WT03-B37-1IA059-000325-B010-337http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev21.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001449 text/html 42905HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:12:48 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:26 GMTContent-length: 42716Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev21.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEATURES SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGH (1059 words) OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUP (1228 words) BRIEFS PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENT ALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER. (378 words) M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALE QUANTUM-CEP FACILITY. (296 words) MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS. (1395 words) HMIR HOTLINE. (464 words) CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES (1075 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996SUPERFUND STAFF JOINS OTHER EPA WORKERS ON FURLOUGHAs the second federal government shutdown of FY 1996 entered itsthird week, EPA Administrator Carol Browner announced on 2 Januarythat the Superfund monies for FY 1995 have been depleted, and thatabout 2,400 EPA employees working under the Superfund programnationwide will join 14,500 EPA workers who are already onfurlough. According to EPA, the furlough of the 2,400 Superfundworkers will result in the shutdown of operations at 450 to650 hazardous waste sites nationwide--National Priorities List(NPL) sites and non-NPL sites--and will leave a total of about80 EPA employees to oversee any remaining operations. According toEPA's initial estimates, the shutdown of operations at Superfundsites also threatens the jobs of 10,000 private-sector workers, whocould be laid off because the government is not able to make timelypayments to their employers. The 10,000 private-sector workersconsist of 5,000 employees of cleanup companies working directlyunder contract with EPA and another 5,000 employees working oncleanups that, while led by potentially responsible parties (PRPs),still require EPA oversight."If the program is dormant for long, private companies will beforced to make permanent staff changes, which will seriouslyundermine our work in restoring the environment," according toJonathan Curtis, president and chief executive officer of CDMFederal Programs Corp. in Fairfax, Virginia. By the end of the weekof 1 January, "private companies will begin making these staffingassessments if the shutdown is not concluded," said Curtis, who ischairman of the Hazardous Waste Action Coalition's (HWAC's)Government Affairs Committee. "Just as Superfund is beginning toproduce results, the plug is pulled," he added. William Epstein,director of government affairs at Roy F. Weston, Inc. in WestChester, Pennsylvania, lamented that the current governmentshutdown will actually increase the overall costs of the Superfundprogram. "We have been told by EPA officials that the mobilizationand demobilization by federal contractors will cost more than if wecontinued work," Epstein noted. "This shutdown will achieve nosavings." According to an EPA source, implementing the shutdown ofthe Superfund program--an operation that began on 2 January--isexpected to take at least five days.In connection with the government shutdown, HWAC's legal counsel,the law firm Morgan Lewis & Bockius in Washington, D.C., has issueda white paper alerting cleanup contractors of the legal issues andrisks that they face, and their options for response, "in the eventof a lapse in the annual appropriations that fund their federalagency customers." Contractors that do not receive payment fortheir services "have the right to suspend their performance," thewhite paper said, and depending on the clauses in their contractswith EPA and other federal agencies, "they may or may not beentitled to an equitable adjustment for the suspension period ifand when more funds are allotted to their contracts." Othercontractors that do not lose funding altogether but otherwise facedelays and disruptions because of the shutdown may not be entitledto compensation "because the lapse in appropriations could bedeemed a sovereign, as opposed to a contractual, act of thegovernment," the white paper said. For a copy of the white paper,contact: HWAC, No. 802, 1015 15th Street, N.W., Washington,DC 20005; Tel: 202-347-7474.The troubles of federal contractors will not end even if anothercontinuing resolution is approved soon. During FY 1996, which beganon 1 October 1995, two continuing resolutions have been required tomaintain operations at those federal agencies and departments,including EPA and the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State,whose FY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved. Thosecontinuing resolutions have funded operations at levels belowFY 1995 appropriations, thereby preventing agency and departmentmanagers--many of whom are expecting dramatic cuts when theirFY 1996 appropriations are finally approved--from making reliablespending plans for the current fiscal year. According to an HMIRsource, developing final FY 1996 budgets for as-yet-unfundedagencies and departments could take up to two more months--approaching the halfway point in the current fiscal year--leavingonly six or seven months for the agencies to spend their monies."Getting everything going again in an efficient way will be verydifficult" under those circumstances, the source told HMIR. "It'snot a good way to run a government."The impact of the federal government shutdown on the environmentalindustry is not limited to suspended EPA contracts. Key departmentsinvolved in the promotion of environmental exports--including theDepartment of Commerce (DOC), the Department of State, and theAgency for International Development (AID)--remain unfunded, andexport-promotion projects involving those entities and private-sector organizations are imperiled. The Environmental ExportCouncil (EEC) in Washington, D.C., currently has cooperativeagreements with AID and DOC to develop environmental exportprograms, but without the federal funding for the programs, "we'regoing to have to quit working on these projects reasonably soon,"said John Mizroch, EEC's executive director. In addition, EEC mayhave to lay off people who are working on a project with the U.S.-Asia Environmental Partnership (USAEP) that would have involvedbringing officials of Asian nations to the United States to reviewU.S. environmental technologies and products. "The governmentshutdown comes at a very unfortunate time," Mizroch told HMIR,"because it holds up these important initiatives that will helpU.S. business."Congressional Republicans have linked the approval of any newcontinuing resolution with the White House's concession on keyelements of a balanced-budget plan--notably on Congress's proposedMedicare cuts and tax relief. On 2 January, however, SenateMajority Leader Robert Dole (Republican-Kansas) expressed hisfrustration with the impasse and, departing from other Republicanleaders, engineered passage of a continuing resolution in theSenate. On 3 January, the House rejected the measure. At presstime, however, the House had softened its stance slightly andindicated that it was prepared to approve a plan to put about280,000 federal employees in several programs back to work, until26 January in some cases and until 15 March in others. The affectedprograms include Meals on Wheels, the administration ofunemployment insurance, visitor services at national parks, and Aidto Families with Dependent Children. The House plan would notprovide money to run those federal agencies and departments whoseFY 1996 appropriations have not yet been approved, including EPA,DOC, the Department of Interior, and the Securities and ExchangeCommission.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996OCCIDENTAL AGREES TO PAY $129 MILLION FOR LOVE CANAL CLEANUPThe story of the hazardous waste site that was largely responsiblefor giving birth to the federal Superfund program neared conclusionlast month as the federal government and Occidental Chemical Corp.reached an agreement resolving Occidental's cleanup liabilities atthe Love Canal site near Niagara Falls, New York. Under the termsof a settlement that was filed on 21 December in the U.S. DistrictCourt in Buffalo, New York, Occidental will pay the federalgovernment a total of $129 million, consisting of $101 million thatthe government has spent on cleanup and $28 million in interestaccrued during 16 years of litigation. The settlement "should senda message of federal persistence and tenacity," said AttorneyGeneral Janet Reno in announcing the settlement. EPA AdministratorCarol Browner noted that "the Love Canal settlement underscoresthis Administration's firm commitment to ensuring that polluters--not the American people--pick up the tab for cleaning up toxicwaste dumps."The settlement must still be approved by U.S. District Court JudgeJohn Curtin, who has presided over the 16-year-old case since thefederal government filed its initial lawsuit against Occidental inDecember 1979. The lawsuit sought cleanup and related damages,including punitive damages, under the Resource Conservation andRecovery Act (RCRA), the River and Harbors Act, and otherenvironmental laws. The state of New York subsequently filed itsown lawsuit against Occidental. Both complaints were later joinedand amended to include cost-recovery claims under the ComprehensiveEnvironmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA),which was enacted in December 1980 under the shadow of the LoveCanal incident and the increasingly controversial problem ofabandoned toxic waste sites. In a settlement approved by JudgeCurtin in July 1994, Occidental agreed to pay New York a total ofnearly $100 million and to perform long-term operation andmaintenance of the remediation systems at the Love Canal site.Occidental Chemical became involved in the Love Canal saga as aresult of its acquisition of Hooker Chemical and Plastics Corp. Inthe early 1940s, Hooker leased and then acquired an uncompletedcanal in the Niagara Falls area--the so-called Love Canal. Until1953, the company dumped about 25,000 tons of chemical waste intothe canal and nearby pits. Hooker subsequently buried the wastesand sold the property to the Niagara Falls School Board for $1,with the stipulation that the board would not hold Hooker legallyresponsible for any subsequent problems that the buried wastesmight cause. From the 1960s through the mid-1970s, complaints bylocal residents about foul odors in the area evolved intocomplaints about chemicals leaking into the basements of nearbyhomes and surfacing in yards, and ultimately into complaints abouthealth problems. Responding to the complaints, the FederalEmergency Management Agency (FEMA) undertook the relocation of239 families in the Love Canal area in 1978; President Jimmy Carterordered the evacuation of another 800 Love Canal families inDecember 1980. FEMA--and later EPA--also took response actions atthe site, consisting of constructing a clay cap over the canal toprevent air emissions and installing a leachate collection systemto prevent the migration of chemical wastes from the canal.A local school and several homes were subsequently demolished, andcontaminated sewer systems and nearby creek sediments were removedor cleaned up; the leachate collection system is still operating.In June 1990, the Love Canal Revitalization Agency adopted a planfor resettling homes in the area, and the first homes went up forsale later that year. In 1992, the Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment (HUD) agreed to provide mortgage insurance for the LoveCanal properties, thereby increasing the pace of home sales in thearea. To date, all but 32 of the 233 homes that were available havebeen sold or are under contract for sale, according to theDepartment of Justice (DOJ).Under the settlement between Occidental and the federal government,the company will pay EPA a total of $102 million covering theagency's response costs plus interest, while the rest of the$129 million will go to FEMA for its role in the response action.The settlement also resolves Occidental's claims that, in additionto Hooker, the U.S. Army dumped chemical wastes into Love Canal andtherefore should be held partially responsible for the cleanupcosts. Without admitting any guilt on behalf of the Army, thefederal government agreed to assume $8 million of the Love Canalresponse costs.In announcing the settlement, federal officials took specific aimat Congressional proposals to provide liability relief topotentially responsible parties (PRPs) through reimbursements ortax credits amounting to as much as 50 percent of PRP costsassociated with the cleanup of wastes disposed of before 1980(Senate proposal) or 1987 (House proposal). According to LoisSchiffer, assistant attorney general for DOJ's Environment andNatural Resources Division, such proposals could give Occidental atax credit for as much as $64.5 million in connection with thecompany's Love Canal liabilities under CERCLA. A reimbursementsystem of the type proposed by Congress "would destroy thefundamental principle that a polluter should pay to clean up itsown mess," Schiffer noted. EPA's Browner declared that "eliminationof the retroactive liability provisions in the Superfund law--assome have proposed--would have let this polluter off the hook."Lois Gibbs, executive director of the Citizens Clearinghouse forHazardous Waste in Falls Church, Virginia, said that she was happywith the settlement. "It has got to send a chill up the spine ofmany others who pollute and pretend it is not a problem," saidGibbs, the former Love Canal housewife whose organizing effortshelped draw national attention to the area's contamination. Astrong proponent of the polluter-pays principal, Gibbs sharplycriticized Congressional attempts to reimburse PRPs for portions oftheir cleanup liabilities. "The only way Occidental and others willchange their way of behaving will be if it costs them more topollute--to do harm than to do good," she told HMIR. "Instead ofcutting the costs for those who have not complied with theSuperfund law, Congress should reward those who did comply, andthose who have improved their environmental practices," shesuggested.Beyond addressing the polluter-pays issue, the Love Canal case doesnot provide much direction for efforts to reform the Superfundprogram, according to Occidental attorney Steven Yablonsky, apartner at Piper & Marbury in Baltimore, Maryland. Love Canal "isnot one of those sites that had hundreds of responsible parties,"said Yablonsky, who noted that multi-PRP sites have presented themost vexing liability problems under CERCLA. Yablonsky added thata key development in the case was Judge Curtin's ruling in March1994 that Hooker's waste disposal practices were consistent withindustry's practices at the time, and that Occidental thereforeshould not be held liable for punitive damages in the Love Canalcase. "There couldn't have been a settlement without that ruling,"Yablonsky told HMIR.While Occidental has now settled the major CERCLA claims of thefederal government and the state of New York, the company is stillnegotiating with the city of Niagara Falls and the Niagara FallsSchool Board to determine the cleanup liabilities of those twomunicipal entities. In addition, Occidental is still engaged inpersonal-injury litigation with numerous Niagara County residents,and it is seeking coverage of its cleanup liabilities at Love Canalfrom its insurers.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996PUBLIC CITIZEN ACCUSES NAFTA OF FAILING TO IMPROVE THE ENVIRONMENTALONG THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER.Far from fulfilling proponents' assurances that the North AmericanFree Trade Agreement (NAFTA) would result in an improvedenvironment along the U.S.-Mexico border, trade between the U.S.and Mexico under NAFTA has exacerbated border-area problems throughan increase in industrial activity, according to a recent report byPublic Citizen in Washington, D.C. The report concluded thatNAFTA's advocates--notably the Clinton Administration--inaccuratelypredicted that NAFTA would lead to increased investment throughoutMexico and, as a result, less concentration of "maquiladora"facilities along the U.S.-Mexico border. Maquiladoras are Mexico-based manufacturing facilities that are owned by foreign firms. ThePublic Citizen report found that, largely as a result of thedevaluation of the Mexican peso one year ago, nationwide investmentin Mexico's infrastructure and industrial base has failed tomaterialize. At the same time, the number of maquiladora facilitiesin the border area has increased by 20 percent from more than546,000 to nearly 690,000 facilities since NAFTA took effect inJanuary 1994, despite an economic crisis that has resulted in a netloss of 1.6 million jobs throughout Mexico. The report noted thatthe increased maquiladora activity along the U.S. Mexico border,coupled with a lack of investment in pollution-controlinfrastructure and the Mexican government's lack of support forenvironmental enforcement, has resulted in increased illegaldumping of hazardous wastes, increased air and water pollution, andworsening health problems, including increased incidences ofhepatitis, cholera, and certain birth defects. According to thereport, the Commission on Environmental Cooperation--the panelestablished under NAFTA to rule on any complaints that the NAFTAnations are not meeting their environmental obligations--has notyet heard a single case involving Mexico's failure to enforce itsenvironmental laws in the border area. "NAFTA begins its third yearsinking in a sea of broken promises relating to the environment,public health, jobs, and wages," said Public Citizen President JoanClaybrook in announcing the report on 2 January. "Not only is NAFTAnot meeting these promises, it has actually made conditions worsethan before it took effect two years ago," she said. For a copy ofthe 110-page Public Citizen report, entitled NAFTA's BrokenPromises: The Border Betrayed, at a cost of $15, contact: CustomerService Department, Public Citizen, 1600 20th Street, N.W.,Washington, DC 20009; Tel: 202-588-1000.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996M4 ENVIRONMENTAL STARTS OPERATIONS AT FIRST COMMERCIAL-SCALEQUANTUM-CEP FACILITY.M4 Environmental L.P., a joint venture between Lockheed Martin andMolten Metal Technology, Inc. (MMT) in Waltham, Massachusetts, hasbegun operations at the first commercial-scale facility to useMMT's Catalytic Extraction Process (CEP) for recycling hazardouswastes. The M4 facility, which is located in Oak Ridge, Tennessee,will use a variant of the CEP technology, known as Quantum-CEP,that is designed to handle radioactive and mixed wastes. TheQuantum-CEP process uses a molten metal bath to break downradioactive and mixed wastes into their constituents, recoversvarious useful materials, such as metals and gases, and stabilizesthe radioactive materials for final disposal. Subsequent to thestart-up of operations at the M4 facility, MMT announced that ithas expanded its original technology license to M4 by allowing thejoint venture to process mixed wastes from commercial generators.Previously, M4 held a license to process only mixed wastesgenerated by the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department ofDefense (DOD), and U.S. Enrichment Corp. In a separateannouncement, MMT said that another commercial-scale Quantum-CEPfacility in Oak Ridge--this one jointly operated by MMT andWestinghouse subsidiary Scientific Ecology Group, Inc. (SEG)--hasreceived all of its required regulatory permits and is ready tobegin operations. The MMT-SEG facility is expected to process itsfirst wastes this month and will handle up to 130,000 cubic feet oflow-level ion exchange resins per year. "I am happy to announcethat this facility is available on schedule, and we expecttremendous success with volume reduction and recycling of thisdifficult waste," said SEG President Bud Arrowsmith in a statementon 19 December. William Haney III, MMT's president and chiefexecutive officer, noted that the MMT-SEG facility "is the largestand most sophisticated system in the world for handling thisdifficult radioactive material."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND OFFERINGS.Allstate GeoTek, a privately held environmental services firm basedin Linden, New Jersey, has acquired Zecco, Inc. from Metcalf & EddyTechnologies, Inc. in Wakefield, Massachusetts, for an undisclosedamount of cash. Privately held Allstate GeoTek is a $22-millioncompany that provides a variety of environmental services,including remediation and sewer inspection and cleaning, inDelaware, New Jersey, and southeastern Pennsylvania. Zecco, whichis operating at a run rate of about $6.5 million, providesremediation and emergency response services and operates ahazardous waste storage and transfer facility in Northborough,Massachusetts.Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group, a subsidiary of McDermottInternational, Inc. in New Orleans, Louisiana, has acquired theassets of Joy Environmental Technologies, Inc. from HarnischefegerIndustries, Inc. in Brookfield, Wisconsin. The terms of thetransaction were not disclosed. Houston-based Joy Environmentalmanufactures air-pollution-control equipment--such as baghouses,ash-handling systems, electrostatic precipitators, and flue-gasdesulfurization systems--for electric utilities and industrialcompanies. According to Babcock & Wilcox, Joy Environmental's lineof ash-handling systems will be transferred to Diamond PowerSpecialty Co., a Babcock & Wilcox unit that specializes inmanufacturing boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment.Barringer Laboratories, Inc. in Golden, Colorado, announced that ithas purchased 647,238 shares of its common stock from its sistercorporation Barringer Technologies, Inc. According to BarringerLaboratories, the stock was acquired in exchange for $509,048 in"intercompany obligations" and another $300,000 in cash. Inaddition, 88,260 shares of Barringer Laboratories' common stockwere placed in an escrow account and will be returned to BarringerTechnologies if Barringer Laboratories achieves certain earningsgoals for 1996. "This transaction is the first step in a long-termplan to grow and increase the stockholders' value in thelaboratory," said Robert Walker, chairman and chief executiveofficer of Barringer Laboratories. As a result of the transaction,"each current shareholder realizes an increase of 39.1 percent intheir stock ownership of the company," Walker noted.Black & Veatch in Kansas City, Missouri, announced that it hasincreased its revolving credit facility with a consortium ofinternational banks from $150 million to $175 million. According toP.J. Adam, Black & Veatch's chairman and chief executive officer,the expanding credit facility will allow the company to borrowshort-term funds and issue longer-term letters of credit to financeits worldwide engineering and construction projects. "Our continuedsuccess in obtaining international work depends on having thenecessary credit support," Adam noted. Black & Veatch'sinternational projects accounted for more than 50 percent of thecompany's estimated $1.1 billion in revenues during 1995.Brownfield Development Corp. (BDC) in Chicago, Illinois, andLandBank in Denver, Colorado, have established a strategic allianceto provide services related to the cleanup and redevelopment of so-called "brownfields" sites--abandoned industrial properties thatface difficulties in redevelopment because of actual or perceivedcontamination at the sites. Under the alliance, the two companieswill jointly identify and assess brownfields properties and makethe financing, insurance, and legal arrangements to remediate thosesites and return them to economic usefulness. BDC currentlyprovides those types of services in the Midwest, while LandBankprovides similar services from its offices in New York City,Denver, and San Francisco. In addition to increasing BDC'sgeographic coverage, the alliance with LandBank will "expand ourdevelopment capabilities, increase our capital reserves, and focuson the acquisition of larger sites," according to BDC ManagerRobert Colangelo. LandBank President Bill Lynott noted that "we arevery excited about the opportunity to apply our environmentalunderwriting and proprietary insurance products to BDC's focusedprogram in the metropolitan Chicago area," where the brownfieldsredevelopment market is especially active.Envirometrics, Inc. in Charleston, South Carolina, and ZellwegerAnalytics, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Zellweger LuwaOrganization of Switzerland, have reached an agreement wherebyZellweger Analytics will have the exclusive worldwide rights tomarket Envirometrics' ACT Monitoring Card System. The ACT systemuses an electronic reader and "passive monitoring cards" to detectthe presence of hazardous chemicals in industrial environments andto conduct analyses of air samples in real time. ZellwegerAnalytics "is an international leader in safety, health, andenvironmental products, and we look forward to new technology-partnership developments and synergistic opportunities for the twocompanies," said Richard Bennett, Envirometrics' president andchief executive officer.Environmental Technologies Corp., a provider of refrigerantrecovery and recycling services and equipment in Lakewood, NewJersey, has acquired all of the outstanding stock of FulCircleRecyclers, Inc. in New York, New York, a recycler of ballasts fromfluorescent lights, in exchange for 1.15-million shares of newlyissued Environmental Technologies common stock. As part of thetransaction, Brin McCagg and Mitchell Dong, two of FulCircle'sprincipals, have been appointed as chief executive officer andpresident, respectively, of Environmental Technologies. The two mentake over those positions from George Cannan, who will remainchairman of the company. FulCircle expects to report revenuestotaling $6 million during 1995, while Environmental Technologieshad revenues of $28.6 million during the fiscal year ending on30 September 1995.EnviroSource, Inc. in Stamford, Connecticut, has entered into anew, $100-million credit agreement with NationsBank and CreditLyonnaise. According to EnviroSource, the new, five-year agreementreplaces an existing $60-million agreement with the two banks andprovides EnviroSource with the financing to redeem all of itsClass G, $7.25 Cumulative Preferred Stock. The Class G stock is due15 July 1996. As a result of the new credit agreement,"EnviroSource will have minimal debt maturities over the next sixyears, which will allow us to reinvest our cash flows fromoperations into the business," according to George Fuehrer,EnviroSource's senior vice president of planning. The company plansto focus that reinvestment on internal growth rather than on growththrough mergers and acquisitions, "although we are not ruling thatavenue out," Fuehrer told HMIR.Heidemij NV in Arnhem, the Netherland, and Eptisa, a consulting andengineering firm in Madrid, Spain, have agreed to merge in atransaction under which Heidemij and Eptisa's management will eachacquire 50 percent of Eptisa's stock from the company's singleshareholder, Banco Central Hispano. As part of the transaction,Eptisa will sell its non-core activities in the engineering andmaintenance of power stations. Eptisa, which specializes in water,environmental, and infrastructure engineering, derived revenuestotaling $80 million from these core businesses during 1994. "Wehave been working with Eptisa since 1992 in a joint venture,Ecogest, aimed at providing environmental services to industry,"said Heidemij chairman Frans Luttmer. "This successful venture isnow the starting point for a much larger cooperation between thetwo companies." In a separate action, Heidemij's subsidiaryGeraghty & Miller has acquired Environmental Strategies Ltd., anenvironmental consulting and engineering firm with offices in Leedsand Chester, England, and has merged Environmental Standards withG&M International, Inc. in Cambridge. According to G&MInternational Manager Brian Cook, "by merging with EnvironmentalStrategies' staff, we will be able to expand our auditing and due-diligence work and have a strong presence in the Northwest regionof the United Kingdom."Philip Environmental, Inc. in Hamilton, Ontario, and ZenonEnvironmental, Inc. in Burlington, Ontario, have reached anagreement whereby Philip Environmental will acquire Zenon'slaboratory business. The terms of the transaction were notdisclosed. Zenon's laboratory operations generated an estimated$12 million in revenues during 1995 and consist of facilities inBurlington and in Montreal, Quebec, and Vancouver, BritishColumbia. According to Philip Environmental, the addition of thethree Zenon laboratories to Philip's existing laboratory operationin Mississauga, Ontario, will give Philip the largest network ofenvironmental laboratories in Canada. The acquisition of the Zenonlaboratory facilities is expected to be completed by 15 January.Philip Environmental is currently engaged in an aggressiveacquisition campaign and recently acquired CyanoKEM and ThermalKEMfrom REP Environmental Processes, which is the former AmericanNuKEM (HMIR, 8 Dec. 1995, p.2).UTILX Corp., a drilling firm based in Kent, Washington, hasannounced that FlowMole Environmental Services Corp., a jointventure between UTILX and Unocal subsidiary CERT EnvironmentalCorp., has begun to "wind down" its remediation operations.According to UTILX President Craig Davies, the decision to ceasethe operations of FlowMole is based on Unocal's decision toterminate all joint-venture relationships connected toenvironmental work and exit the environmental business. FlowMolewas established in 1994 to market innovative remediation approachesusing CERT Environmental's remediation technologies and UTILX'shorizontal guided drilling technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HMIR HOTLINE.Fernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO), DOE'sEnvironmental Restoration Management Contractor at the former FeedMaterials Production Center near Fernald, Ohio, is requesting firmsto submit expressions of interest in supplying a vitrificationfurnace to process radioactive wastes that are currently stored atthe Fernald facility. According to FERMCO, the furnace must becapable of producing 20 to 30 tons of vitrified waste per day.While FERMCO does not expect to issue the request for proposals(RFP) for the vitrification project until April, it is requestingthat parties indicate by 15 January their interest in supplying thevitrification furnace. For further information, contact: Bob May,FERMCO, Mail Stop 52-4, P.O. Box 538704, Cincinnati, OH 45253-8704;Tel: 513-648-4322; Fax: 513-648-4900.VECTRA Technologies, Inc., a San Ramon, California-based providerof radioactive waste management and other engineering services tothe energy industry, announced on 28 December that it istemporarily suspending all construction and start-up activitiesrelated to its EnviroGlass vitrification program. According to RayFortney, VECTRA's president and chief executive officer, theinterruption in the company's progress towards developing theEnviroGlass technology "was necessary because delays in placing ourTransportable Vitrification Unit at our lead client's site made itimpossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-level waste that we are contracted to process." Fortney noted thatVECTRA is negotiating with the client to remove the low-levelwastes and dispose of them through a subcontractor, "but if we arenot successful in these negotiations, we may be forced to acceptcontract cancellation." Fortney said that the company will continueto pursue new projects involving the EnviroGlass technology.CompuChem Environmental Corp. in Research Triangle Park, NorthCarolina, has announced that it is seeking to acquire an analyticallaboratory to merge into its facility at Research Triangle Park(RTP). CompuChem said that it plans to transfer the laboratoryequipment and technical personnel of the acquired laboratory to itsRTP facility while maintaining any existing sales offices that theacquired company may operate. "Our philosophy is to keep it allunder one roof, so you can have all your certifications,sophisticated equipment, and experienced staff in one place, andthereby better serve your customers," according to CompuChemPresident Kees Verkerk. He said that the primary purpose of theacquisition is to expand the company's business, which is currentlyconcentrated in the federal sector, into the industrial market.According to Verkerk, the 55,000-square-foot RTP facility is one ofthe largest laboratories in the United States, employing up to200 people during its peak seasons. For further information,contact: CompuChem Environmental Corp., 3306 Chapel Hill/NelsonHighway, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709; Tel: 919-406-1601.For further information on these brief hotline items or any articlein this issue, call the HMIR Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIESKey: * = Small business set-aside.Sols. N47408-96-R-6305 and N47408-96-R-6309 to submit proposals tothe Navy for innovative assessment, cleanup, and pollution-controltechnologies. For further information, call Rosalie Hammonds atTel: 805-982-5097, or contact: Commanding Officer, NAVFACContracts, Naval Construction Battalion Center, Building 41, 100023rd Avenue, Port Hueneme, CA 93043-4301; Attn: Code 2711.(Deadline: 2/2/96.)Sol. DACA87-96-R-0008 to locate, identify, and dispose of ordnanceand explosives at current and former military installationsthroughout the United States. For further information, call AnitaPrince at Tel: 205-895-1156, or contact: Army Engineering andSupport Center, 4820 University Square, Huntsville, AL 35816-1822;Attn: CEHNC-CT-D. (Deadline: 2/23/96.)Sol. F08650 to study the degradation of chemicals that the Armymust destroy under the Chemical Weapons Convention. For furtherinformation, call John Hammerling at Tel: 407-494-7092, or contact:45th Contracting Squadron/LGCXA, 1201 Minuteman Street, Patrick AirForce Base, FL 32925-3237. (Deadline: 1/26/96.)Sol. HCET009 to evaluate concrete-surface decontaminationtechnologies for the Hemispheric Center for EnvironmentalTechnology at Florida International University in Miami, FL. Forfurther information, call M.A. Ebadian at Tel: 305-348-2569, orcontact: Hemispheric Center for Environmental Technology, FloridaInternational University, Room 458, ECS Building, UniversityCampus, Miami, FL 33199. (Deadline: 1/30/96.)Sol. DAAL01-96-Q-3001 to provide environmental and safetyengineering services at the Army Research Laboratory located atFort Monmouth, NJ. For further information, call Mike Watershied atTel: 908-427-4936, or contact: Fort Monmouth Site Contracts Branch,Operations Directorate, Army Research Laboratory, Fort Monmouth, NJ07703-5601; Attn: AMSRL-OP-FM-PR(KAS). (Deadline: 1/17/96.)*Sol. SP4400-96-R-0005 to remove hazardous materials from theDefense Reutilization and Marketing Service (DRMS) offices inRichmond, VA, and surrounding locations and dispose of thematerials. For further information, call Evon Boyer at Tel: 616-961-4406, or contact: DRMS, 74 North Washington Avenue, BattleCreek, MI 49017-3092; Attn: DRMS-PHS. (Deadline: 2/15/96.)*Two solicitations to provide environmental services at U.S. PostalService facilities in Georgia, Tennessee, and other southeasternstates. Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For furtherinformation, call Quincie Naylor at Tel: 770-454-0632, or contact:Facilities Service Office, U.S. Postal Service, Suite 300, 4000DeKalb Technology Parkway, Atlanta, GA 30340-2799. (Deadline:1/22/96.)RFP 509-67-96 to pick up medical wastes at the Department ofVeterans Affairs Medical Center in Augusta, GA, and dispose of thewastes. For further information, call Sylvia Henry at Tel: 706-731-7175, or contact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service(90C), Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, One FreedomWay, Augusta, GA 30904-6285. (Deadline: 2/9/96.)Solicitation to provide environmental services at various locationswithin the Louisville District of the Army Corps of Engineers.Interested firms should submit SF 254 and 255. For furtherinformation, call Sharon Evans at Tel: 502-582-6208, or contact:Army Corps of Engineers, Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr.Martin Luther King Jr. Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline:1/19/96.)Sol. DE-RP65-96WA13322 to provide architectural and engineeringservices, including environmental engineering services, at WesternArea Power Administration facilities in AZ, CA, CO, IA, KS, MN, MT,ND, NE, NM, NV, SD, UT, and WY. Interested firms should submit SF254 and 255. For further information, Dorothy Paquet at Tel: 303-275-1529, or contact: Western Area Power Administration, P.O. Box3402, Golden, CO 80401; Attn: A1520. (Deadline: 1/10/96.)Sol. 554-27-96 to provide emergency response services to theDepartment of Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Denver, CO. Forfurther information, call Jack Gregorio at Tel: 303-393-4690, orcontact: Acquisition and Materiel Management Service (90C),Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1055 ClermontStreet, Denver, CO 80220. (Deadline: 2/7/96.)Sol. F05611-96-R-0211 to provide environmental engineering servicesat the U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado. Interested firms shouldsubmit SF 254 and 255. For further information, call Shirley McCoyat Tel: 719-472-2734, or contact: Operational Contracting Office,Lobby Area, 8110 Industrial Drive, U.S. Air Force Academy, CO80840-2315. (Deadline: 2/1/96.)Sol. N68711-96-C-2079 to prepare an environmental impact statementin connection with base-closure activities at the Naval ShipyardComplex in Long Beach, CA. Interested firms should submit SF 254and 255. For further information, call Kathy Luhmann at Tel: 619-532-2721, or contact: Naval Facilities Engineering Command,Southwest Division, 1220 Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187;Attn: Code 0211. (Deadline: 1/22/96.)Solicitations to prepare environmental impact statements forvarious military preparedness activities at the Naval Air WeaponsStation in China Lake, CA (N68711-96-C-2089), and at the Naval AirWarfare Center in Point Mugu, CA (N68711-96-C-20-90). For furtherinformation, call Nancy Trent at Tel: 619-532-2853, or contact:Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Southwest Division, 1220Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92132-5187; Attn: Code 0211.(Deadlines: N68711-96-C-2089, 1/30/96; N68711-96-C-2090, 1/25/96.)Sol. F04700-96-B-0014 to perform laboratory analyses of wastewaterat Edwards Air Force Base, CA. For further information, call TamiaTrue at Tel: 805-277-3900, or contact: Directorate of Contracting,Air Force Flight Test Center/PKAB, 5 South Wolfe Avenue, EdwardsAir Force Base, CA 93524-1185. (Deadline: Not specified; analyticallaboratory must be located within 100 miles of Edwards Air ForceBase.)Sol. DTCG88-96-B-6AL262 to install and operate a bioventing systemat a Coast Guard facility in San Diego, CA. For furtherinformation, call William Obershaw at Tel: 510-535-7236, orcontact: Contracting Officer, Civil Engineering Unit, U.S. CoastGuard, Suite 200, 2000 Embarcadero Road, Oakland, CA 94606-5337.(Deadline: 2/8/96.)Solicitation to provide environmental well drilling services atDOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, CA. Forfurther information, call Robert Baker at Tel: 510-422-8449, orcontact: Procurement Department, Lawrence Livermore NationalLaboratory, L-626, P.O. Box 5012, Livermore, CA 94551. (Deadline:1/12/96.)*Sol. N44255-96-D-0056 to provide environmental compliance servicesat various Navy locations in the Pacific Northwest. Interestedfirms should submit SF 254 and 255. For further information, callPatricia Talbot at Tel: 360-396-0249, or contact: Engineering FieldActivity-Northwest, Naval Facilities Engineering Command, 19917Seventh Avenue, N.E., Poulsbo, WA 98370. (Deadline: 1/25/96.)Sol. DACW21-96-B-0014 to remove PCB-contaminated oil and equipmentfrom the J. Strom Thurmond Power Plant near Augusta, GA, anddispose of the materials. For further information, call SharonGodbee at Tel: 912-652-5400, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,Savannah District, P.O. Box 899, Savannah, GA 31402-0889.(Deadline: 2/1/96.)Sol. DACA27-96-B-0015 to remove PCB-contaminated transformers froma location in Columbus, OH, and dispose of the transformers for theArmy Corps of Engineers. For further information, call Diana Lewisat Tel: 502-582-5706, or contact: Army Corps of Engineers,Louisville District, Room 821, 600 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.Place, Louisville, KY 40202-2230. (Deadline: 1/18/96.)Back to Headline List WT03-B37-2IA059-000325-B010-367http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev35.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001525 text/html 33123HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:13:33 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:33 GMTContent-length: 32934Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev35.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *NEWS & ANALYSIS* UNION SEEKS COURT-ORDERED BAN OF MEXICAN TRUCKS (204 words) CDL ENFORCEMENT GETS BOOST VIA HIGHWAY BILL (287 words) RAILROAD INCIDENT REPORTING CHANGES DELAYED (217 words) PRIOR NOTICE TIME CUT FOR DOCK-SIDE GAS TRANSFERS (150 words) TRUCK SIZE DEBATE ADDS TO NAFTA IMPLEMENTATION WOES (247 words) PORTABLE TANKS BANNED FOR PEROXIDE SHIPMENTS (142 words) AIR CARGO DEREGULATION NEARS FOR U.S./CANADA (163 words) ESCORT TUG BOAT REQUIREMENTS TO TIGHTEN IN 1996 (136 words) *DOT INTERPRETATIONS* A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2 (157 words) Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federal (290 words) Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than in (275 words) A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drum (130 words) Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked in (206 words) A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would be (252 words) There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outer (173 words) A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeat (131 words) Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tank (201 words) *BRIEFS* Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23% (30 words) RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing (29 words) DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergency (18 words) New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docket (33 words) Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from (34 words) RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexible (35 words) DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous (35 words) Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tank (29 words) DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materials (21 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996UNION SEEKS COURT-ORDERED BAN OF MEXICAN TRUCKSThe Teamsters Union is seeking a court order banning Mexican trucks fromentering the U.S. unless drivers show evidence that DOT safety rules are met.A ruling favoring the union would require Mexican truckers to show customofficials proof of insurance and other documents demonstrating compliancewith hazardous materials and rules.Under North American Free Trade Agreement provisions effective in Decem-ber,Mexican trucks gained access to U.S. roads in Arizona, California, New Mexicoand Texas.  While the treaty requires them to comply with DOT rules when inthe U.S., the Teamsters allege drivers are being waved through after signingcompliance check-off forms rather than undergoing safety inspections.  OnDec. 15, the union asked the D.C. circuit appeals court for an emergency stayhalting Mexican cross-border trucking.The Teamsters allege DOT knows Mexican truckers often fail to maintainadequate insurance, are not licensed or properly qualified, operate unsafevehicles and fail to assure safety when carrying dangerous materials.  Itnoted a one-day inspection in October by the Texas Railroad Commission foundevidence of fraudulent insurance coverage by trucks entering the state.  Theunion asked that trucks be barred until DOT sets up a centralized enforcementsystem.  A court ruling is expected by February.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996CDL ENFORCEMENT GETS BOOST VIA HIGHWAY BILLState transportation agencies will receive $5.4 billion in federal fundsduring 1996 with significant increases in aid to administer the nationalcommercial driver's license (CDL) program.  The money, authorized by NationalHighway System (NHS) legislation enacted in December, includes a nearly 15%boost in federal funds to enforce CDL rules for trucks carrying hazardousmaterials.  The measure also calls for additional increases of up to 10% in1997 and 1998 to assist states in CDL compliance.To qualify, states must show DOT they will use funding to meet CDLinspections and enforcement program standards.  Aid will go only to statesthat maintain record-keeping systems and participate in a national DOT database program to track records on drivers, truck and equipment inspections andtraffic accidents involving commercial vehicles.  An intended benefit of theplan is to help DOT gather data on number of licensed hazardous materialsdrivers and quantities of hazardous materials transported.Some 1.1 million roadside inspections now are done annually and higherallocations will allow those to increase, DOT said.  The program alsoincludes funding for drug and alcohol enforcement.  DOT noted that in 1992,federal aid helped several states set up drug-free zones within 1,000 feet oftruck stops, doubling penalties for selling of drugs there.In addition to hailing increased CDL funding, DOT Secretary Federico Penacalled the National Highway System the "backbone of America's transportationnetwork."  The 165,000-mile road system includes the current Interstatesystem as well as other major state and federal highways.  Although itcomprises only 4% of the nation's roads, NHS carries about 40% of all trafficand some 75% of truck traffic.  NHS roads also represent over 90% of theapproved hazardous materials routing network.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996RAILROAD INCIDENT REPORTING CHANGES DELAYEDThe new incident reporting rules have been delayed at least until April tolet the Federal Railroad Administration consider questions from railroads oncompany-managed control programs.  FRA is considering industry proposals toomit a provision that railroads maintain in-house controls to ensure thatreports are filed for each incident.Arguing that in-house programs would be burdensome, railroads urged FRA toadopt a "99% performance standard."  By dividing the number of reportedaccidents by the number of actual accidents, companies say they could comparereporting rates against a 99% standard to determine whether reportingperformance is satisfactory.While agreeing that a 99% performance rate would be acceptable, FRA said thatbefore adopting such an approach it would consider adding penalties forcompanies falling short of the standard.  It asked for industry input on aplan where fines increased for each percentage point below 99%.  The agencysuggested $1,000 for 98%; $3,000 for 97%; $9,000 for 96%, and so on.FRA noted that changes in accident reporting standards would not altercorrective action reporting required when non-compliance citations involveassessment of civil penalties.  Such reporting is limited to physical defectsin rail equipment, such as cracks in hazardous material cargo tanks;insufficient record keeping, such as tracking engineer time-on-duty; andfailure to file safety violation reports.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996PRIOR NOTICE TIME CUT FOR DOCK-SIDE GAS TRANSFERSLiquefied gas transfer operators at shipping ports have been granted relieffrom section 127.131(a) "prior notification" rules.  Despite overall CoastGuard tightening of gas unloading standards, beginning Jan. 1 liquefied gasfacilities may give port authorities only four hours notice before cargotransfers.Facility operators had argued against the 24-hour notice saying frequentchanges in weather or tides made arrival schedules uncertain.  The CoastGuard agreed after company logs showed facilities often cannot know 24 hoursin advance when ships will arrive.Though willing to relax notification time, the Coast Guard said other rulestightening liquefied hazardous gas transfers would go forward in 1996.  Theseinclude more rigid procedures for monitoring unloading operations andrequirements that automatic transfer shutdown equipment be installed.  Datacollected since 1985 on deaths and property damage resulting from accidentsduring liquefied gas transfers indicate current rules are "unjustifiablylax," the Coast Guard said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996TRUCK SIZE DEBATE ADDS TO NAFTA IMPLEMENTATION WOESU.S. and Mexican transportation officials will meet in January to try to ironout differences regarding size of trucks allowed into Mexico under the NorthAmerican Free Trade Agreement.  While U.S. truckers are protesting entranceof Mexican trucks into border states [see story p. 1], Mexico is attemptingto ban on its roads 53-foot-long trailers, the dominant size used by U.S.companies.Three days before the Dec. 18 border opening, Mexican custom officials saidthe trailers would not be let into the country for equipment "safety rea-sons" related to truck length and hazardous cargoes that could be hauled.After strong protests from U.S. transportation and trade representatives,Mexico agreed to permit the trailers as long as the entire vehicle did notexceed 68 feet.  Carriers claim this would effectively halt U.S. trailerentry into Mexico because few 53-foot trailer rigs are less than 68 feetlong.The issue appears to have stemmed from internal conflicts between Mexicantransportation officials and border-area custom houses, private businessesthat enforce rules at crossings.  According to Dave Berry, VP at SwiftTransportation of Phoenix, the Mexican transportation agency would likedifferences resolved so transborder shipments can proceed, but customhousesare being responsive to Mexican domestic trucking problems.U.S. Trade representative Mickey Cantor expressed hope that the January talkswould resolve the problem.  In the interim, certain trailers may cross onlyif interline arrangements are made so that U.S. trailers are towed intoMexico by Mexican drivers.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996PORTABLE TANKS BANNED FOR PEROXIDE SHIPMENTSShippers have until Oct. 1 to line up new packaging to replace non-specification portable tanks now used to transport certain hydrogenperoxides.  Under HM-181E provisions effective on that date, portable tanksno longer will be approved packaging.  Instead, shippers will be subject tointermediate bulk container (IBC) rules which ban non-specification packagingfor bulk peroxide shipments.Final rule HM-181E, which specifies intermediate bulk containers as the DOT-approved packaging for bulk peroxide shipments, defines IBCs as "packagingother than a portable tank" used for hazardous cargo shipments.However, the rule allows hazardous materials, except for those poisonous byinhala-tion, to be packaged until Oct. 1, 1996, according to rules in effecton Sept. 30, 1991.  Because the HMR in 1991 allowed hydrogen peroxide to betransported in non-specification portable tanks, IBCs are not mandatory untilOct. 1, DOT explained.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996AIR CARGO DEREGULATION NEARS FOR U.S./CANADADeregulation of air cargo between the U.S. and Canada could be implemented byMarch under an agreement expected to spur more than $1 billion in economicactivity between the two countries.  A bilateral plan to lift restrictions onshipments of hazardous and other cargoes was proposed in 1995 andnegotiations are scheduled for completion by March.  U.S.-Canada arrangementsnow limit aircraft size, package weight and size and force some aircraft tomake return trips empty.The new agreement would ease these constraints, unify certain hazardous cargorules and allow competitive pricing, Transportation Secretary Federico Penasaid.  Air transportation analysts estimate the air cargo market in bothcountries could expand by close to 50% in two years under a more open treaty.Air shippers say restrictions are an aberration of freer hemispheric trade inthe 1988 U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement and the 1994 North American FreeTrade Agreement.  Deregulation talks began in 1991, but had been stalleduntil this plan was announced.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ESCORT TUG BOAT REQUIREMENTS TO TIGHTEN IN 1996Tanker escort rule expansion is ahead for single-hulled ships carryinghazardous cargoes in U.S. waters, the Coast Guard said in December.  Severalports and waterways are slated for inclusion on a February list designatingareas where tug and tow boat assistance will be required.  The action follows1995 implementation of a rule requiring at least two escort vessels toaccompany hazardous cargo-carrying, single-hulled tankers in Prince WilliamSound, Alaska, and Puget Sound, Wash.Tug boat rules apply to single-hulled tankers over 5,000 gross tons.Companion vessels could reduce the possibility of grounding or collision whena tanker loses propulsion or steering, Coast Guard project manager Tom Jordanexplained.  Escort rules are mandated by the 1990 Oil Pollution Act, and areto be in force until single-hulled ships carrying hazardous cargoes arephased out in 2015.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2A bag with four plies or more must be waterproof to qualify as a UN 5M2 paperbag for hazardous materials use, DOT told Southern Bag, Yazoo City, Miss.The package maker said its bags are made using four plies: the two innermostare kraft paper, the third is a 3-mil linear low-density plastic laminated topaper, the outermost is paper.  Plant manager Jimmy Druey explained that theplastic side of the third ply faces in toward the packaged material and askedif the construction meets UN 5M2 standards.DOT cited 178.521(b)(2) requiring that bags be waterproof by the use of awater-resistant ply as one of the two outermost plies or a water-resistantbarrier of a "suitable protective material" between the two outermost plies.It said bags of four plies or more that meet all requirements of 178.521 andtested per subpart M of Part 178 may be marked as a UN 5M2 paper bag.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Initial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federalInitial and recurrent hazardous materials training requirements for federalemployees were spelled out by DOT in response to inquiries from variousgovernment agencies.  Questioners asked if it is acceptable, under initialtraining rules, for a new hire to take an exam without receiving some type ofinstruction from the hiring agency.  Noting that a major purpose of trainingrules is to ensure that employers provide training for each hazmat employee,DOT said the rules specify that workers whose jobs involve the transportationof hazardous materials receive familiarization training covering the HMR.For initial training, section 172.704(c) specifies training must occur within90 days of hire and that each new employee must be trained before beingtested.Questioners also asked if, under recurrent training rules, an employee withinitial training can take a recurrent exam without additional instructionprior to the exam.  DOT replied that recurrent training must be completed anddocumented at least once every two years, and that employees should receiverecurrent hazmat training before being tested .Regarding questions about use of computer-based training to meet trainingrequirements, DOT said each agency must determine the most suitable source oftraining for its employees.  Computer-based training is acceptable and may beused provided the general awareness, function specific, safety training, andtesting requirements are fulfilled.DOT added that a record of each hazmat employee's training over the precedingtwo years must be maintained by the employer for the duration of employmentin each hazardous material job and for 90 days thereafter.  A current recordof relevant training is not required to be received from a previous employer,but may be used to eliminate the need for the new employer to retrain asrequired in 172.704 (c)(1)(iii).Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Some asphalts in international transport are described differently than inSome asphalts in international transport are described differently than indomestic shipment, DOT informed Seneca Petroleum, Crestwood, Ill.  Thecompany asked about "cutback asphalts," which it said can be subdivided intorapid curing, medium curing and slow curing.  It noted that the faster thecuring rate, the more volatile the material.Seneca said its rapid curing asphalt has a flash point of 70 to 90 degreesFahrenheit.  Because it is transported at 150 degrees Fahrenheit, it believedthe product does not meet the definition of an elevated temperature material.The company said it understood that elevated temperature materials aredefined in the HMR as liquids shipped above 212 degrees Fahrenheit ormaterials shipped in a liquid phase with a flash point at or above 100degrees Fahrenheit.However, company safety director Jim Sniegowski said Illinois transportationofficials interpret the definition to mean any material transported at orabove its flash point.  Thus the state requires Seneca to prepare rapidcuring asphalt for shipment with elevated temperature shipping paper, markingand placarding rules.  The firm asked for clarification of the elevatedtemperature rule and for a proper shipping name.DOT replied that a material with a flash point below 37.8 degrees Celsius(100 degrees Fahrenheit) and offered for transportation or transported below100 degrees Celsius (212 degrees Fahrenheit) does not meet the section 171.8definition of an elevated temperature material.Therefore, the shipping description for rapid curing asphalt would be"Asphalt, cut-back, 3, UN1999, PG III," and elevated temperature rules wouldnot apply.  However, the agency added, for international transportation thematerial must be described as "Elevated temperature liquid, flammable, n.o.s.(Asphalt)."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drumA cap seal must withstand internal pressure of 100 kPa without the drumclosure in place, DOT advised Kelly Air Force Base, Texas.  The agencycovered sections 173.226 and 173.227 rules concerning closures on packagingsused to ship materials poisonous by inhalation.  The Air Force asked whattesting must be done to determine if a cap seal meets the internal pressurerequirements of the HMR.DOT said no specific test (for example, hydrostatic testing) is required.Whatever test is used, it must apply the pressure for enough time todetermine if the cap seal can withstand 100 kPa.  That period depends on thetest method used, the agency said.  It added that if a hydrostatic test isused, for example, a five-minute application of the test pressure isappropriate.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Adhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked inAdhesives shipped in containers weighing no more 66 pounds and marked inaccordance with HMR part 172 may be transported as a consumer commodity, DOTtold Grand Circuit, Freehold, N.J.  It sells an adhesive called Grand CircuitHoof Repair to blacksmiths for gluing on horseshoes and repairing damagedhoof walls.The product is sold "as is," ready for use off the shelf, explained generalmanager Rita Newell.  Grand Circuit describes the material for shipping as aflammable liquid, UN1133, class 3 in packing group III.  The adhesive is soldin 1-, 2- and 3-ounce bot-tles, as well as in 40- and 380-mL plastic tubes.The veterinary supply company asked for clarification of the ORM-D ratingwhen transporting its product.DOT responded an "Adhesive, 3, UN1133, PG II," may be renamed and reclassedas "Consumer commodity, ORM-D" if it meets criteria in 173.150.  That sectionrequires the materials not meet the definition of any other hazard class andnot be a hazardous substance, hazardous waste, or marine pollutant.The agency advised that the inner packagings must be placed in a strong outerpackaging, the completed package must weigh no more than 66 pounds, and theouter packaging must be marked in accordance with 172.316.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would beA material subject to EPA uniform hazardous waste manifest rules would bedescribed as an "environmentally hazardous substance," DOT advised a DownersGrove, Ill., firm.  Castrol Industrial described its product as a petroleumoil, with a flash point of 400 degrees Fahrenheit and containing less than 5%barium salt.  This material is packaged in 55-gallon (non-bulk) drums or 330-gallon intermediate bulk containers.The petroleum product maker noted that the material does not meet thedefinition of a marine pollutant, but when tested as a waste, it does meetEPA's definition of a toxic hazardous waste.  Company regulatory specialistMarcia Montgomery asked whether a class 9 hazard warning label is appropriatefor shipping.DOT replied that if the product is not a Division 6.1 poisonous material, amarine pollutant, or a hazardous substance, then it does not meet the criter-ia of any hazard class contained in 49 CFR Part 173 and, therefore, is notsubject to regulation.However, if it is transported as a waste subject to EPA uniform hazardouswaste manifest rules, it would be described as "Waste, environmentallyhazardous substances, liquid, n.o.s., 9, UN 3082, PG III."  Packagings of 119gallons or less (non-bulk) au-thorized for this material are in 173.203, DOTsaid.  Packagings of greater than 119 gallons (bulk) are in 173.241.  Inaddition, each bulk and non-bulk packaging must be marked in accordance withsections 172.301 or 172.302, as applicable, and must be labeled with a Class9 label as prescribed in section 172.400.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996There are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outerThere are no restrictions on the number of inner receptacles in an outerpackaging as long as the complete package passes the prescribed tests and iscertified, DOT told Mallinckrodt Chemical, Paris, Ky.  Packaging engineerGreg Smart asked the agency to clarify 173.158 pertaining to the number ofinner receptacles per outer package to ship nitric acid.  Subparagraph (b)(2)limits the number of inner receptacles to four.  However, subparagraph (f)(2)does not place a limit on the number of inner receptacles.DOT advised that 173.158(f)(2) applies to nitric acid of 70% or less con-centration.  When packaged in 4H1 expanded plastic boxes, the HMR does notlimit the number of inner glass packagings, only that each not exceed 2.5 L.Paragraph (b)(2), which specifies a limit of four inner receptacles per outerpackaging applies to nitric acid in higher concentrations as long as it doesnot contain sulfuric or hydrochloric acid as impurities.  In both cases, DOTnoted, outer packagings constructed of plastic also must conform tocompatibility requirements in 173.24(e).Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeatA commercial invoice and packing list for export/import need not repeathazardous materials information on the ocean bill of lading, DOT told LuskShipping, Baltimore.  The firm explained its commercial invoice includes adescription of goods, address of the shipper and seller and payment terms.Lusk asked if emergency response information and phone numbers, as requiredby the Hazardous Materials Regulations, needed to be included on the invoiceor material packing list.DOT replied no.  The HMR specifies the shipping paper is the document thatcontains the hazardous materials data required by sections 172.203 and 204and emergency phone number required by 172.604(a)(3).  The agency added thatcompliance with shipping paper data was met by the ocean bill of ladingcontaining all data required by sections 172.203, 172.204 and 172.604(a)(3).Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Rules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tankRules requiring manholes on cargo tank trucks apply to date of tankmanufacture, not vehicle manufacture, DOT said responding to carrierinquiries on section 178.337-6, manhole closure requirements.  Severalcompanies noted manholes or inspection openings were mandated on cargo tanksmade after April 21, 1994, and that tanks made before that date but laterinstalled on trucks were not required to comply with the manhole rule.DOT said the April 21 date applies to manufacture of the cargo tank, not itsinstallation on a motor vehicle.  It added that a cargo tank refers to thetank fitted with all appurtenances, reinforcements, fittings and closures af-fecting lading retention installed by the cargo tank manufacturer.DOT said under the definition of cargo tank in 178.320, appurtenances,fittings, closures and valves added by truck and tank assemblers or ownersare not part of a cargo tank.  Therefore, a tank marked with an original testdate on or before April 21, 1994, is not required to be fitted with manholeor inspection openings.  The certificate stating the completed cargo tankmotor vehicle conforms to all DOT specifications and the American Society ofMechanical Engineers code may be dated after April 21, 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23%Air traffic control privatization plans not to affect current 6.23% hazardousmaterials air waybill tax, DOT said.  Agency is targeting Oct. 1, 1997, tobegin non-government air traffic control corporation.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996RSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filingRSPA and Ohio conducting pilot test of alternative procedure for filing 1996carrier federal registration statement.  RSPA looking at possible rulemakingto allow state registration to satisfy federal rules.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergencyDOT proposed hazardous materials pipeline facilities conduct emergencyresponse activities at plants handling gas, hazardous liquids, carbondioxide.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996New consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docketNew consolidated docket management system, combining nine separate docketfacilities into one central office, announced by DOT.  New office replacespaper-based system with electronic imaging system.  Access informationavailable from Lorie Dankers, 202/366-5565.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Coast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure fromCoast Guard amended 127.1407(b) to reduce hydrostatic test pressure from 1.5to 1.1 times maximum allowable working pressure.  Also will permit captain ofthe port to authorize alternatives to hydrostatic testing, includingpneumatic tests.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996RSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexibleRSPA denied requests to revise 173.35(b) to allow reuse of flexibleintermediate bulk containers.  Also denied shipper petitions for continueduse of intermediate bulk containers now holding DOT exemptions.  Packagingmust meet standards in HM-181E.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardousDOT denied industry requests to drop 127.1325 requirements that hazardous gastransfer sites maintain security guards, or apply rule only during transfers.Agency said explosion risk from vandalism/sabotage exists even when transfersnot in progress.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Certain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tankCertain chlorine users granted DOT exemption from 49 CFR 174.67(i)(j) tankcar unloading rules.  Exemption authorizes chlorine-filled rail cars toremain attached to connectors without physical presence of unloader.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS MATERIALS TRANSPORTATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materialsDOT Transportation Safety Institute, Oklahoma City, hazardous materialstraining schedule available for 1996.  Contact Virginia Litres, 202/366-4488.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-3IA059-000325-B011-3http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev54.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001557 text/html 44253HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:14:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:39 GMTContent-length: 44064Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev54.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEDERAL COURTS' EQUITABLE JURISDICTION IS LIMITED, RCRA DEFENDANTS REPLY (763 words) VERTAC RECEIVER LOSES BID TO SUE THIRD PARTIES FOR DIOXIN CLEANUP COSTS (468 words) 6TH CIR.'S $1.5M FINE AFFIRMANCE, CORP. OFFICER LIABILITY FINDING APPEALED (670 words) OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129M TO CLOSE A CHAPTER ON LOVE CANAL (541 words) WD KY WON'T RECONSIDER ORDER ALLOWING RP SECTION 107(a) COST RECOVERY (289 words) ED WA: CERCLA'S SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY WAIVER EXTENDS TO STATE CLAIMS (656 words) 3RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS, VISITORS TO WASTE SITE ARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS (894 words) IL APP. CT. AFFIRMS CARRRIER WIN ON LATE NOTICE GROUNDS (345 words) AZ APP. CT. REVERSES INSURER WIN ON TCE COVERAGE BAD FAITH SUIT (601 words) SD NY DENIES CARRIERS JUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OF COVERAGE, LOST POLICY (951 words) CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996FEDERAL COURTS' EQUITABLEJURISDICTION IS LIMITED,RCRA DEFENDANTS REPLY     The Resource Conservation Recovery Act citizen suitdefendants who are seeking reversal of the Ninth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals' determination of their liability forrestitutionary damages, on Dec. 28 submitted their reply to theplaintiffs' arguments to the U.S. Supreme Court.  Meghrig et al.v. KFC Western Inc., No. 95-83 (U.S.); see Hazardous WasteLitigation Reporter, Dec. 20, 1995.     Alan and Margaret Meghrig rejoined that KFC Western Inc.'sposition "is seriously flawed because it proceeds from a seriesof false assumptions," including a "misapprehension of thelimited jurisdiction of federal courts to render equitable reliefin the face of a statute such as [RCRA]."     KFC Western's response, the petitioners contended, "largelyignores the thorough statutory construction analysis advanced byPetitioners in favor of a more generalized series of assumptionstied to Respondent's view of fairness."  RCRA's jurisdictionalstatement, argued the Meghrigs, "do[es] not authorize thedistrict courts to broadly 'take such action as may benecessary,' but authorize[s] those courts to restrain a person orto order a person to take other necessary action, or both, andnothing more."     The Meghrigs noted the panoply of federal environmentalstatutes that contain citizen suit provisions, and stated thattheir respective legislative histories, "beginning with the 1970Clean Air Act and flowing through subsequently enacted federalenvironmental statutes, [confirm] congressional intent to limitthe remedies available to citizen plaintiffs by excludingjurisdiction to award damages."     The petitioners argued that to accept the respondents'contention that recognition of restitution under RCRA would notunduly interfere with CERCLA "would be to accept the propositionthat the massive legislative effort and epic compromise necessaryto enact CERCLA [was] simply swept away by Congress four yearslater" with the passage of the 1984 RCRA amendments.               The Meghrigs challenged KFC Western's assertion that thetrial court possessed jurisdiction to grant equitable relief."RCRA's citizen suit provision contains no grant of authority tothe district courts to formulate general federal common law,"they contended, "and the claims of Respondent KFC, as a privateparty, do not fall within any of the four narrow areas in whichfederal courts have general common law jurisdiction."     The petitioners asserted that the Supreme Court's 1992opinion in Franklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, upon whichKFC Western relied extensively in arguing for a federal court'sjurisdiction to fashion relief, "has no bearing on the RCRAstatute.  In Franklin, the statute was absolutely silent on thesubject of remedies available to an aggrieved plaintiff....  Bycontrast, RCRA provides particularized citizen remedies, and itslegislative history and that of related statutes reaffirm thelimitations on those remedies."     The Meghrigs averred that the relief sought by KFC Westerndoes not constitute equitable restitution.  "What Respondentseeks here is compensation for an injury to its property," theyargued, "and that certainly is distinguished from an equitableaction for specific relief such as restitutionary awards of back-pay, or return of specific property".     In 1963, the petitioners inherited a commercial parcel inLos Angeles from their father.  Gasoline stations had beenpreviously operated on the site for decades; all undergroundstorage tanks had been removed well before the Meghrigs tooktitle.     In 1975, the petitioners sold the land to the respondent,who established a Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise on the site.In the course of renovations in 1988, petroleum contamination wasdiscovered, and KFC Western spent some $211,000 in complying witha cleanup order from the Los Angeles Department of Health.     When the Meghrigs refused KFC Western's reimbursementdemands, the respondent started the present litigation in theU.S. District Court for the Central District of California.  Thetrial court granted the Meghrigs' dismissal motion in March 1992,holding that no "imminent and substantial endangerment" existedto support a RCRA claim, and stating that RCRA's citizen suitprovision solely made injunctive relief available.     In March 1995, the Ninth Circuit reversed by a 2-1 margin.The appellate court concluded that RCRA's "imminent andsubstantial endangerment" language did not act as a time-bar, anda RCRA citizen suit plaintiff could make demand for moneydamages.  The Meghrigs lodged their certiorari petition thefollowing July, and the Supreme Court agreed to review the matterlast October.  Oral argument in the matter is scheduled forJan. 10, at 10:00 a.m.               John P. Zaimes and Clifton J. McFarland of McClintock,Weston, Benshoof, Rochefort, Rubalcava & MacCuish, Los Angeles,represent Alan and Margaret Meghrig.     Daniel Romano and Sharon Corda of the Law Office of DanielRomano, Santa Monica, CA, represent KFC Western Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996VERTAC RECEIVER LOSESBID TO SUE THIRD PARTIESFOR DIOXIN CLEANUP COSTS     A federal judge in Little Rock on Dec. 11 denied a motion bythe court-appointed receiver for the bankrupt Vertac ChemicalCorp. to sue other parties to recover cleanup costs that could beused to pay Vertac's environmental debts to the federal and stategovernments for the cleanup of a bayou polluted by runoff fromthe plant.  United States v. Vertac Chemical Corp., No. LR-C-80-109 (ED AR).     U.S. District Judge George Howard Jr. of the EasternDistrict of Arkansas noted that the State of Arkansas is alreadyseeking to remedy environmental damage to the bayou and he saidhe was not persuaded that the receiver's limited resources shouldbe used to fund an action that the state intends to pursue.     Vertac's Jacksonville, AR, plant was acquired by HerculesInc. in 1961.  Hercules had manufactured the defoliant AgentOrange at the plant from 1964 to 1968, pursuant to a governmentcontract.  Thousands of barrels of dioxin, one of the byproductsof Agent Orange, and other hazardous wastes contaminated the soilat the plant site and polluted Rocky Branch Creek, which runsthrough the site and empties into Bayou Meto.  The government hadcommenced a CERCLA action in 1987 to recoup the costs ofremediating the site.     Court-appointed bankruptcy receiver Lee S. Thalheimer of theLittle Rock firm of Arnold, Grobmyer & Haley, had asked thecourt's permission to file a citizen's suit under the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act against others who may be liablefor polluting Bayou Meto.     Judge Howard observed that Furrer v. Brown, a recent EighthCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals case, held that plaintiffs may onlyseek injunctive relief, not a monetary judgment, under RCRA and,therefore, the receiver would not be able to recover any moniesfrom an RCRA suit.  (Furrer v. Brown, 62 F.3d 1092 (8th Cir.1995).     He took note of the fact that the Ninth Circuit has decidedthe same issue differently in KFC Western v. Meghrig, 49 F.3d 518(9th Cir. 1995) and that the U.S. Supreme Court has granted apetition for writ of certiorari in that case to decide the issueof whether recovery of cleanup costs is available in a privateaction under RCRA.     Judge Howard also denied Thalheimer's request to be grantedthe authority to place restrictions on the future use of theVertac plant.  The receiver wanted to authorize Hercules toclean, salvage and sell plant equipment to help pay offcreditors.  Hercules had supported the request but the governmentopposed it.     Judge Howard agreed with the United States that thereceiver's request was overly broad and vague.  However, toencourage the parties to work together, the judge dismissed therequest without prejudice to renew to give the parties a chanceto work out their differences.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 19966TH CIR.'S $1.5M FINEAFFIRMANCE, CORP. OFFICERLIABILITY FINDING APPEALED     The Michigan RCRA defendants whose $1.5 million penalty fornoncompliance with closure deadlines was upheld by the SixthCircuit last July, on Dec. 1 petitioned the U.S. Supreme Courtfor writ of certiorari.  Production Plated Plastics Inc. et al.v. United States et al., Nos. 95-878 (U.S.); see Hazardous WasteLitigation Reporter, Sept. 6, 1995.     In addition to challenging the fine as unconstitutionallyexcessive, the petitioners exhorted the High Court to "determine,once and for all, whether Congress intended corporate officerliability under RCRA and CERCLA, and if so, under what standard."     The litigation stems from the operation of a chrome platingfacility in Richland, MI, which opened in 1966 and was acquiredthree years later by petitioner Production Plated Plastics Inc.("PPP").  PPP, as did the prior owner, stored sludge and processwater in on-site surface inpoundments.     In 1977, Michigan sued PPP under the state Water ResourcesConservation Act after hexavelent chrome was discovered in thegroundwater in the plant's vicinity.  PPP closed the impoundmentsin the course of the remediation plan it had agreed to with theMichigan Department of Natural Resources.     PPP applied for RCRA interim status for its impoundments in1980.  PPP was unable thereafter to obtain insurance or a closurebond, and it lost its interim status in 1985.  The federal andstate governments brought the present litigation in 1987,alleging failure to submit a closure plan within 15 days oflosing RCRA interim status, and failure to complete closureactivities within 180 days of the state's approval of closureplan.  Also named to the suit were the affiliated Michigan CityPlastics Co. Inc. (MCP) and Michael Ladney, the controllingofficer of both entities.               The U.S. District Court for the Western District of Michigandetermined in 1990 that Ladney may be held jointly and severallyliable.  The trial court granted the government's demand forpermanent, mandatory injunctive mandatory relief in 1991, and theSixth Circuit affirmed the following year.     After a trial on penalties, Judge Benjamin F. Gibson in 1992imposed a $1.5 million penalty on the defendants, and ordered theimplementation of a $2.4 million trust fund to pay forgroundwater monitoring over 30 years.  The trial court alsoappointed a third-party trustee to marshall the defendants'assets to comply with the injunction.     The Sixth Circuit affirmed in an unpublished per curiamopinion last July 19.  The panel found no violation of thedefendants' due process rights in that Ladney operated hisbusinesses without regard for corporate form, and concluded thatthe fine imposed was well below the $90 million potentialmaximum.     In their petition, the defendants assert that while "courtshave found joint and several liability for RCRA compliance,penalties should be assessed separately and not jointly andseverally... [B]y clear implication, cases explaining therequirements of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments (Due ProcessAnalysis) and Eighth Amendment (Excessive Punishment Analysis)require that a court analyze behavior individually when assessinga penalty sought by the government that amounts to punishment."     The petitioners asserted that "[s]ince fines under RCRA areexclusively punitive, they are fully subject to the EighthAmendment's prohibition against excessive fines.... [N]either theDistrict Court nor Sixth Circuit gave anything but cursoryconsideration to the possibility that the $1.5 million fine, thelargest penalty in the Western District of Michigan's history,could be excessive."     As to the issue of owner/operator liability under bothCERCLA and RCRA, the petitioners argued that those federal courtsthat have extended such liability to corporate officers haveignored Supreme Court precedent concerning statutoryconstruction.  "RCRA does not define 'owner' or 'operator' toinclude corporate officers, employees or shareholders," thedefendants contended.  "Likewise, nothing in RCRA's legislativehistory suggests that Congress intended the joint and severalliability of corporate officers for the violations of acorporation."     Douglas W. Van Essen of Law, Weathers & Richardson, GrandRapids, MI, submitted the petition on behalf of Production PlatedPlastics Inc., Michigan City Plastics Co. Inc. and MichaelLadney.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996OCCIDENTAL PAYS $129MTO CLOSE A CHAPTERON LOVE CANAL     Occidental Chemical Corp. has agreed to pay the U.S.government $129 million in cleanup costs and interest to settle a16-year-old lawsuit resulting from decades of pollution at LoveCanal, the case that spurred Congress to enact the Superfund Lawof 1980.  United States et al. v. Hooker Chemical Corp. et al.,No. 79-CV-990C (WD NY); see Hazardous Waste Litigation Reporter,June 3, 1991.     Under the proposed consent decree, announced Dec. 21,Occidental Chemical Corp. (Oxychem) will pay $102 million to theEnvironmental Protection Agency and $28 million to the FederalEmergency Management Agency (FEMA).  FEMA handled the initialcleanup and relocation of Love Canal residents.     From 1942 to 1953, Oxychem's corporate predecessor, HookerChemical, dumped an estimated 22,000 tons of toxic chemicals andhazardous wastes at Love Canal from its Niagara Fallsmanufacturing plant.  The site was eventually covered over anddeeded to the City of Niagara Falls.  Homes and a school werelater built on and near Love Canal.  Chemicals began seeping intothe houses in the 1970s sickening residents; one resident, LoisGibbs, led a crusade to expose Hooker's actions and clean up thesite.     In 1979, the federal government and New York State broughtsuit against Hooker.  The federal government initially soughtcompensation of more than $200 million in cleanup costs underCERCLA and the state sought $250 million in punitive damages.Oxychem was held liable in the liability phase of the trial, butthe state's claims for punitive damages were denied.     In June 1994, Oxychem agreed to pay the state $98 million tosettle the remaining state claims.  The U.S. Army has also agreedto pay the government $8 million for its share of the costs forcleaning up hazardous waste that it dumped at the site duringWorld War II.     The consent decree, which is expected to receive finalapproval in 30 days, eliminates the need for a second trial ondamages.  Under its terms, Oxychem will pay the $129 million infour installments over three years, beginning three months afterthe court grants final approval.     While the proposed settlement closes out the federal andstate cleanup claims, it does not end the litigation over LoveCanal.  The City of Niagara Falls is seeking $4 million in costsand interest and 900 former residents have personal injurylawsuits still pending.  In the wake of the federal and statesettlements, Niagara Falls expects that it will soon reach asettlement with the company to end its suit as well.               In announcing the settlement, U.S. Attorney General JanetReno called it "the transformation of an environmental disastercalled Love Canal into a success story.  It stands for theprinciple that when people make a mess, they should clean it up."     A spokesman for Oxychem said that the company has neverdenied liability, but that the settlement represents a compromiseamong the parties on the amount of compensation, rather thanfines or penalties.  The agreement, he said avoids having to gothrough a protracted trial on damages.     Oxychem is represented by Steven K. Yablonski of Piper &Marbury, Washington, DC.  The federal government is representedby Steven Novick and Steven R. Baer of the U.S. JusticeDepartment, Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996WD KY WON'T RECONSIDERORDER ALLOWING RPSECTION 107(a) COST RECOVERY     U.S. District Judge Joseph H. McKinley Jr. of the WesternDistrict of Kentucky on Dec. 27 refused a defense bid toreconsider his November ruling finding a responsible party CERCLAplaintiff capable of suing for cost recovery under Section107(a).  Barmet Aluminum Corp. v. Doug Brantley & Sons Inc. etal., No. 4:95-CV-93-M (WD KY); see Hazardous Waste LitigationReporter, Dec. 6, 1995.     The judge also refused the defendants request forcertification for interlocutory appeal to the Sixth Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals.     In March 1995, plaintiff Barmet Aluminum Corp. entered intoa consent order with the EPA to clean up the Brantley Landfillsite; Barmet was first named as a potentially responsible partyregarding the site in 1989.     Barmet thereafter lodged a CERCLA Section Section 107/113complaint against excavator Doug Brantley & Sons Inc. and itscorporate principals.  The defendants argued for the dismissal ofthe allegations under Section 107, contending that Barmet'sstatus as a responsible party limited it to seeking Section113(f) contribution.     Judge McKinley held last Nov. 22 that Section 107(a)(4)(B)imposes liability for "any other necessary costs of responseincurred by any other person consistent with the nationalliability plan," and refuse to exclude responsible parties fromthe defined "any other person."   He stated that the onlydistrict court within the circuit to have addressed the issue hastwice allowed responsible parties and potentially responsibleparties to sue for Section 107 cost recovery.               Kim K. Burke, Robert A. Bilott and Charles H. Pangburn IIIof Taft, Stettinius & Hollister, Cincinnati, represent theplaintiff.     J. Anthony Goebel, Joseph J. Zaluski, George L. Seay Jr. andClinton J. Elliot of Wyatt, Tarrant & Combs, Louisville, KY,represent the defendants.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ED WA: CERCLA'S SOVEREIGNIMMUNITY WAIVER EXTENDSTO STATE CLAIMS     U.S. District Judge Justin B. Quackenbush of the EasternDistrict of Washington on Dec. 11 clarified his October order inan environmental cost recovery action against the U.S. Army Corpsof Engineers.  Crowley Marine Services Inc. et al. v. Fednav Ltd.et al., No. CS-94-178-JLQ; see Hazardous Waste LitigationReporter, Nov. 1, 1995.     The judge stated that CERCLA's waiver of sovereign immunity,which he had previously held to override the Corps' assertion ofimmunity under the Flood Control Act of 1928, applied to theplaintiffs' state statutory claims as well.     Plaintiffs Crowley Marine Services Inc. and others, alongwith the Corps, were sued in 1991-1992 by the WashingtonDepartment of Ecology over soil and groundwater contamination inthe vicinity of a levee and drainage system owned and operated bythe Corps.  The levee and drainage system, situated on the bankof the Columbia River, is part of a federal flood controlproject.  The plaintiffs performed remediation in satisfaction ofthe state suit, and brought the present action against some 20parties who refused to participate in the cleanup.     In his Oct. 10 order addressing the Corps' dismissal motion,Judge Quackenbush agreed that the Flood Act barred theplaintiffs' count under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA).  Herefused to find the Corps immunized on the CERCLA claims, findingthat the defendant asserted none of the enumerated defenses tothe sovereign immunity waiver, and determining that CERCLAcontains no express exception regarding Flood Act immunity.     The Corps sought clarification of the order, seeking adetermination that the FTCA ruling carried over to theplaintiffs' common-law tort claims, and that CERCLA's sovereignimmunity did not apply to the claims under Washington's hazardousmaterials statutes.  The plaintiffs responded that CERCLA'ssovereign immunity unequivocally applies to state environmentalstatutes.     Judge Quackenbush primarily agreed that the plaintiffs'claims for negligence/negligence per se, strict liability,trespass, and nuisance "were applicable to the Corps only throughthe FTCA," and thus were dismissed.     In considering the claims under Washington's state Superfundlaw, the Model Toxics Control Act (MTCA), the court wrote thatCERCLA Section 9620(a)(4) "provides, in pertinent part, that'State laws concerning removal and remedial action, includingState laws regarding enforcement, shall apply' to facilities ofthe United States...     "The MTCA is similar in language to CERCLA," the judgecontinued.  "The court finds that CERCLA's waiver of immunity, inconjunction with the form and substance of the MTCA, require theconclusion that the MTCA is applicable to the site owned andoperated by the Corps."  The court agreed with the Corps that thewaiver solely extends to sites currently owned or operated by theUnited States.     Judge Quackenbush then addressed the plaintiffs' claimsunder the Washington Hazardous Waste Management Act (HWMA), thestate RCRA equivalent.  The court looked to the 1992 amendment toRCRA Section 6961, which restated and emphasized the waiver ofsovereign immunity in the statute.  "The 1992 amendment was aclear effort on behalf of Congress to equally apply environmentalstandards to private citizens and the federal government," thejudge wrote.     The judge rejected the Corps' assertion that the claim forrelief under the Declaratory Judgment Act should be dismissed forlack of an independent basis of federal jurisdiction."Plaintiffs' CERCLA claims were not dismissed, and these claimsprovide an independent jurisdictional basis, the court stated.     Judge Quackenbush lastly rejected the Corps' bid to dismissthe claim for the reasonable costs of negotiation with theWashington state authorities, including attorneys' fees.  TheCorps asserted that such recovery was barred under the U.S.Supreme Court's 1994 ruling in Key Tronic v. U.S.; the courtrejoined that the plaintiffs "seek recovery of attorneys' feesunder several statutes, including CERCLA, the RCRA, the MTCA, andthe HWMA.  Each of those statutes provides for potential recoveryof attorneys' fees."     Gillis E. Reavis of Morrison & Foerster, Seattle, representsCrowley Marine Services Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 19963RD CIR.: NEIGHBORS,VISITORS TO WASTE SITEARE NOT KNOWN CREDITORS     Neighbors of a dump site contaminated by low-level radiationwere not known creditors and, therefore, the corporate owner ofthe sites had no obligation to provide them with actual noticewhen it went into bankruptcy, the Third Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals ruled on Dec. 18.  Chemetron Corp. v. Jones et al.,No. 94-3371 (3rd Cir.).     From 1965 to 1975, Chemetron Corp. owned and operated amanufacturing facility that made an antimony oxide catalystutilizing depleted plutonium and a nearby landfill where itdumped waste products from that manufacturing process in CuyahogaHeights, OH.  Chemetron sold the sites in 1975, but becameinvolved in cleanup efforts between 1980 and 1988 after it wasdiscovered that the sites were contaminated with radioactivewaste.     In 1988, Chemetron filed for Chapter 11 reorganization inthe U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Western District ofPennsylvania.  The court issued a claims bar date order fixingthe last day for creditors to file claims as May 31, 1988.Chemetron sent the required actual notice to all of its knowncreditors and also voluntarily placed advertisements in the NewYork Times and Wall Street Journal in an effort to reach anyunknown creditors.     In 1992, 15 individuals filed suit against Chemetron and itssuccessors in interest in the Cuyahoga County Court of CommonPleas claiming to have been injured from exposure to radioactiveand toxic chemicals at the dump site.  Eventually the list ofplaintiffs grew to 21.  Two of the plaintiffs had lived in housesnear the site and the rest were periodic visitors to the houses.     Chemetron moved to dismiss the suit, arguing that any suchclaim had been discharged in the bankruptcy proceedings which hadended in 1990.  The plaintiffs then petitioned the bankruptcycourt to be allowed to file late claims.   In August 1993, thebankruptcy court granted the petition, finding that theplaintiffs were known creditors who had been entitled to actualnotice of the proceedings and the claims bar date.  Thebankruptcy court then reserved ruling on the issue of whether theplaintiffs' claims were dischargeable.     Chemetron appealed the bankruptcy court ruling to U.S.District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania, whichreversed the bankruptcy court's grant of the motion to file lateclaims.  The district court held that the plaintiffs were notknown creditors and that the notice published in the two nationalnewspapers were sufficient to alert them to the bankruptcyproceedings.  The district court also ruled, without explanation,that the plaintiffs' claims were dischargeable as a result of thebankruptcy action.     The plaintiffs appealed to the Third Circuit, which affirmedthe district court finding that the plaintiffs are unknowncreditors.  In Tulsa Professional Collection Service Inc. v.Roper, 485 U.S. 478, 490 (1988), the U.S. Supreme Courtcharacterized a known creditor as one whose identity is eitherknown or "reasonably ascertainable by the debtor" Circuit JudgeJane R. Roth wrote.  Generally, debtors are expected to identifyknown creditors through a careful search of their own books andrecords and further efforts are not required, she explained.     In this case, she said, the bankruptcy court replaced the"reasonably ascertainable" standard with a "reasonablyforeseeable" standard.  Under that test, the bankruptcy courtsaid Chemetron knew or should have known that it was reasonablyforeseeable that it would suffer claims from individuals livingnear the sites making them known creditors.     This "reasonably foreseeable" standard is an incorrect ruleof law that imposes an impossible burden on debtors, the ThirdCircuit found.  None of the claimants currently live near thesite and some have moved as far away as Texas.  "We are hardpressed to conceive of any way the debtor could identify, locate,and provide actual notice to these claimants," Judge Roth said.     Having affirmed the district court's ruling that theplaintiffs were unknown claimants in the bankruptcy action andthat the newspaper notices, therefore, were sufficient to informthem of the proceedings, the circuit court found that thedistrict court erred in failing to consider whether theplaintiffs' failure to file their claims in a timely manner wasdue to "excusable neglect."  The appellate panel remanded thatissue to the district court with instructions to consider thetotality of the circumstances and the potential impact onChemetron.     The Third Circuit also vacated the district court's rulingthat the plaintiffs' claims were discharged by the bankruptcyaction and remanded that issue to the bankruptcy court.  Becausethe bankruptcy court had postponed ruling on the issue ofdischarge, it was not an appealable order and, therefore, was notproperly before the district court, the Third Circuit said.     Circuit Judge H. Lee Sarokin concurred in the judgment butsaid that the Third Circuit went to far in discarding the"reasonably ascertainable" test entirely.  "These tests are notmutually exclusive, or even at odds.  They address separateissues," Judge Sarokin wrote.  One has to do with whether adebtor knew or should have known a claim would be brought whilethe other has to do with the debtor's ability to identify apotential claimant, he said.     The Jones plaintiffs were represented by William Mitchelland Deborah J. Papushak of Armstrong, Mitchell & Damiani,Cleveland.  Chemetron was represented Dennis G. Terez of Squire,Sanders & Dempsey, Cleveland and George L. Cass of Buchanan,Ingersoll, Pittsburgh.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996IL APP. CT. AFFIRMSCARRRIER WIN ON LATENOTICE GROUNDS     A company that waited 14 months to notify its insurers thatit might be partly liable for cleaning a hazardous waste sitecannot claim insurance coverage, the Illinois Appellate Court,First District stated in an opinion published Dec. 14.Industrial Coatings Group Inc. v. American Motorists InsuranceCo. et al., No. 1-94-1491 (IL App. Ct., 1st Dist.).     Industrial Coatings Group Inc. learned in February 1986 thatit faced potential liability for hazardous waste contamination ata site in Griffith, IN, where Industrial's predecessor had sentused machinery solvent for processing and return.  The appellatepanel wrote that the policyholder should have notified itscarriers at that time.     The predecessor Joanna Western Mills Co. had sent dirtysolvent to the American Chemical Services site from 1959 to 1985.In operating the site for more than 25 years, American Chemicalburied more than 20,000 drums containing hazardous materials atthe site.  Many of the drums leaked or were punctured while otherhazardous materials were pumped into retention ponds on the site.     After testing by the EPA, the American Chemical site wasdesignated as a Superfund site.  Industrial Coatings' insurancepolicies provided that in the event of an occurrence, writtennotice to the insurers giving the particulars was required "assoon as practicable."  The insured, however, did not give writtennotice to the insurers until more than 14 months after it hadreceived the EPA's letter requesting voluntary participation inthe site cleanup.     The Cook County Circuit Court found that Industrial Coatingsgave its insurance companies late notice, that it therebybreached a condition precedent to coverage under its insurancepolicies and that the company, therefore, had no right to obtaincoverage for the pollution claim which had been asserted againstit.     The state appellate panel affirmed, finding that the delayin notice precluded coverage.  "Under Illinois law, a delay ofeven a few months in giving notice breaches the policy as amatter of law, defeats coverage and justifies the entry ofsummary judgment for the insurance company," the court said.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996AZ APP. CT. REVERSESINSURER WIN ON TCECOVERAGE BAD FAITH SUIT     The Arizona Court of Appeals on Nov. 30 overturned a trialcourt's dismissal of a bad faith claim lodged by an environmentaltort defendant against its insurers.  Tucson Airport Authority v.Certain Underwriters at Lloyd's, London et al., No. CV-95-0052(AZ Ct. App.).     The panel found that the policyholder adequately pleaded aclaim for the carriers' threat to drop a defense of a relatedaction in order to ensure the insured's cooperation in anothersuit, and then withdrawing coverage because of the policyholder'scooperation.     The Tucson Airport Authority (TAA) had been named to twoclass actions in the 1980s stemming from the disposal of TCE onairport property.  The TAA settled with the class claimants for$35 million in the understanding that recovery would be soughtonly from the TAA's insurers.  Those class plaintiffs, in turn,intervened in the declaratory judgment action brought against TAAby its carriers.  The insurers contended that coverage wasunavailable to the intervenors, as the TAA was not liable for TCEdisposal by TAA's lessees.     TAA was subsequently named to a third class suit (the Bahrssuit); it tendered the Bahrs suit to its carriers, who agreed todefend under a reservation of rights.  At this juncture, TAAcontended, the insurers threatened to drop the defense of theBahrs suit if TAA did anything to impede the insurers' attemptsto contest coverage in the declaratory judgment action.     TAA complied, and the insurers obtained summary judgmentsagainst the intervenors in the declaratory judgment action.  Thecarriers then sought to have these judgments declared resjudicata in TAA's pending cross-action for declaratory judgment.When TAA contested the insurers' res judicata motion, TAA wasallegedly informed that such response action cost TAA "alldefense coverage and indemnity coverage for any and allthird-party tort liability claims arising from groundwatercontamination, including insurance coverage for the third-partyliability claims presented against TAA in the Bahrs (putative)class action."     TAA then amended its declaratory judgment suit to include abad faith count, arguing that the carriers breached their duty toreasonably balance their interests against the interests of thepolicyholder.  The Pima County Circuit Court dismissed the badfaith count.     In its reversal, the state appellate panel cited to ArizonaSupreme Court precedent stating that "one of the benefits thatflow[s] from the insurance contract is the insured's expectationthat his insurance company will not wrongfully deprive him of thevery security for which he bargained or expose him to thecatastrophe from which he sought protection....  Conduct by theinsurer which does destroy the security or impair the protectionpurchased breaches the implied covenant of good faith and fairdealing implied in the contract."     After finding the bad faith allegations adequately plead,the court considered the insurers' contention that the claim wasbased on privileged communications made during pending coverageactions by the insurers' counsel.  The panel was persuaded by theCalifornia Supreme Court's 1985 ruling in White v. Western Title,which drew a distinction between a bad faith claim "basedsquarely on a privileged communication, such as an action fordefamation, and one based upon an underlying course of conductevidenced by the communication."     The court found that the "gravamen of TAA's bad faith claimis not a communication, but a course of 'wrongful and tortious'conduct evidenced by the insurers' actions and communicationsduring the coverage actions. Furthermore, TAA's claim does notassail a pleading but instead alleges that its insurers followeda course of conduct in which they failed to perform their dutiesfairly and in good faith."Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZARDOUS WASTE LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996SD NY DENIES CARRIERSJUDGMENT ON TRIGGER OFCOVERAGE, LOST POLICY     U.S. District Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy of the SouthernDistrict of New York on Nov. 22 denied summary judgment toLumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. and Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.on a policyholder's coverage demands stemming from environmentalliabilities at a North Carolina site.  Unimax Corp. et al. v.Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co. et al., No. 92 Civ. 6115 (KTD) (SDNY).     The judge rejected the carriers' contention that NorthCarolina law should be construed so as to find that nooccurrences triggering coverage happened during their policyperiods.     In 1968, the insured Unimax Corp. purchased for itssubsidiary, JFD Electronics Corp., a television antennaproduction facility located in Oxford, NC.  JFD leased the siteand operated the facility over the ensuing 11 years.  In 1979,JFD sublet the site to an affiliate of Ventura Electronics Corp.,which also assumed the facility's operations.  The followingyear, JFD purchased the remaining interest from Unimax andconveyed the site to Ventura.     In 1986, volatile organic compounds were discovered in thesite's groundwater; the state and the EPA commenced a cleanup thefollowing year.  In 1988, Ventura's successor brought a CERCLAcost recovery action against Unimax and JFD.  The EPA notifiedthe insureds that they were regarded as potentially responsibleparties with respect to the site in the fall of 1989; thepolicyholders asserted they first learned of the contamination inAugust 1988.     That same month, the insureds tendered notice to bothLumbermens and Liberty Mutual; both carriers refused coverage.Lumbermens had written Unimax and JFD umbrella comprehensivecatastrophe liability coverage from 1969 through 1971; theinsureds asserted that Lumbermens had also issued them primarypolicies covering 1968 through 1972.  Liberty Mutual issued thepolicyholders primary CGL coverage from 1975 through 1979.     Judge Duffy first considered the insurers' bid for summaryjudgment on the ground that under North Carolina law, anoccurrence does not take place until discovery of contamination,and that such discovery did not occur within the policy period.The insureds rejoined that New York law should be applied, andthat an injury-in-fact trigger should be recognized.     The court preliminarily concluded that no conflict existedbetween the laws of the interested states.  "This case," thejudge wrote, "is centered on insurance policies " i.e. contracts" and the appropriate conflicts analysis begins with each State'scontract laws.  New York and North Carolina apply the same rulesfor contract interpretation."     In looking to the policy language, the court found that it"clearly states that an occurrence takes place if physical injuryresults during the policy period."  The judge further noted thatunder either state's precedents, "contamination is deemed to bephysical injury."  The court further rejected Liberty Mutual'scontention that the insureds never responded to its summaryjudgment with evidence demonstrating that contamination occurredwithin the policy period.  "The focus of Liberty Mutual's motionwas that contamination was not considered under the law to beproperty damage until the discovery of the damage," Judge Duffystated.     The court then considered the policyholder's cross-motionfor summary judgment on the issue of the carriers' duty todefend.  The judge granted the motion as to Lumbermens, findingthe insurer to have made no argument beyond the trigger issue.Liberty Mutual's policy contained a pollution exclusion clause,which the insurer argued would void coverage if New York law wereapplicable to the dispute.     On the present facts, however, the court noted that "anendorsement to the contract specifically deleted the pollutionexclusion clause with regards to operations in North Carolina.If New York law governs these policies, that endorsement wasmisleading and created, at least, an ambiguity [that] must beconstrued in favor of the insured."     The court ultimately refused the insureds judgment againstLiberty Mutual, finding the insurer had raised a genuine ofmaterial fact as to the plaintiffs' knowledge of their claims.JFD had knowledge of its potential liabilities as early as 1972,Liberty Mutual had argued and, therefore, its notice wasuntimely.               The policyholders claimed that Liberty Mutual waived itslate notice defense by not raising the defense in its 1990disclaimer of coverage; the carrier responded that it hadinsufficient knowledge of the underlying facts until discoveryhad commenced.  Judge Duffy denied the insureds summary judgmenton the waiver issue.     The court lastly denied Lumbermens summary judgment withrespect to the two CGL policies it asserted were lost.  Withrespect to the 1968 through 1971 policy ("1ZL policy"), the courtnoted that the insureds proffered some 100 pages bearing the 1ZLnumber that was turned over by Lumbermens during discovery.  "Theonly pages known to be missing are two endorsements and thepolicy jacket," the court wrote.  "I find it incredible thatLumbermens would retain this file, which imposes liability, butlose the documents that may have relieved Lumbermens ofliability."  Judge Duffy stated that liability would be measuredaccording to the terms of the policy as discovered in theinsurer's files.     As to the 1971 through 1972 policy ("8ZL policy"), the judgefound that the plaintiffs had demonstrated its existence, due toa reference to it in Lumbermens' umbrella policy.  The courtdenied  the insureds summary judgment, however, finding thatmaterial issues of fact remained concerning the 8ZL policy'scontent.     Bruce Bienboim and Aidan Synnott of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind,Wharton & Garrison, New York, represent the insureds.     Frank Torres of Evans, Orr, Pacelli, Norton & Laffan, P.C.,New York, and Judith Fournie Helms, Catherine M. Connelly-Warrenand Katherine E. Tammaro of Tressler, Soderstrom, Maloney &Preiss, Chicago, represent Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Co.  RobertL. Joyce of Wilson, Elser, Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, New York,represent Liberty Mutual Insurance Co.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-4IA059-000325-B011-36http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev17.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001637 text/html 38246HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:14:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:25 GMTContent-length: 38057Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev17.html Sample Issue Copyright HAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WASHINGTON UPDATE CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health (224 words) LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House of (86 words) NEWS BRIEFS BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway. A federal (104 words) DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of Representatives (106 words) INDUSTRY TALK WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses the (92 words) TOXICOLOGY REPORT LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed. Recent evidence is (56 words) CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal (94 words) REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles. (75 words) ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated. Chemistry, toxicity, (35 words) INTERNATIONAL FORUM DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused by (91 words) CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish (89 words) ENVIRONMENTAL REPORT AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects of (129 words) TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting from (57 words) RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach to (79 words) ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupt (152 words) INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles on (66 words) INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human (89 words) METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish (65 words) OCCUPATIONAL ALERT RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration (61 words) FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent of (110 words) DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational health (148 words) LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposed (56 words) OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of such (40 words) COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling. (48 words) COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for (125 words) MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other news (91 words) CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutch (85 words) PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTH (53 words) ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection are (54 words) CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the (90 words) MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a (96 words) ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry. In a (140 words) COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton (86 words) HAZCHEM REFERENCE SHELF EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp., (44 words) BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P. (79 words) 1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00; (57 words) HAZCHEM ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS AND SERVICES HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulations (61 words) MEETING NEWS OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will (67 words) FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will (39 words) INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23, (53 words) CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace healthCONGRESSIONAL OUTLOOK FOR 1996 in the environmental and workplace health andsafety areas is reviewed.  1996 begins with uncertainty over the future ofmany bills, among them Superfund, clean water, regulatory reform, RCRA reform;the 104th Congress is seen as extremely anti-environment by many environmentalleaders.  Many predict that there will be continued attacks on environmentallegislation by use of indirect methods, such as riders on appropriationsbills.  Superfund sites will cost $2.5 billion annually for cleanup; somemethod must be used to raise more money, because Superfund itself onlyprovides $1 billion a year.  Environmental groups want groundwater cleanupseparate from industry cleanup responsibilities.  Tax authority for Superfundexpired on Dec. 31, 1995; the corporate environmental income tax and chemicaland petroleum excise taxes that raised Superfund monies must be reauthorized.      A number of bills have bipartisan support:  H.R. 2036 would reformland-disposal restrictions under RCRA; safe drinking water (S. 1316) requiresrisk assessment and cost-benefit analyses to set standards, but exemptsby-products of chlorination (trihalomethanes).      Legislation to reform OSHA failed to move in 1995, and prospects are dimfor 1996.  Bills under consideration would move OSHA away from strictenforcement and more toward technical support and assistance to firms.  Thesechanges are not well supported by industry and are vigorously opposed bylabor.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp. 14-20, Jan. 8, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House ofLEGISLATION IN PROGRESS, previously introduced by the U.S. House ofRepresentatives and the Senate in the environmental, occupational health, andtransportation areas, is listed below; bill number(s), committee(s) to whichbills were referred, floor action, and conference action are as follows:      H.R. 2601, S. 1316: Overhauls procedures used to set drinking watercontaminant standards, and give states more flexibility to protect drinkingwater sources.  Senate Environment & Public Works committee reported, amended11-7-95; Senate amended, passed 11-29-95.(Chemical & Engineering News, pp. 18-19, Jan. 22, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996BREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federalBREAST IMPLANT SETTLEMENT, revised recently, is underway.  A federal districtcourt judge ordered the printing and mailing of a revised offer to siliconegel breast implant recipients, which promises to speed payments to them fromthree major manufacturers--Bristol-Myers Squibb, Baxter Health Care, and3M--but excludes Dow Corning.  Overwhelming costs of litigation forced DowCorning, the maker of about half of the implants, into bankruptcy.  Therevised settlement seeks to avoid thousands of court cases that wouldotherwise clog the judicial system for years.  The total value of the revisedsettlement is nearly impossible to assess.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp.15-16, Jan. 22, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of RepresentativesDIOXIN REASSESSMENT is being examined by the House of RepresentativesSubcommittee on Energy & Environment in an attempt to see how science is usedby EPA.  Several hearings looked into EPA's long-running reassessment of thehealth effects of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds.  The goal of the hearingswas not to determine if EPA were right or wrong but to find out if the agencyis making appropriate use of the resources available.  The implication is thatEPA has used these resources selectively to support public policy objectivesthat may not stand up to more rigorous scientific scrutiny.  (Chemical &Engineering News, p. 22, Jan. 1, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996WHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses theWHITE PAPER REPORT ON U.S. INDUSTRY SAFETY & HEALTH PRACTICES assesses theimpact of the anti-regulatory era in Washington, with budget, staff, andspending plans for the coming year.  The White Paper helps safety, industrialhygiene, and environmental professionals plan for 1996.  Data generated forthis report comes from questionnaires.  Subjects include the outlook for 1996,industry benchmarks, plant-size benchmarks, and the regulatory outlook.  The36-page report was prepared by Industrial Safety & Hygiene News and was issuedas a supplement to the December 1995 issue of American Industrial HygieneAssociation Journal.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence isLEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) as a teratogen is reviewed.  Recent evidence ispresented on the following issues: lead is a human teratogen, impact ofpregnancy and lactation on lead toxicokinetics, and the contribution ofpaternal lead exposure to adverse reproductive outcome.  Human studies dataare the primary focus.  (Teratology 50(5), 367-373 (1994); Chemical Abstracts122:98868z, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animalCARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE, the sixth plot, the results of animal bioassayspublished in the general literature, 1989-1990, and by the National ToxicologyProgram from 1990-1993, is presented in this volume.  A companion publicationin the same volume is the PRESIDENT'S CANCER PANEL CONFERENCE ON AVOIDABLECAUSES OF CANCER, which contains papers on tobacco use; alcohol; diet andnutrition; hormones and medication; occupational exposures; generalenvironmental exposures; radiation; infectious agents; gender, ethnicity, andenvironment; genetic susceptibility and environmental interactions; and aprogram summary and recommendations.  (Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol.103, Supplement 8, 320 pp., 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.  REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY is reviewed and discussed in three articles.   Effectsof occupational chemicals on reproductive functions (scientific reviews ofSoviet literature on toxicity and hazards of chemicals); adverse effects ofenvironmental chemicals on the outcome of human pregnancy, includingtransplacental poisoning, spontaneous abortions, and birth defects; andreproductive risks of heavy metals and pesticides in women are discussed.(Reprod Toxicol, ed. by Mervyn Richardson, pp. 45-62, 73-97, 167-83 (1993);Chemical Abstracts 122:98847s, 98849u, 98853r, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,ARMY CHEMICALS thought to be hazards were evaluated.  Chemistry, toxicity,environmental pollution, and pollutants of such materials are discussed;drinking water health advisories are offered.  (Drug Metab Review 26(4),649-662 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:98834k, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused byDEVELOPING NATIONS have various diseases and disorders, many caused byenvironmental problems.  Environmental health problems are particularly acutein Ghana, where there is heavy metal pollution and aflatoxins, naturalcarcinogens, in the diet.  LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) exposure is prevalent amongartisans who smelt metal retrieved from old batteries, and effluents fromheavy industry bring MERCURY (CAS RN 7439-97-6), ARSENIC (CAS RN 7440-38-2),ALUMINUM (CAS RN 7429-90-5), and lead into the environment.  These issues andmany others are discussed in the article.  (Chemical & Engineering News, pp.27-28, Jan. 1, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to PolishCARCINOGEN INFORMATION SOURCES AND DATABASES available to Polish researchersare discussed.  These sources include the series "IARC Monographs on theEvaluation of Carcinogenic Risk to Humans"; official lists of carcinogens fromindividual countries; a periodical that surveys compounds tested forcarcinogenic activity; the Annual Report on Carcinogens, a series on chemicalsin the workplace; a guide on carcinogens; and computer databases, includingthe INCAR, IRIS, IRPTC, RTECS CHEMINFO factual databases and the CANCER-CD,MEDLINE, TOXLINE, NIOSHTIC and MEDIP bibliographic databases.  In Polish.(Med Pr 46(3), 289-300 (1995); Medline 96-045331)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996AIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects ofAIR POLLUTION review of epidemiological evidence of health effects ofparticulates is summarized.  Acute exposure to elevated levels of particulateshas been associated with increased cardiopulmonary mortality, hospitalizationfor respiratory disease, and increased incidence and duration of respiratorysymptoms, as well as exacerbation of asthma, declines in lung function, andrestricted activity.  Small deficits in lung function, higher risk of chronicrespiratory disease and symptoms, and increased mortality have also beenassociated with chronic exposure to respirable particulates.  Health effectshave been observed at levels below current U.S. National Ambient Air QualityStandards.  Although the biological mechanisms involved are poorly understood,recent evidence supports the hypothesis that such air pollutants are a riskfactor for respiratory disease and cardiopulmonary mortality.  (InhalationToxicol 7(1), 1-18 (1995); Chemical Abstracts 122:98861s, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996TRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting fromTRIHALOMETHANE PRECURSORS in surface drinking water in Egypt resulting fromchlorinated pesticides, could not be removed efficiently by traditionaltreatments.  Reuse of agricultural drainage increases the level oftrihalomethane precursors; chloramination is the recommended drinking waterdisinfectant to minimize the level of exposure to these potentialcarcinogens.  (Water Treat 9(3), 209-214 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:114100a, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996RADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach toRADON (CAS RN 10043-92-2) indoors is reviewed in a risk-based approach tohealth protection criteria.  A WHO/EURO working group met in Israel early in1993 to assess the significance of health risks from indoor radon, to developa unified approach to the control of radon exposure, and to advise on thecommunication of associated health risks.  This article summarizes thedeliberations of this working group and its conclusions and recommendations.(Indoor Air 4(3), 197-201 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1410079, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disruptENDOCRINE DISRUPTORS, pollutants ubiquitous in the environment, may disrupthuman fertility and possibly the ability to reproduce.  Both male and femalereproductive health are being disturbed by environmentally occurring chemicalsthat change fertility by causing, among numerous effects, low sperm counts,testicular abnormalities, and altered sexual development of both male andfemale fetuses, as well as cancers and other diseases of both sexes.  Amongthe chemicals cited as endocrine disruptors are PHTHALATES, ingredients invarious plastics, paints, inks, and varnishes; ALKYL PHENOLS, produced bymicrobial degradation of detergent, paint, herbicide, and cosmetic chemicals;and ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, including DDT (CAS RN 50-29-3), ALDRIN CAS RN309-00-2), and DIELDRIN (CAS RN 60-57-1).  Studies on these chemicals beganbecause certain wildlife, exposed to these substances, had suffered changes inreproductive ability.  The implications for human reproduction are discussedand reviewed.  (The Sciences, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 12-15, Jan.-Feb. 1996;Health, pp. 52-56, Oct. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles onINDOOR AIR REVIEW, a newspaper on indoor air quality, carries articles onpublic awareness of air quality as federal funding declines; ASTM-developedcarbon dioxide indoor standard; environmental tobacco smoke issues lessimportant; radon standards; indoor air quality training; building management;and the year's review in Congress, NIOSH, EPA, OSHA, and other organizations;and filtration news.  (Indoor Air Review, Vol. 5, No. 10, 24 pp., Dec. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing humanINDOOR AIR QUALITY POLICY OPTIONS are examined for reducing human exposures.There are different policy approaches available for reducing human exposuresto indoor pollutants, an exceptionally complex task.  Options range fromwaiting for more definitive information to enacting regulatory standards, withmany variations in between.  This article presents some of the factorspolicy-makers must consider in establishing indoor air quality policies andthe role researchers should play in ensuring that such policies are based onthe best, available scientific information.  (Indoor Air 4(3), 202-211 (1994);Chemical Abstracts 122:140873z, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996METAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fishMETAL CONTAMINATION in water at varying concentrations may cause fish tissueresponses to stress differently, according to recent studies.  Tissues of fishliving in metal-contaminated waters show signs of chronic stress; the fishresponded poorly to additional pollution and to stresses of confinement.  Thestudy expands the range at which pollutants exert deleterious effects onorganisms.  (Science News, Vol. 149, p. 21, Jan. 13, 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996RESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administrationRESPIRATOR choices and industrial responsibilities in their administration arereviewed in a multi-part article.  Administering a program and OSHArequirements are discussed, and tabulations of self-contained breathingapparatus, supplied-air respirators, air-purifying respirators, and poweredair-purifying respirators are presented.  For each type of respirator,company, brand, model, mask material, and other features are noted.(Environmental Protection, pp. 15-18, 20-22, 24-26, Nov. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996FOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent ofFOUNDRY INDUSTRY in South Africa was studied to estimate the extent ofoccupational health monitoring for dust and pneumoconiosis and to assess dustlevels and the prevalence of pneumoconiosis.  In only 13 (16%) of the 82foundries responding were regular periodic full-sized chest radiographs done.Dust levels were measured every 3 years or more frequently in 20 foundries(24%).  Uncontrolled dust hazard was evident in nine foundries surveyedbetween 1983 and 1992.  The prevalence of silicosis ranged from 0% to 10.3%and increased with duration of service.  The study provided convincingevidence of neglect of occupational health by the foundry industry.  (S AfrMed J 84(12), 851-855, 1994; Medline 96-012992)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996DOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational healthDOMESTIC WASTE COLLECTION was reviewed in the light of occupational healthproblems.  The last decade has seen a growing interest in recycling  domesticwastes, and action plans to increase such recycling have been adopted by manygovernments.  In 1975, an excess risk for chronic bronchitis was reported forwaste collectors in Switzerland and data from the Danish Registry ofOccupational Accidents and Diseases also indicate an excess risk for pulmonaryproblems among waste collectors compared with the total work force.  Highincidence rates of gastrointestinal problems, irritation of the eye and skin,and symptoms of organic dust toxic syndrome (influenza-like symptoms, cough,muscle pains, fever, fatigue, headache) have been reported among workerscollecting the biodegradable fraction of domestic waste.  They may be exposedto multiple agents such as dust-containing bacteria, endotoxins, mold spores,glucans, volatile organic compounds, and diesel exhaust. (Sci Total Environ170(1-2), 1-19, 1995; Medline 96-007153)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996LEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposedLEAD (CAS RN 7439-92-1) may cause postural stability problems in exposedworkers.  Workers so exposed had significantly poorer postural stability thandid the control group.  Lead may affect certain parts of the whole sensoryneural axis resulting in postural instability when visual input is cut off.(Occup Environ Med 51(11), 768-771 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1113559v,1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996OCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of suchOCCUPATIONAL DISEASE information notices provided on diagnosis of suchdiseases are discussed.  Occupational exposures and diagnosis include thecausal agent toxic effects and exposure criteria.  (Report of the Comm EurCommunities EUR 14768, 212 pp. (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1136702, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling. COOLING LUBRICANTS require skin protective measures in handling.  Occupationalskin diseases in the metalworking industry are attributed to coolinglubricants in 30-40% of all cases.  Medical and technical protection measuresand the diagnosis of diseases are discussed.  In German.  (TribolSchmierungstech 41(1), 30-33 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:141154c, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996COAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications forCOAL MINE DUST hydroxyl radical generation and possible implications for coalworkers'pneumoconiosis (CWP) are reviewed and discussed.  Occupationalexposure to coal mine dust causes CWP and other pulmonary diseases bymechanisms that remain unclear.  Because the hydroxyl radicals (-OH) may playan important role in the pathogenesis of CWP, the potential role of bituminouscoal mine dust samples for catalyzing the generation of -OH from hydrogenperoxide were studied.  Based on the results, it was proposed that higherconcentrations of surface iron in coal mine dust may be involved in thegeneration of increased levels of -OH radicals and may play an important rolein the development of CWP in different coal mining areas.  (Free Radical BiolMed 18(1), 11-20 (1995); Chemical Abstracts 122:141142x, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other newsMANGANESE PARKINSONISM, HAZARDOUS WASTES AT YALE UNIVERSITY, and other newsitems are featured in the December 1995 issue of ACTS Facts (Arts, Crafts andTheater Safety).  MULTIPLE CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY, RESINS AND GLUES ANDPARKINSONISM, YELLOW DYE AND CANCER, MOLYBDENUM TRIOXIDE CANCER STUDY, CERAMICFIBERS AND PLEURAL PLAQUE, and MANGANESE PARKINSONISM LAW SUIT and other itemsare featured in the January 1996 issue of ACTS Facts.  ACTS cites materialfrom various sources important to occupational health in the fine arts.  ACTSFacts, 181 Thompson St., #23, New York, NY 10012-2586; telephone 212-777-0062.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of DutchCARBON DISULFIDE (CAS RN 75-15-0) occupational exposure mortality of Dutchworkers is reviewed and discussed.  Epidemiological studies carried out inGreat Britain, Scandinavia, and the United States indicate that workersexposed to carbon disulfide are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease(CVD) mortality, and in particular for ischemic heart disease mortality.  Theresults of the Dutch study show that exposure to relatively low levels ofcarbon disulfide increases the risk of CVD mortality.  (Int Arch Occup EnvironHealth 66(2), 103-110 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:1135655u, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTHPROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CRYSTALLINE SILICA HEALTHEFFECTS: CURRENT STATE OF THE ART contains papers on exposure assessment,epidemiology, in vivo toxicology, in vitro toxicology, and public policy.  Theproceedings are in a single issue of the journal Applied Occupational andEnvironmental Hygiene, Vol. 10, No. 12, pp. 977-1156 (Dec. 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection areELECTROPLATING TOXIC CHEMICALS formation, health effects, and detection arereviewed and discussed.  German legislation, technical regulations, theprocess of toxics monitoring, definition and classification of hazardousmaterials (threshold limit values), methods of detection, and measurement ofoccupational exposure to hazardous compounds are presented.  In German.(Metalloberflaeche 48(2), 72-74, 76-78 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:113281y,1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by theCENTER FOR SAFETY IN THE ARTS services will continue to be provided by the NewYork Foundation for the Arts.  CSA lost funding due to governmental fundingcutbacks, but the newsletter, Art Hazards News, will be continued under theauspices of NYFA.  This issue's main article is devoted to pyrotechnics,fire, and explosion effects.  Other articles and abstracts from the literaturecover potentially hazardous chemicals used in the arts and the healthimplications of these materials for artists and performers.  (Art HazardsNews, Vol. 18, No. 5,  8 pp., 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in aMANGANESE (CAS RN 7439-96-5) TOXICITY information is available in a pamphlet,Potter's Manganese Toxicity", a reprint of an article published in the journalContact. The pamphlet discussed the experiences of a raku potter who developedParkinson-like symptoms of manganese poisoning and metal fume fever.Manganese fumes emitted during raku firing are more dangerous than breathingor ingesting the dusts; symptoms are flu-like, and range from fatigue,insomnia, confusion, forgetfulness, blackouts, vision changes, loss ofthree-dimensional perception, slow reflexes, and headaches, to loss of bladdercontrol, motor skills, and more.  (The Crafts Report, p. 4, Jan. 1996)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In aALPHA AMYLASE may be an occupational allergen in the baking industry.  In agroup of 226 bakers and pastry makers and in 88 students of a training schoolfor bakers, skin sensitivity to the common allergens wheat and alpha amylasewere evaluated.  Findings confirm that bakers are at risk of sensitization notonly to wheat allergen but also to amylase from Aspergillus oryzae.  Theenzyme should be included in the list of substances to be tested among bakersin whom an occupational allergy is suspected, but particular care should betaken in evaluating the cutaneous response.  Further investigations are alsoneeded to identify the source of risk and to better define the characteristicsof the enzyme and the relationship between skin reaction to amylase,sensitization to wheat, and atopy.  In Italian.  (Med Lav 85(2), 142-148(1994); Chemical Abstracts 122:141148d, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996COTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cottonCOTTON-caused ocular and nasal irritation in workers in Lancashire cotton andsynthetic fiber mills was studied.  A cross-sectional study of 1048 cottonworkers and 404 synthetic fiber workers showed that work-related ocular andnasal irritation are the most common symptoms experienced by cotton textileworkers.  There was no relation between these symptoms and atopy, byssinosis,or dust concentration.  It is likely that they relate to as yet unidentifiedagents unrelated to concentration of cotton dust.  (Occup Environ Med 51(11),744-748 (1994); Chemical Abstracts 122: 113657t, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp.,EXPOSURE FACTORS HANDBOOK from EPA (1995, ISBN 0-86587-509-X, 866 pp., $125)includes more than 350 tables of data on standard factors needed to calculatehuman exposure to toxic chemicals.  Available from Government Institutes,Inc., 4 Research place, Suite 200, Rockville, MD 20850; telephone301-921-2355.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P.BRETHERICK'S HANDBOOK OF REACTIVE CHEMICAL HAZARDS, 5th ed., ed. by P. Urben(1995, 2 vol., ISBN 0-7506-1557-5, $225), also available in CD-ROM andcomputer software ($595 each), provides a single source of logically arranged,readily accessible data on chemical hazards arranged by specific chemical byformula; fire-related data; indexes to chemical names and Chemical AbstractsService Registry Numbers; and by class, group, and topic.  Available fromButterworth-Heinemann, 225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, MA 01801; telephone800-366-2665; 617-928-2613; FAX 800-446-6520; 617-933-6333.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 19961996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00;1996 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH & SAFETY BUYERS GUIDE (1996; print, $99.00; CD-ROM,$149; both, $248) contains information on products and services.  More than15,000 firms are listed in 13 major sections.  Geographic, product andservices, and alphabetic firm listing indexes are available.  For informationcontact Stevens Publishing Corp., Directory Division, P.O. Box 2573, Waco, TX76702-2573; telephone 800-727-7573.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996HEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulationsHEALTH AND SAFETY SOFTWARE product focus covers compliance and regulationstracking, ergonomics and human factors, and safety training administration andsafety training electronic products.  For each product, as appropriate, arelisted company, product name, platform, operating system, hardware, database,format, type of product, updates, local support, management tasks, personnel,training, and other factors.  (Occupational Health & Safety, pp. 67-98, Oct.1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996OSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting willOSHA 29 CFR 1910.120(e) TRAINING COURSES from Field Safety Consulting will bepresented according to the following schedule:  8-HOUR REFRESHER, Feb. 8,1996, in North Haven, CT; 24-HOUR HEALTH AND SAFETY, Feb. 5-7, 1996, in NorthHaven, CT; and 40-HOUR HEALTH AND SAFETY, Feb. 5-9, 1996, in North Haven, CT.For information contact Field Safety Consulting, Inc., 28 Magee Avenue,Stamford, CT 06902; telephone 203-964-9199; FAX 203-969-1325.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996FUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course willFUNDAMENTALS OF INDUSTRIAL HYGIENE continuing education short course will beheld in New Orleans, LA, on Feb. 26-Mar. 1, 1996.  For information contactAmerican Industrial Hygiene Association, 2700 Prosperity Avenue, Suite 250,Fairfax, VA 22031; telephone 703-849-888; FAX 703-207-3561.Back to Headline List CopyrightHAZCHEM ALERT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,INDOOR AIR QUALITY continuing education course will be offered Feb. 22-23,1996, in Chicago, IL.  Fee is $250.  For information contact Great LakesCenter for Occupational and Environmental Safety and Health (M/C 922), Schoolof Public Health, University of Illinois at Chicago, 2121 West Taylor St.,Chicago, IL 60612-7260; telephone 312-996-8842; FAX 312-413-7369.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-5IA059-000325-B018-414http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev38.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001719 text/html 21864HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:15:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:34 GMTContent-length: 21675Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev38.html Sample Issue Copyright INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PSC PUBLIC HEARINGS ON WISCONSIN'S ELECTRIC INDUSTRY (309 words) MURPHY OIL SUBSIDIARY AND TEMPLE-INLAND FOREST PRODUCTS FORM FIBERBOARD COMPANY (269 words) INDONESIA'S DURI FIELD PRODUCES BILLIONTH BARREL OF OIL (171 words) PARACELSIAN FILES PATENT APPLICATION OF IMPROVED AH-IMMUNOASSAY TECHNOLOGY (215 words) GENETIC ENGINEERING PROMISES NEW BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN AGRICULTURE (306 words) EPA APPROVES MONSANTO'S INSECT-PROTECTED COTTON (218 words) CHIRON AWARDS CONTRACT TO SEPRAGEN FOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMS (366 words) CPUC IS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM CELLULAR TOWERS (217 words) APHIS GEARING UP TO EVALUATE TRANSGENIC INSECT RELEASES (570 words) CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PSC PUBLIC HEARINGS ON WISCONSIN'S ELECTRIC INDUSTRYThe Public Service Commission of Wisconsin (PSC) has preparedan Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) as part of itsinvestigation into changing the structure and regulation ofthe electric utility industry in Wisconsin(PSC Docket 05-EI-114). This EIS is now available for publicreview. A separate report by a special Advisory Committee tothe Commission lists recommendations for changes in electricgeneration, transmission and distribution.The PSC held public information meetings and hearings onthe future of Wisconsin's electric industry in six cities,November 27 through December 5. The hearings were required inorder to obtain public comment on the EIS, but comments andtestimony were also encouraged on the investigation itself,including the upcoming Commission Advisory Committee Report.The Commission decisions (based on the comments andtestimony, EIS, and Advisory Committee Report) may affectcustomer electricity costs, customer electric services, andthe choices available for each.The EIS has been prepared because this investigation couldresult in the adoption of principles and policies thatsignificantly alter the regulatory responsibilities of theCommission. Changes in how the Commission regulates electricutilities could, in turn, have environmental and economicconsequences. The EIS explores the economic, environmental andsocial costsThe PSC encourages members of the public and organizations toattend the hearings or write and send comments on the EIS.Comments and testimony on the EIS must be submitted to thePublic Service Commission offices in Madison by 4:30 p.m. onWednesday, December 6, 1995. Comments and testimony will beconsidered by the three-member Commission as it determineswhat recommendations it will make to the Legislature onDecember 12.For more information, or to request a copy of theEnvironmental Impact Statement or the Advisory CommitteeReport, please write to the Public Service Commission ofWisconsin, Electric Division, P.O. Box 7854, Madison, WI,53707-7854, or call 608/267-2896.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996MURPHY OIL SUBSIDIARY AND TEMPLE-INLANDFOREST PRODUCTS FORM FIBERBOARD COMPANYDeltic Farm & Timber Co., Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary ofMurphy oil Corporation (NYSE:MUR), and Temple-Inland ForestProducts Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Temple-Inland, Inc. (NYSE:TIN), have formed Del-Tin Fiber, L.L.C.and plan for the entity to construct and operate a mediumdensity fiberboard plant at a site near El Dorado, Arkansas.The plant will cost an estimated $90 million, will have anannual production capacity of 150 million square feet and willhave more than 100 employees when it begins production in late1997. The site selection and project design are subject toregulatory approvals, completion of final engineering andresolution of other site-related issues. Construction isscheduled to commence in the summer of 1996.Del-Tin's Chairman, Ron Pearce, stated, "We are pleased toannounce our selection of the El Dorado/Union County area forthis exciting new venture. We deeply appreciate the efforts ofthe El Dorado chamber of Commerce and its local team, city andcounty officials, the Arkansas Highway & TransportationDepartment and the Arkansas Industrial Development Commission,all of whom worked together to provide us with a site havingthe necessary infrastructure for a project of this magnitude.Del-Tin looks forward to a long and prosperous future in UnionCounty."Medium density fiberboard (MDF) is used as a substitute forlumber in the furniture, flooring and molding industriesthroughout the world. MDF is an engineered wood productcomposed of wood residuals (chips, shavings and sawdust) heldtogether by an adhesive bond. unlike most other lumbersubstitutes, MDF possesses many of the same machining andstrength characteristics of solid wood.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996INDONESIA'S DURI FIELD PRODUCES BILLIONTH BARREL OF OILIndonesia's giant Duri oil field, currently producing at arecord 300,000 barrels daily (b/d), yielded its billionthbarrel in September, Chevron and Texaco reported.Duri is operated by PT Caltex Pacific Indonesia (CPI), a 50/50Chevron/Texaco affiliate working under a long-term productionsharing agreement with Pertamina, Indonesia's state oilcompany.Located in Sumatra, Duri was discovered in 1941 and beganproducing in 1958. Output peaked at 65,000 b/d in 1963, andthen declined steadily until 1984. At that time, CPI engineersdetermined that Duri's large reserves, shallow depth, thickoil and tight reservoir rocks made it an ideal prospect for"steamflood" technology, which injects steam to heat the oilso that more of it flows to the production wells.In 1985, CPI began a major steamflood at Duri, launching anew era of production growth. Plans call for continuedexpansion of the steamflood, already the world's largest.Meanwhile, advanced seismic imaging is helping to maximize oilrecovery. Duri currently represents about 40 percent of CPI'stotal oil output.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996PARACELSIAN FILES PATENT APPLICATIONOF IMPROVED AH-IMMUNOASSAY TECHNOLOGYParacelsian, Inc. (NASDAQ: PRLN), of Ithaca, NY, has filed aU.S. patent application that describes improvements in its Ah-Immunoassay technology.  Paracelsian anticipates thatenhancements over its currently licensed technology willprovide markets for the assay in Asia and Eastern Europe."The simplicity and speed of the new formats are ideal forcountries with enormous environmental problems and littlefinancial support for high-cost instrumental analysis," saidinventor Geoffrey Wheelock, Ph. D., Director of AnalyticalResearch at Paracelsian. "Much of Asia and Eastern Europe arerebounding from decades of environmental neglect."Ah-Immunoassay technology is a biologically-based diagnostictest designed to detect and determine the level of dioxin-likecompounds found in the environment. The disclosure filed atthe U.S. Patent and Trademarks Office in Washington, D.C.describes methods for increasing sensitivity, reducingbackground interference, increasing sample throughput,reducing the time required to perform the assay, and reducingreagent use.Paracelsian is a biotechnology company engaged in thediscovery of pharmaceuticals and the development and marketingof assays for Unproved cancer diagnosis. The Company'stechnologies are based on a biochemical process known assignal transduction -- a form of information processing withinthe cell. The Company has in effect several licensing deals,including an agreement with Dow Chemical for Paracelsian'sAh-Immunoassay signed in January 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996GENETIC ENGINEERING PROMISES NEWBUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES IN AGRICULTURESales of genetically engineered products to the agricultureand food industries will rise from a few hundred milliondollars in 1995 to $3 billion by 2000 and nearly $10 billionby 2005.  The growing role of these products will providesubstantial productivity gain in agriculture, contribute toongoing changes in industry structure, provide novel productswith consumer benefits, and create new business opportunitiesin agricultural inputs, agricultural processing, and chemicalproduction.Decision Resources, one of the industry leaders inbiotechnology market analysis, has published "Biotechnology inAgriculture: Impacts on Products and Markets."This study predicts that over the next decade, thebiotechnological impacts in several industry sectors will bedramatic, with major shifts in market share and sales of newproducts. These sections include herbicides, insecticides,animal health, seeds, downstream processes and products,diagnostic and detection technology, and production of high-value compounds in animals and plants."Biotechnology in Agriculture: Impacts on Products andMarkets" is derived from interviews with industry participantsand a combination of proprietary and publicly availableinformation. It analyzes the global regulatory environment andintellectual property issues relevant to the commercializationof agricultural biotechnology, profiles the 20 majoragricultural biotech companies, and tracks the activities ofthe numerous players in the market.The report is available for $2,600 for the first copy and $350for each additional copy. For more detailed information or toplace an order, contact Jean Carbone, Decision Resources, BayColony Corporate Center, 1100 Winter Street, Waltham, MA02154.  Phone: 617.487.3737 Fax: 617.487.5750Decision Resources is an international consulting andpublishing firm that evaluates world markets, emergingtechnologies and competitive forces in growth industriesworldwide. DR Reports are research publications providingcost-effective, timely business intelligence to help decisionmakers in the life sciences stay abreast of today'sinnovations and remain successful in volatile climates.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996EPA APPROVES MONSANTO'S INSECT-PROTECTED COTTONThe EPA has granted regulatory approval for Monsanto'sBollgard(TM) gene, which provides cotton plants with season-long,in-plant protection from such major lepidopteran insect pests asthe cotton bollworm, tobacco budworm and pink bollworm. EPA'sregistration of the Bollgard gene, the first insect-protectiongene to be approved for cotton and only the third for any crop,follows the successful completion earlier this year of regulatoryreviews by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and U.S.Department of Agriculture (USDA). The notification marksMonsanto's fourth allowing full commercialization of agenetically engineered crop in the past six months.The insect control protein introduced into cotton plants wasoriginally isolated from a specific strain of a natural soilbacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis. The genetically-engineeredseeds containing the Bollgard gene are covered by Monsantopatents, some of which have been issued, while others arepending.According to James Tobin, Monsanto Cotton Business Director, theBollgard gene will be widely available to America's cottonfarmers for the 1996 planting season. The gene has already beenincorporated into a number of popular cotton varieties.The technology will be commercially introduced by Delta andPine Land Company, the leading U.S. cotton seed company.Additional programs to commercialize Bollgard cotton areunderway at the Jacob Hartz Seed Company and StonevillePedigreed Seed Company, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CHIRON AWARDS CONTRACT TO SEPRAGENFOR LARGE-SCALE PURIFICATION SYSTEMSSepragen Corporation (NASDAQ: SPGNU, SPGNZ, SPGNA, SPGNW), ofSan Leandro, CA, has signed a contract to build multipleQuantaSep LS (large-scale) systems for Chiron Corporation. Thecontract, valued at approximately $400,000, includes hardware,software, documentation and validation. The systems have beendesigned to meet the specific needs of Chiron's drugmanufacturing efforts.  Delivery is scheduled for January1996."The interactive team efforts between Sepragen and Chironengineers resulted in the custom design of the processpurification systems. These will enable the rapid purificationof large quantities of two new potential Chiron drugs fortheir clinical trial needs," said Vinit Saxena, president andchairman."This is part of our overall strategic plan to providestate-of-the-art, large-scale purification systems tobiopharmaceutical companies to enhance and optimize theirmanufacturing processes."We selected Sepragen for this purchase based on theexceptional service that they have provided to us in thepast," said Mark Pemberton, director of Bulk PharmaceuticalManufacturing at Chiron Corporation.The QuantaSep LS is a large-scale, computer-controlledchromatography workstation consisting of hardware,electronics, software, sensors and detectors."Sepragen's advanced technologies have added significanteconomic value to the manufacturing processes of many FDAapproved pharmaceutical drugs worldwide," Saxena said.Sepragen Corporation is a pioneer in the field of large-scalechromatography - the next generation technology in theseparations field. The company markets a patented radial flowchromatography (RFC) technology that utilizes a novelhydrodynamic column design in which the flow is directedradially from the outside to the center of the column. Thesurface areas are larger and the radial flow path (bed depth)is shorter. The combination of these features results inhigher flow rates, lower back pressures, and increasedvolumetric productivity over traditional axial columns. Thisis further magnified in large-volume chromatographyapplications.Sepragen also markets computer-controlled processchromatography workstations and process technology to thebiotechnology, food and environmental industries. Thecompany's products are being used by leading biotechcompanies to reduce manufacturing costs and commercialproduction time to market, as well as by food andenvironmental companies to produce new value-added productsand processes. Based in San Leandro, California, the companymarkets its proprietary RFC technology and services worldwide.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996CPUC IS WATCHFUL REGARDING RF/EMF FROM CELLULAR TOWERSThe California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) todayordered cellular utilities to identify and address publicconcerns- potential health problems from electromagnetic field(ENF) and radio-frequency (RF) exposure in siting and buildingnew cellular towers. It urged cellular companies to sitefacilities away from schools and hospitals, and to restrictaccess to sites with warning signs and barriers.The Commission's jurisdiction is limited to cellular towersand related facilities - it does not regulate cellular phones.The federal Food and Drug Administration regulates RFemissions from consumer/industrial devices and is looking intoRF emissions from hand-held cellular phones.Due to public concern and scientific uncertainty regarding thepotential health effects of EMF exposure, the Commissionexamined what steps should be taken to mitigate the-healtheffects, if any, of RF and EMFs from the 1,000 cellularfacilities in California. It found no scientific link betweenEMFs and adverse health effects on humans from cellularfacilities.A steering committee composed of one representative each fromthe CPUC Commission Advisory and Compliance Division, CPUCDivision of Ratepayer Advocates, state Department of HealthServices, Cellular Carriers Association of California, andcitizens concerned About Telecommunications EMF held an EMFinformational workshop on July 21, 1993 for interestedindividuals and organizations. The workshop was videotaped forthose who could not attend.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT via NewsNetJanuary 1996APHIS GEARING UP TO EVALUATE TRANSGENIC INSECT RELEASESNow that the first application to field test a geneticallyengineered insect has been submitted to USDA/APHIS, aTransgenic Arthropod Team has been formed in the BiotechnologyPermits Unit of Biotechnology, Biologics, and EnvironmentalProtection (BBEP), the agency that oversees introductions oftransgenic organisms and products for USDA. The Team will beresponsible for the development of guidance for the release ofgenetically modified arthropods into the environment, and thepreparation of environmental documents associated with thosereleases.APHIS/BBEP already provides this sort of guidance toprospective applicants seeking to field test geneticallyengineered plants and microorganisms under permit ornotification. The agency distributes USDA-APHIS TechnicalBulletin 1783, "User's Guide for Introducing GeneticallyEngineered Plants and Microorganisms" to help investigatorsidentify potential risks to the environment, and advisesapplicants concerning the data that must be available foragency review.With more insect release proposals expected, the TransgenicArthropod Team is compiling a Bibliography Associated With theIntroduction of Transgenic Arthropods, which is publiclyavailable in database format. It currently contains 32 generalcitations and reviews, 32 references on field evaluations,and 58 titles on laboratory methods. The Team will continueadding relevant publications and expand the database, andencourages others to suggest additional publications thatshould be included. In addition to the bibliography, thefollowing information on how proposed releases will bereviewed is available on the BBEP homepage(http://www.aphis.usda.gov/bbep/bp).The evaluation process first considers what the risks wouldbe if the introduced organism was not transgenic. The analysisat this point would be the same as for the introduction of aclassical biological control organism and would require suchinformation as: (1) phylogenetic position of the organism andcharacteristics of near relatives, (2) geographic origin andrange, to include temperature and relative humidity tolerancesand diapause attributes, (3) host and habitat preferences, (4)dispersal characteristics, (5) life table attributes, (6)interactions with other species, and (7) the relationshipbetween the organism and currently employed pest managementstrategies.The evaluation process would next consider whether the geneticalterations have altered the risks associated with theunmodified organism. The fundamental risk assessment issue tobe addressed is: Will the genetic alteration modifyecologically or environmentally relevant properties of theorganism? To properly address this issue, APHIS would need toconsider such information as: (1) how the recipient organismwas transformed through recombinant DNA technology, to includecharacteristics of the donor, vector, and recipient organismsand a description of the methods employed, (2) thecharacteristics of the modified organism, to include thestability of the new genotype and the probability of genetransfer to other organisms, (3) potential impact of thetransgenic arthropod on native populations, communities, andecosystems, and (4) methods for evaluation of the safety ofthe transgenic organism in field trials before unrestrictedrelease.In summary, the APHIS evaluation process would basicallyconsider the attributes of the unmodified organism, theattributes of the genetic alteration, the phenotype of themodified organism compared to the unmodified organism, and theattributes of the accessible environment. Only aftersufficient information is provided in these four areas ofconcern will APHIS be able to determine the appropriateness ofa release into the environment.APHIS welcomes comments at any time concerning the present andfuture regulation of transgenic arthropods. These commentscan be directed to Dr. Orrey P. Young at oyoung@aphis.usda.govor at 301-734-8565 (voice) or 301-734-5992 (fax)Back to Headline List WT03-B37-6IA059-000325-B019-37http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev40.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001754 text/html 39960HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:16:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:35 GMTContent-length: 39771Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev40.html Sample Issue Copyright INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNet September 18, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT REPS SPAR WITH ENVIROS OVER WASTE-ENERGY MORATORIUM (518 words) EPA'S NEW LANDFILL REGS APPLAUDED BY NSWMA, CRITICIZED BY ENVIROS (617 words) BFI STOCK FALLS AFTER COMPANY LOWERS 4TH-QUARTER EARNINGS PROJECTION (519 words) DELAWARE AUTHORITY PICKS ABB RESOURCE RECOVERY FOR WASTE-ENERGY PLANT (596 words) MIFA CLOSES $342-MILLION REFINANCING FOR SEMASS ROCHESTER EXPANSION (992 words) MECKLENBURG COUNTY, N.C., TO ISSUE RFP FOR 600 T/D MASS-BURN PLANT (219 words) EPA SEEKS COMMENTS ON USED OIL OPTIONS; STRESSES SUPPORT FOR RECYCLING (623 words) DENVER SELECTS CAMP DRESSER & MCKEE TO STUDY LOWRY LANDFILL SITE (132 words) WHEELABRATOR, REF-FUEL AND ENERGY ANSWERS REVISE GREEN ISLAND PLANS (432 words) KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES in (161 words) SWANA RFQ DRAWS 49 PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS FOR EPA'S MITE PROGRAM (199 words) MID-AMERICA WASTE SEEN MAINTAINING 25%-30% ANNUAL EARNINGS GROWTH (387 words) CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991INDUSTRY, GOVERNMENT REPS SPAR WITH ENVIROS OVER WASTE-ENERGY MORATORIUM   At the latest round of Senate hearings over Resource Conservation andRecovery Act reauthorization, representatives of industry and localgovernment officials strongly opposed a proposal by the environmental groupClean Water Action that there be a moratorium on the construction of newwaste-to-energy plants until the year 2000, and that incinerator ash bemanaged as a hazardous waste.   The moratorium and incinerator ash proposals have been endorsed by abroad coalition of national environmental groups, and legislation toachieve those goals introduced by Rep. Peter Kostmayer (D-Pa.) has won theendorsement of 24 House co-sponsors. However, the main Senate RCRA bill,S. 976, sponsored by Sen. Max Baucus (D-Mont.) contains no such provisions,and Baucus' skeptical questioning last week of the Clean Water Actionrepresentative suggested that it is unlikely to be amended to do so.   Dr. Henry Cole, director of science and policy for Clean Water Action,argued that the moratorium was needed in part to confront the ''mercurycrisis in this country.'' As well, he said, waste-to-energy competesdirectly with recycling for materials, and for scarce capital.   Asked Baucus: ''Why would a moratorium be necessary if the Clean AirAct (mercury emissions) reduction provisions'' were implemented andenforced as called for under that law? Cole replied that he did not haveconfidence EPA would effectively implement the provisions, and that,anyway, this was not his sole reason for supporting a moratorium.   Under questioning from Baucus, Randall Franke, representing the NationalAssociation of Counties, the National League of Cities, and the Solid WasteAssociation of North America, stated this his groups ''are equally adamantand opposed'' to a moratorium on waste-to-energy, and the designation ofincinerator ash as hazardous. Said Franke: ''We need more options (forsolid waste management), not less.''   AllenMoore, president of the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, said that while there had been ''temporary disruptions'' at afew waste-to-energy facilities due to materials diversion caused byrecycling, in general there was no conflict between resource recovery andrecycling. ''You can accommodate any level of recycling,'' said Moore, aslong as waste-to-energy plants are built at the outset as part of anintegrated waste management solution.   In his testimony, Paul Varello, deputy chair of NSWMA's Institute ofResource Recovery, said that several recent field tests ''make clear thatmunicipal waste combustor ash is not a 'hazardous waste.' '' Based onfindings that incinerator ash disposed in a landfill meeting the relevanttechnical standards ''presents no significant risk to human health and theenvironment,'' Varello said that several provisions in S. 976 ''could beimproved.''   Added Varello: ''Specifically, several provisions in S. 976 wouldimpose more stringent requirements on landfills where ash and municipalsolid waste is disposed than for landfills where only municipal solid wasteis disposed. These provisions reflect the old view that the disposal ofcombined ash (bottom and fly ash) from waste combustors presents a greaterthreat to human health and the environment than the disposal of municipalsolid waste. A series of recent studies suggest otherwise.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991EPA'S NEW LANDFILL REGS APPLAUDED BY NSWMA, CRITICIZED BY ENVIROS   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's issuance September 11 of thefirst comprehensive federal Subtitle-D municipal landfill standards should''bolster confidence in landfilling'' and ''help level the playing field,''EPA Administrator William K. Reilly said last week.   The regs were generally applauded by industry for providingenvironmental safeguards that will facilitate the construction of needednew landfills. At the same time, the regs drew fire for their''loopholes'' from environmentalists, whose recent lawsuit finally forcedEPA to issue the long-delayed regs when it did.   The EPA regs, issued under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act,include location, facility design and operation, groundwater monitoring,financial responsibility, and closure requirements, in addition to cleanuprequirements for existing contamination. They are generally to take effect24 months from publication in the Federal Register, with the exception thatground-water monitoring and corrective action requirements are phased-in,allowing up to five years for compliance.   Under law, states will be required to incorporate the EPA standards intotheir current state permitting programs. EPA approval of the state programis then required, with the Agency retaining the authority to enforce itsstandards in cases where a state program is not approved.   In states with EPA-approved permitting programs, landfills must bedesigned to ensure drinking water standards are not exceeded ingroundwater. States without EPA-approved programs are required to havelandfills designed with a composite liner made of synthetic materialcovering a two-foot clay liner.   At the same time, the regs provide states with approved programflexibility to alter landfill requirements ''to accommodate the widevariety of local conditions that exist around landfills,'' said EPA. Undercertain conditions, states with EPA-approved programs can approvealternative landfill designs, allow use of alternative daily covermaterials, or modify the rule's 30-year post-closure care period.   While this approach was cited by Reilly as an example of the Agencyhaving ''worked hard'' to reduce burdens that the rules might place oncommunities, this flexibility was criticized by the Sierra Club forenabling states to enact ''potentially weaker'' landfill and groundwatermonitoring standards. This, said the Sierra Club's Daniel Weiss, wouldallow ''some landfills to evade strict groundwater protection requirementswhich perpetuates the threat of drinking water contamination across thenation."   The Sierra Club also faulted the regs for not requiring leak detectionsystems which would detect leaks before they contaminated groundwater, andcalled on Congress to plug this and other loopholes.   Allen Moore, president of the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, noted that the waste services industry ''has anxiouslyawaited'' the EPA regs ''because they enumerate the measures being taken byour industry to protect the environment and to assure public health andsafety in the land disposal of our nation's wastes.''   Added Moore: ''Hopefully, these new regulations will be a catalyst foreliminating the backlog that exists in some states where permitting andsiting of new disposal facilities have been halted due to a lack of federalenvironmental protection standards. Now, using these new rules as abuilding block, these stalled projects can proceed and we can begin sitingand developing the capacity to meet our future waste disposal needs.''   Among other standards included in the EPA regs:   -- Location requirements restrict the siting of new landfills nearairports and in ecologically valuable wetlands or areas subject to naturaldisasters such as floodplains, fault areas and seismic zones.   -- Operation standards include daily cover, methane gas monitoring,stormwater controls, and programs to keep regulated hazardous waste out oflandfills.   -- Closure and post-closure care include placing a final cover over thelandfill, final cover maintennace, groundwater and methane gas monitoring,and leachate management for 30 years.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991BFI STOCK FALLS AFTER COMPANY LOWERS 4TH-QUARTER EARNINGS PROJECTION   Not even the publication of RCRA Subtitle-D regulations by theEnvironmental Protection Agency helped stop the fall of Browning-FerrisIndustries stock, which fell nearly six points in the 10 days following thecompany's prediction of lower fourth-quarter earnings.   BFI filed an 8-K with the Securities and Exchange Commission Sept. 3,estimating that its fourth-quarter earnings would be 15%-25% less than itsthird-quarter earnings. Earlier the company had predicted a 10%-15% dropover the previous quarter. Net income of 28-32 cents per share is expectedfor the fourth quarter, which ends Sept. 30, down from 38 cents for thethird quarter. The company also estimates income from operations for fiscal1991 will be 12%-15% lower than the $257 million reported for 1990.   BFI stock dropped four points to 21-3/4 after the 8-K was filed, and hadfallen another 1-7/8 by Sept. 12, the day after Subtitle D was published.   In the 8-K report, BFI blamed lower revenues both in the third andfourth quarters on lower commercial waste volumes as a result of therecession, as well as state waste minimization requirements and thediversion of a portion of the waste stream from the company's higher margincollections and landfill operations to the lower margin recyclingbusiness.   Fletcher Thorne-Thomsen, BFI's vice president for investor relations,said the company is disappointed with the results, but he would not predictwhen the company would come out of the slump, nor would he name thenumber-one cause of the company's economic troubles.   A former BFI official said that in addition to the recession a majorcause of the firm's economic problems is poor management. ''The company isjust in turmoil right now,'' he said. ''Sure business is down, but it'sstill solid; and saying recycling has hurt is crazy because it saves airspace, and that air space will be worth more next year than it is today.''   Other industry observersagree that the company has a management problem.One analyst pointed out that, while other waste management firms arehaving some financial troubles because of the recession, they are notnearly as bad as BFI has experienced.   However, at least one Wall Street firm--Smith Barney--has some positivewords. Analyst Ken Leung is advising his clients to buy because, ''Thestock is cheap and we think it has bottomed out.''   Leung says BFI will clearly benefit in the long run from the newSubtitle-D regulations, which he predicts will reduce the 6,000 existingsolid waste landfills to 2,000. He adds, however, that in the near term thenew rules may put downward pressure on disposal prices, as small landfillowners scurry to fill existing facilities that can not meet the newrequirements.   In other BFI news, on Sept. 4 the company declared a regular quarterlycash dividend of 17 cents per common share of stock, payable Oct. 4. At thesame time, it announced that Frank W. Montfort would fill the newly createdoffice of vice president, chief quality officer. Montfort had beendivisional vice president, operations.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991DELAWARE AUTHORITY PICKS ABB RESOURCE RECOVERY FOR WASTE-ENERGY PLANT   The Delaware Solid Waste Authority Board has selected ABB (Asea BrownBoveri) Resource Recovery Systems to start negotiations for the design,construction and operation of a 500-ton/day waste-to-energy plant.   The mass-burn facility will allow the authority to manage solid wastegenerated as the result of future increased growth in Sussex County, saidthe authority. The amount of the contract was not made public.   ABB and two other companies, Foster Wheeler Power Systems andWestinghouse Electric Corporation submitted ''excellent proposals for theproject,'' said an authority spokesman. The authority's staff, consultantsand board members conducted exhaustive evaluations of the three proposals,he said.   The general view was that any one of the three companies would do a goodjob, he continued. Cleanliness of operations, technical capability,operating experience, guarantees, economic, and financial strengths wereconsiderations in the selection process, said the official.   ''ABB is a multi-national company with revenues of $27-billion and about215,000 employees. ABB brings together the best of American, Swedish,Swiss and German technology in a worldwide high technology company,'' saidthe authority official. ABB acquired the U.S. firm ofCombustion-Engineering, Inc., a Delaware corporation. The authoritybelieves that ABB can provide Delaware with a state-of-the-art andenvironmentally sound waste-to-energy facility, he said.   The plant will be located at the authority's Southern Solid WasteManagement Center at Jones Crossroads, Sussex County, Delaware. Front-endseparation of materials will be accomplished through the ''RecycleDelaware'' program, said the official. In addition, space will beallocated for additional front-end separation in the Southern ReclamationPlant if it becomes necessary in the future.   The Southern Reclamation Plant will not only reduce material beinglandfilled, but will also give the authority the opportunity to recycleexisting landfill space in the future. Timely completion of the plant willbe essential for assuring safe solid-waste disposal capacity in SussexCounty for several decades, said the official.   The plant will have the best available control technology, whichincludes the scrubbing of acid gases and a baghouse to remove fineparticulates. The authority will dispose of the ash from thewaste-to-energy plant in its Southern Solid Waste Management Centerlandfill. With state and federal assistance and approval, the authoritywill explore constructive uses for ash in order to minimize ash disposal inthe landfill, said the official.   The waste-to-energy plant will generate approximately 15-megawatts ofelectricity, according to officials at ABB, headquartered in Windsor,Connecticut. Contract and price negotiations are expected to begin inSeptember and construction could begin as early as the fourth quarter of1992. The plant will feature ABB's state-of-the-art environmentalcontrols, which have been subjected to rigorous testing by the U.S.Department of Environmental Protection and its Canadian counterpart,Environment Canada, said the official. The new facility will feature theCombustion Engineering DeBartolomeis mass-burn grate system, proven in 79plants around the world for 35 years, an ABB Combustion Engineering Systemssteam generator, and other ABB-manufactured products and systems.   ''In today's market, winning this project against two qualitycompetitors is a significant accomplishment,'' said the ABB official.''The Southern Reclamation Project will strengthen our company's positionin the North American waste to-energy market and enhance our stature as amajor full-service vendor.''   ABB Resource Recovery Systems designs, builds and operates bothmass-burn and processed fuel waste-to-energy plants, including operationalfacilities in Hartford, Detroit and Honolulu, and several projectscurrently under development.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991MIFA CLOSES $342-MILLION REFINANCING FOR SEMASS ROCHESTER EXPANSION   The Massachusetts Industrial Finance Agency (MIFA), Semass andunderwriters closed a $342-million refinancing and facilities expansionbond issue for the shred and burn Semass Resource Recovery Facility inRochester, Massachusetts, said a project official.   The Semass facility is a 52-megawatt shred and burn, waste-to-energyresource recovery plant with a capacity of 1,900-tons of solid waste perday. It is the largest facility of the three of its type in operation,according to the official.   The expansion would increase total electrical output of the plant to78-megawatts and the waste acceptance capacity by about 900-tons/day to2,800-tons/day. The expansion is slated to be on line by the end of 1993.   Semass is still working on building permits and obtaining a review ofthe plans by the Department of Environmental Protection. It is expectedthat some work on the expansion can begin this fall, he said.   The sources of revenue to repay principal and interest on the bonds arewaste disposal fees to be derived from waste disposal contracts withmunicipalities and private sources, as well as income from the solid-wastespot market, said the official.   Other sources of revenue will be derived from the sale of electricity toCommonwealth Electric Company, the sale of ferrous and non-ferrousrecyclables and interest earned on funds and accounts as defined by theindenture.   The principal security for the bonds includes a mortgage on the Semassplant as well as a leasehold mortgage on a transfer station in Braintree,Massachusetts. Prudential Securities was the lead underwriter andplacement agent for the issue, which consisted of $255.6-million oftax-exempt, 24-year bonds, $61.6-million of taxable bonds and $25-millionin taxable subordinated notes.   Greenwich Partners, Inc. of Greenwich, Connecticut, was underwriter andplacement agent for the tax-exempt bonds, and Stephens Inc. of Little Rock,Arkansas, was underwriter and placement agent for the taxable portion ofthe issue.   The major portion of the financing consisted of $145.6-million non-alternate minimum tax (AMT) and $110-million AMT tax-exempt revenue bonds.The non-AMT bonds were priced at par to yield 9%. The AMT bonds werepriced at par to yield 9.25%.   The $61.6-million of taxable bonds are priced at par to yield 11.25%;the subordinated notes were priced at par to yield 13.2%. The majorportion of the tax-exempt bonds were purchased by bond funds, according toGreenwich Partners. The Semass bond issue will refund $178.6-million ofoutstanding debt and provide approximately $160-million of the expansion ofthe existing Semass plant.   The principal security for the bonds includes a mortgage on the Semassplant as well as a leasehold mortgage on a transfer station in Braintree,Massachusetts. There is also a debt service reserve fund consisting ofapproximately one year's maximum debt service.   The existing Semass facility currently has operating contracts with 31municipalities, one regional waste disposal district, Otis Air NationalGuard Base and a commercial waste hauler.   The Semass facility in Rochester, Massachusetts, went into commercialoperation in 1989. The shred and burn technology is based on the principleof shredding municipal solid waste and magnetically removing a largepercentage of the ferrous metals.   Shredding solid waste to a uniform six-inch size enhances the fuel valueso that a ton of processed refuse fuel has the equivalent heating value of72-gallons of fuel oil. The fuel is fed to boilers where it burnsprimarily in suspension creating heat and producing steam to generateelectricity, he said. The process includes clean-up systems forremoving pollutants from boiler exhaust gases. A bottom ash processingsystem recovers ferrous and non-ferrous metals and converts the residualinto a usable aggregate product.   The fly ash is stabilized to form a non-toxic, non-hazardous mortarwhich is then landfilled and does not pose a threat to the environment,continued the official. Potential uses for the Semass boiler aggregateinclude cinder blocks for construction and as a gravel substitute for roadbases.   The patented flyash stabilization system ensures that no hazardous ortoxic material from the facility leaves the site, they said. Otherfacilities using the process have operated in Albany, New York, since 1981,and Hamilton, Ontario, since 1972.   During the 12-month period ending July, 1991, the existing plantoperated at the industry standard of approximately 85% of capacity and isexpected to continue at this rate. In the first year after completion, theexpansion facility is expected to operate at 80% of capacity and to reachthe 85% level thereafter, said the Semass official.   The Semass facility has, since it first began accepting waste in 1988,processed 1,250,000-tons of solid waste, and produced over 700,000-megawatthours of electricity, enough to service over 50,000 houses in southeasternMassachusetts.   It has recovered over 117-million pounds of metal, enough to build atleast 58,000 new cars, said the official. About 5% of the waste isrecovered as recyclable metals which are marketed. These metals contributea ''small percentage'' to the overall profits of the plant, he elaborated.''But we look at it as a source of revenue plus the avoided cost oflandfilling,'' he explained. It also contributes to the recycling goals ofthe regions, according to the official.   The facility has produced approximately 97,000-tons of boiler aggregatefrom bottom ash; and enough gravel substitute to produce over 6-millionconcrete blocks. Semass is currently reviewing tests with the Departmentof Environmental Protection. ''We're very confident the aggregate will befound suitable for use in construction of the expansion, and that we'll beable to market it in the future,'' the project official added.   Semass is a private, for-profit entity owned by subsidiaries of EnergyAnswers Corporation of Albany, New York, Bechtel Group Inc., StephensHolding Company and ESI Energy, Inc., an affiliate of Florida Power andLight Company.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991MECKLENBURG COUNTY, N.C., TO ISSUE RFP FOR 600 T/D MASS-BURN PLANT   Officials in Mecklenburg County, N.C. plan to issue a request forproposals on October 1 for a 600-ton/day, mass-burn incinerator to be builtat an industrial park south of Charlotte.   The county is seeking a turnkey contractor that will design, constructand operate the waste-to-energy plant, said Charles G. Horne, projectmanager at the county's engineering department.   The $80-million facility, which will be built at the Arrowood IndustrialPark, will generate steam for a General Tire factory and as much as 12.5 mwof electricity for Duke Power, the local utility (Integrated WasteManagement, 20 March, 3).   Horne told Integrated Waste Management that responses will be due Jan.30, and that the county will select the winning proposal by the end ofMarch. Construction of the plant is likely to begin in the second half of1993, with completion of the incinerator to follow in late 1995 or early1996.   Mecklenburg County's first waste-to-energy plant--a two-year-old,235-t/d facility at the campus of the University of NorthCarolina-Charlotte--was designed and built by MK Ferguson of Cleveland,which also operates the incinerator for the county.   Horne said that parties interested in receiving information about theupcoming RFP should call 704-336-6178.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991EPA SEEKS COMMENTS ON USED OIL OPTIONS; STRESSES SUPPORT FOR RECYCLING   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency last week sought public commenton a wide range of options for the listing and management of used oil. Inissuing what an Agency official termed a ''neutral'' proposal--whichincluded one option that would list used oil as a hazardous waste--EPAofficials reiterated their interest in promoting used oil recycling in anenvironmentally safe manner.   In providing a 45-day public comment period, Agency officials said thiswould be followed by issuance of final EPA rules in May, 1992. At the sametime, EPA officials noted that used oil recycling is also being taken up byCongress as part of its reauthorization of the Resource Conservation andRecovery Act. Agency officials said they expected last week's proposal''would become part of a dialogue with Congress''--the consequences ofwhich are still difficult to predict.   Last week's proposal expands upon a 1985 Agency initiative that proposedto list used oil as a hazardous waste. The Agency noted again last weekthat it had backed away from that proposal as a result of public commentswhich ''convinced the (A)gency that listing used oil as a hazardous wastewould severely cripple the recycling industry.''   A successful lawsuit challenging this inaction, brought by the NaturalResources Defense Council and others, concluded with the court ruling thatEPA was required to make a listing determination for used oil based on thestatutory criteria for listing, which relates to whether a material istoxic or not.   In addition to its option to list all used oil as hazardous, a secondoption would list as hazardous ''only those categories of used oil that aretypically and frequently hazardous based on their toxicity at the point ofgeneration, rather than after collection and likely contamination.'' TheAgency said oils that may be listed under this option are those fromgasoline-powered engines, including used oils from automotive crankcases,marine engines, and piston-engine airplanes.   A third option would be not to list any used oils as hazardous, andinstead rely on management standards ''to address the types ofmismanagement that have historically occurred with used oil, such ascontamination with hazardous waste due to mixing, road oiling, releases,and spills associated with storage and transportation.'' Should thisoption be adopted, the Agency said used oil handlers would still berequired to test oil destined for disposal for hazardous characteristics,and then manage it accordingly.   The Agency stated its belief that used oils pose hazards to human healthand the environment, ''and therefore need to be managed safely.'' Thelatest proposal contemplates a ''phased-in'' two-stage approach tomanagement standards, which would include the following options:   --''Provide management standards for all used oils to some extent.''   --''Provide one set of management requirements for all used oilhandlers.''   --''Provide basic management standards immediately that balance theinterests of protective regulation and the need to promote recycling.''   The Agency proposed that the Phase-1 requirements ''would be fairlysimple 'good housekeeping' practices that address the improper storage anddisposal of used oil by generators, transporters, recyclers, and disposalfacilities.'' It added that ''good housekeeping'' would include suchpractices as ''inspecting for leaks, releases, or spills; maintainingstorage tanks and containers; and tracking recycled used oil fromgenerators to recyclers.''   This Phase I would also ban road oiling and establish guidelines thatpresume that ''all used oil being disposed is destined for recycling.''Phase II under this approach would involve possible additional managementstandards and controls for used oil, if needed.   The EPA proposal also considers possible incentives for promoting thecollection and recycling of used oil generated by people who change thierown oil, the so-called ''do-it-yourselfers.''Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991DENVER SELECTS CAMP DRESSER & MCKEE TO STUDY LOWRY LANDFILL SITE   The city and county of Denver as well as the Denver Metro WastewaterReclamation District have selected Camp Dresser & McKee to perform aremedial investigation/feasibility study and treatability study of theLowry Landfill, located in Arapahoe County, Colo., said a companyspokeswoman. The contract is valued at $1.6 million and completion of workis slated for March, 1993, she said.   The landfill accepted industrial and municipal wastes from 1967 to 1980,is listed on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's National PrioritiesList and will be cleaned up through Superfund, she said. Under thecontract, Cambridge, Mass.-based Camp Dresser & McKee will evaluate thenature and extent of contamination and evaluate remedial alternatives forthe soils and surface water and sediments media, she explained.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991WHEELABRATOR, REF-FUEL AND ENERGY ANSWERS REVISE GREEN ISLAND PLANS   Wheelabrator Technologies, American Ref-Fuel and Energy Answers Corp.have all submitted revised proposals to build a 1,500-ton/daywaste-to-enegy plant in the Village of Green Island, New York, according toJohn Brown, spokesman for the Green Island Solid Waste Advisory Committee.   The town last month had sent letters to the firms allowing them tosubmit additions or amendments to their initial plans for the venture(Integrated Waste Management, 21 Aug., 1).   Jack Risteau, project manager for Wheelabrator Corp., said the companyhas added a shopping center to its proposal. ''We've added working withHeritage Development Company of Syracuse to build a retail center whichcould generate as much as $12 million a year for the village,'' he said.''We've interested them (Heritage Development Company) enough that they'veentered into a working agreement with us, but we're in the early stage.''   Risteau said both Wheelabrator Corp. and Heritage Development Companyare doing market studies and other analyses to determine the value of ashopping center for the village. ''They (Green Island) don't have anymalls. It would be a real benefit for them. It would be about 300,000square feet, and employ 750 people,'' he said. He said the mall would belocated north of Green Island's electric substation.   Energy Answers Corp. has added new air pollution control equipment, andupgraded the waste processing facility by adding a 500-ton/day constructionand demolition debris recycling facility and a paper recycling mill to itsproposal, according to Thomas Julien, Project Manager for Answers. Juliensaid the company's unsure as to how much the entire package will costbecause the sizes of the facilities have not been determined. However, itis expected that Energy Answers Corp. will generate between $3- and $4million annually in payments to the village.   Finally, American Ref-Fuel has proposed in its revision three differentprojects to complement the waste-to-energy and recycling facilitiesfeatured in its original plan. According to J. Kevin Cmunt, ProjectDevelopment Manager for American Ref-Fuel, one option is building a KraftMarket Pulp Mill, which would produce uncoated freesheet, coatedgroundwood, coated freesheet, uncoated groundwood and bristol at a rate of600 t/d. This includes stationery, tablets, and copier paper.   American Ref-Fuel also proposed a 100% recycled newsprint mill or alinerboard facility. According to Cmunt, six leading paper manufacturingcompanies have expressed interest in the projects. He added an addition ofa paper recycling project would result in benefits of $8,475,000 to$10,850,000 to the Village of Green Island per year.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991KEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES inKEEP AMERICA BEAUTIFUL (KAB) LAUNCHES SOLID WASTE WORKSHOP SERIES inPhoenix, Arizona on September 27. The newly-designed community workshopsare intended to educate citizens and public officials about solid wastehandling practices, according to an official of the Stamford,Connecticut-based non-profit group.   Future solid waste workshops will be scheduled around the country. ''Thenew series will continue KAB's efforts to counter our growing dependence ona declining number of landfills, the increasing amount of trash producedeach year, and the inability of communities to site new disposalfacilities,'' said the official.   ''Our goal,'' he concluded, ''is to accelerate the training of concernedlocal citizens and public officials to prepare them to assume greater rolesin planning and implementing solid waste management programs at thecommunity level.'' KAB is a national public education organizationdedicated to improving waste handling practices in 460 certified affiliatedcommunities in 40 states, including 19 official, state-affiliatedorganizations.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991SWANA RFQ DRAWS 49 PROSPECTIVE CONTRACTORS FOR EPA'S MITE PROGRAM   The Solid Waste Association of North America (SWANA) has received 49responses to its request for qualifications (RFQ) from companies,universities and laboratories seeking to be subcontractors to performevaluations under the Environmental Protection Agency's Municipal SolidWaste Innovative Technology Evaluation (MITE) program.   SWANA and the EPA recently entered into a three-year cooperativeagreement in which the association is assisting the agency in implementingthe evaluation program (Integrated Waste Management, 29 May, 2). EPAestablished the program a year ago to ''help developers address barriers tocommercialization by providing objective, independent, third-partyevaluations of selected technologies,'' said a SWANA official.   Information produced by the program will be used not only by technologydevelopers but by local governments that are responsible for day-to-daymanagement of municipal solid wastes, the official said.   EPA's evaluation program in the first year included solidification andstabilization of municipal waste combustion ash residues. Second yearactivities are being directed at evaluating other strategies for managingmunicipal solid wastes, such as recycling, landfilling, combustion andmaterials processing.   A SWANA spokesperson said the association had not yet established theschedule for deciding on the RFQs and further evaluations.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT via NewsNetSeptember 18, 1991MID-AMERICA WASTE SEEN MAINTAINING 25%-30% ANNUAL EARNINGS GROWTH   Mid-American Waste Systems Inc., which is one of the fastest growing andmost profitable solid waste companies n the U.S., should maintain annualearnings growth of 25% to 30%, according to a report prepared by StephenSchweich, research analyst at Alex. Brown & Sons, Baltimore, Maryland.   Mid-American revenues are growing at a better than 30% annual rate andoperating margins exceed 25%, he continued. Solid waste management is a$28-billion per year industry in the U.S., and ''we believe Mid-Americancan reach $300-million to $400-million in revenues by 1995 whilemaintaining its current profit margins,'' said the report.   The firm, based in Canal Winchester, Ohio, has extensive landfillresources, well-managed transfer stations and collection operations,growing special waste businesses, and experienced management, according toSchweich. It has 17 operating landfills, 9 transfer stations and 8collection companies.   Its principal areas of geographic focus include Ohio, Indiana,Pennsylvania, Illinois and West Virginia. New landfill sites are underdevelopment in Florida, South Carolina, California and Colorado. In the1986 to 1989 period, Mid-American's revenues grew from $4-million to$48-million, and net income increased tenfold.   The company's rapid geographic expansion came primarily fromacquisitions of 10 landfills and numerous waste collection companies inOhio, Indiana, Kentucky and Pennsylvania. Mid-American's basic acquisitionphilosophy has been to buy companies cheaply, bring in professionalmanagement, exploit synergies with other Mid-American operations, andultimately build critical mass and profitability, explained the analysis.   During the past two years, Mid-American has added other territories toits operations base including West Virginia, Georgia and Colorado.Moreover, the company is pursing ''greenfield'' landfill projects inCalifornia and Florida, elaborated the report.   According to Alex. Brown estimates, the total North American solid wasteindustry was about $28-billion in 1990. Municipalities and independentoperators control roughly 71% of the market. Waste Management handles 14.3%of the waste, Browning-Ferris controls 8.9%, and Laidlaw 2.7%.   Of the 3.4% of the waste handled by emerging players--representing$950-million in 1990--Attwoods earned $338-million. Chambers Developmentgarnered $214-million, and Western Waste $190-milion. Mid-Americanachieved revenues of $79-million, American Waste $61-million, Sanifill$39-million. Republic Waste had revenues of $18-million, and IntegratedWaste, $12-million.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-7IA059-000325-B019-78http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev30.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001844 text/html 32783HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:16:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:32 GMTContent-length: 32594Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev30.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 9, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *************** SLANTS & TRENDS *************** (389 words) JCAHO ISSUES BLUEPRINT FOR HOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT (117 words) NRC REJECTS THREE SCENARIOS FOR FUTURE OF LLW PROGRAM (376 words) LATEST MARKET REPORT PREDICTS SAFETY SYRINGE SALES TO RISE (397 words) HRCC TO CONSIDER NATIONAL MODELS FOR MINIMIZING MEDICAL WASTES (277 words) ISWA FORMS NEW WORKING GROUP TO RESPOND TO MEDWASTE ISSUES (123 words) ACQUISITIONS DRIVE SUCCESS FOR MID-SIZED WASTE FIRMS (200 words) EPA ESTIMATES STAFF LAYOFFS FROM REPUBLICAN BUDGET OFFER (166 words) AUTOCLAVING VIEWED AS APPEALING FOR HOSPITAL WEIGHING WASTE OPTIONS (258 words) EPA AUDIT POLICY SPELLS RELIEF FOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATORS (376 words) NEW HAMPSHIRE WASTE REGULATORS AWAIT EPA REPORT, AIR STANDARDS (928 words) REUSABLE WASTE CONTAINER ISSUE HIGHLIGHTED AT WASTE EXPO '96 (128 words) MEDWASTE NAMES NEW CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER (148 words) HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION ELECTS TOP OFFICIALS (168 words) CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996***************SLANTS & TRENDS***************WHISTLEBLOWER UPDATE:  A Labor Department judge is slated tohear arguments Jan. 31 on whether to grant whistleblowerstatus to a former employee of a sharps containermanufacturer who complained about the integrity of productsbeing shipped (MWN, Dec. 12, p. 206). In that case, DOLAdministrative Law Judge Samuel Smith ruled for the firsttime the federal Environmental Protection Agency couldregulate sharps collectors under the Toxic SubstancesControl Act .THE LONG-AWAITED RULING could spell relief for whistleblowerSteve Balog. Dottie Balog, his wife, said she hoped thegovernment's budget problems would not interfere with theJan. 31 court trial. Much is riding on the decision. IfSteve Balog is granted whistleblower protection, then hisemployer, Med-Safe Systems, would be barred from suing him.Also, Balog could be eligible for back pay, legal fees, andeven his job, she said.* * *THE COST IS NOT EXCESSIVE for hospitals to switch fromincineration to either on-site autoclaves or regionalautoclave facilities for their medical waste management,says a soon-to-be-released cost analysis by a New Yorkenvironmental group. "We're finding its a small part ofhospitals' operating budgets," said Center for Biology ofNatural Systems' Catherine Hill. "We think its feasible."Hill said researchers focused on the "most accepted"alternative to incineration in crunching numbers on theattractiveness of abandoning incineration. The group, housedat Queens College, also factored in the necessary wastemanagement costs after using the steam sterilizer.MEDICAL WASTE BECAME A TARGET for the environmental groupwhen it embarked on a study of air pollution sources in theGreat Lakes (MWN, May 30, p. 84). That study recommendedmedical waste be sterilized and landfilled, rather thanincinerated, to decrease dioxin compounds in the Great Lakesregion. According to Hill, EPA's dioxin numbers for medicalwaste incinerators were accurate for the time data werecollected in 1989/1990. Since then, more than one-half ofthe incinerators have shut down, so the report may not be anaccurate snapshot of today's dioxin burden, Hill noted.THE GROUP's FINDINGS on the benefit of autoclaves is notnews to Vicky Jas at the Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center,whose comprehensive cost analysis convinced the hospital toshut down its incinerator and apply for a permit to operatean autoclave (see story, p. 5).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996JCAHO ISSUES BLUEPRINT FORHOSPITAL WASTE MANAGEMENT     The Joint Commission on Accreditation of HealthcareOrganizations (JCAHO) recently prescribed its plan for asafe environment.     According to the latest manual, hospital leadersshould: plan for waste management space, equipment andresources; educate staff about the role of environment insupporting patient care; develop standards to measurehospital performance in managing and improving theenvironment; and develop an Information Collection andEvaluation System to continuously measure environmentalcare.     The manual outlines what should be included in ahazardous materials and waste management plan, and thestandards for personnel to meet in selecting, handling,storing, using and disposing of waste.     For more information, contact JCAHO, One RenaissanceBoulevard, Oakbrook, Ill. 60181; 708-916-5635.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996NRC REJECTS THREE SCENARIOSFOR FUTURE OF LLW PROGRAM     None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commission staffscenarios for the future of the commission's low-levelradioactive waste (LLW) program is satisfactory, NRC'sAdvisory Committee on Nuclear Waste (ACNW) concluded Dec.29.     Facing severe federal budget cuts, the staff reportlooked at three scenarios: continue the current program,reduce the program by eliminating or cutting back variousparts, or terminate all parts of the LLW program.     The staff concluded the present program could notcontinue at present budgetary levels, but the entire programcould not be abolished because that move would require majorchanges in a number of pieces of federal legislation. Theonly viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reducedprogram.     The major failing of the staff report "is the failureto address the question of what the LLW program ought to bein order to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW ChairmanPaul Pomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley AnnJackson.     The budgetary focus of the report fails to addressNRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health andsafety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be madein accordance with priorities set with reference to theunderlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.     Necessary elements in the reshaped LLW program are: astaff that includes experts in each of the technologiescritical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program thatprovides technical assistance to those preparing licenseapplications for LLW disposal facilities; a program thatmaintains NRC's capability for processing licenseapplications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposalfacilities; and a program that identifies and supportslimited research activities in priority areas and assuresthat the information value is maintained from studies thatare terminated or transferred to other programs.* * *NURSING STAFF INJURY is on tap in the new Institute ofMedicine (IOM) report to be released in mid-January. Thereport-Nursing Staff in Hospitals and Nursing Homes: Is itAdequate?- focuses on how the unprecedented change in thehealth care industry has affected the occupational health ofnurses, as well as patient care. IOM kicked off the probe inresponse to a congressional request. For information,contact IOM, 202-334-2138.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996LATEST MARKET REPORT PREDICTSSAFETY SYRINGE SALES TO RISE     More than 4.8 million needles and syringes were sold inthe United States in 1994, and safety syringe sales wereforecasted to jump at least 45 percent by the end of 1995,said a new market report on the medical disposal market.     Connecticut-based Theta Corporation predicted safetysyringe sales would increase more than 45 percent with unitshipments to exceed 2.25 billion by the end of 1995.     The report provided an in-depth analysis of the largestU.S. disposal medical equipment products market. The latestreport, Dynamic Medical Disposal Market, forecasted markettrends through 2001 for the following products: needles andsyringes, procedure kits and trays, evacuated bloodcollection tubes, respiratory therapy disposables andinfusion disposables.Needle Sticks Drive Market     According to Theta Corp., the most significant trendaffecting the medical disposables market is the increasingawareness of the danger of bloodborne pathogen infectionsfrom accidental needle sticks.  The greatest commercialsuccess will come from new features incorporated intoexisting products offered by vendors who currently dominatethe market, the firm found.     Safety needles and syringes are expected to reachmarket penetration exceeding 80 percent by 2001, the reportpredicted, and while the products may become more popular,safety product prices will also decline dramatically. Since1992, the U.S. Patent Office has approved more than 500patents for safety features for syringes and needles.     Today more than 60 percent of all surgical proceduresinvolve use of a kit, and the report charted the market forthe following procedure kits and trays: cardiovascular,angiography and angioplasty, orthopedic, OB/GYN, ophthalmic,endoscopic and others.     Theta Corp. predicted sales of all respiratory therapydisposables would reach 38.6 million units by 2001, and thatcompound annual growth rates of 17.1 percent was anticipatedfor sales of infusion sets from 1995 to 2001.     Fifteen companies were selected for detailed profilesthat included information on product development, productsand marketing strategies: Baxter International Inc., BectonDickinson and Co., C.R. Bard, Inc., Hudson Respiratory CareInc., Invacare Corp., Isolyser Co., Inc., Johnson & Johnson,Marquest Medical Products, Inc., MAXXIM Medical, Inc.,Puritan-Bennett Corp., The Med-Design Corp., SherwoodMedical, Siemens Medical System, Inc., Smiths Industries andSterile Concepts.     To order Theta Marketing Report No. 541, contactPhyllis Klaben, Theta Corp., Theta Building, Middlefield,Conn. 06455; 203-349-1054 or fax 203-349-1227. Cost for the121-page report is $995.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996HRCC TO CONSIDER NATIONAL MODELSFOR MINIMIZING MEDICAL WASTES     The Healthcare Resource Conservation Coalition (HRCC),an ad hoc group of suppliers, haulers and hospitals, willreview national models that have proven successful inminimizing medical waste at its next meeting in May.     The reach of the nonprofit communications group hasbeen expanding over the last year. While not included atfirst, waste haulers have joined the group of thoseinterested in solving medical waste problems, said MayoMedical Center's Director of Waste Management Terry Horseth.The group recently has incorporated as a nonprofit networkand includes 50 members, such as representatives from BaxterInternational Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Beth Israel Hospitaland Kaiser Permanente.     Horseth said everyone recognizes education is key inkeeping health care organizations, manufacturers, suppliersand government informed on the issues. "There is no centralplace to find out all the information. Everyone must keepreinventing their own wheel," he said.     The meetings have been valuable, explained Horseth,since all players in medical waste management shareinformation on what is happening nationwide, as well asfinding solutions to thorny local problems. Medical wastemanagement issues vary as widely as state and localregulations, and HRCC members have the advantage of keepingup on ever-changing waste management and recycling markets.     "Right now we're looking for success stories," saidHorseth, who touted recycling efforts at the Mayo Center inRochester, Minn. The next meeting is tentatively slated forMay in Chicago.     HRCC offers a communications network for all members ofthe health care community to tackle issues such as wasteminimization, waste and product management and governmentregulation.     For information on HRCC, contact Terry Horseth, 507-284-1912.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996ISWA FORMS NEW WORKING GROUPTO RESPOND TO MEDWASTE ISSUES     The International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) hasformed a new working group to deal with health care wasteissues.     ISWA members have worked closely with the World HealthOrganization in assisting countries in preparing theirnational policies on health care waste management, said arecent bulletin from The World Resource Foundation.     The group has also named a new chairman: Bill Townend,deputy director of the London Waste Regulation Authority(LWRA). Townend represented ISWA on the European UnionPriority Waste Stream Project on health care waste that wascompleted last year.     For information on ISWA's new group, contact BillTownend, LWRA, Hampton House, 20 Albert Embankment, LondonSE1 7TJ, UK tel: (44) (0) 171-587-3000; fax (44) (0) 587-5258.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996ACQUISITIONS DRIVE SUCCESSFOR MID-SIZED WASTE FIRMS     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronouncedgrowth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing69 percent to $2 billion, and the trend should continue,according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, afinancial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.     The report found that acquisition growth acceleratedover the past year. The top 13 waste companies are expectedto increase their revenues by 21 percent, with a majorrevenue component driven by acquisitions.     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish tostress that the improvement in the cost of financing hasbeen most notable for the smaller waste service companies. Alonger track record leading to enhanced credibility hasenabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs ofcapital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from theaccess to longer term financing and attractively pricedequity."     In general, the analysis said, long term financingrates for all firms, as represented by 30-year Treasurybonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdropfor continued aggressive acquisition.     For copies of the report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-SizedCompanies Lead Industry in a Torrid Acquisition, contact thefirm's William Fisher, 800-237-5643.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996EPA ESTIMATES STAFF LAYOFFSFROM REPUBLICAN BUDGET OFFER     Up to one-fourth of the Environmental ProtectionAgency's staff may be laid off by spring unless Republicanssubstantially increase EPA's funding, said EPA AdministratorCarol Browner. EPA's budget could have dramatic implicationsfor its medical waste emissions rule and its long-awaitedreport to Congress.     About one-third of the workers who promulgateregulations, issue permits and perform inspections could belaid off if Congress approves the EPA appropriations billvetoed by President Clinton, agency officials said.Researchers and employees involved in environmental cleanupswould not be cut. EPA officials were hesitant until now toestimate the impact of the budget cuts on staffing.     At a Dec. 18 press conference, President Clinton vetoedthe $5.7 billion spending bill, insisting the measure wouldhave cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent and safedrinking water aid to local governments by 45 percent.     In response, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.) argued thatthe cuts were based on recommendations from organizationsincluding the National Academy of Public Administration.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996AUTOCLAVING VIEWED AS APPEALINGFOR HOSPITAL WEIGHING WASTE OPTIONS     Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center may become thestate's first facility to shut down an incinerator and openan autoclaving facility in a dramatic move to save money andavoid having to comply with costly new emission regulations.     The medical center's Vicky Jas conducted acomprehensive, 12-year cost analysis that comparedretrofitting the existing incinerator to shipping wastesoff-site, autoclaving or using a gas sterilizer. Autoclavingwas by far the least expensive option, she said.     "We had the resources to evaluate these, while othersare running scared," said Jas, who added that many hospitalshave already inquired about when the facility will be up andrunning.     The Lebanon, N.H., facility is hoping to be granted itsstate permit soon, begin testing the new autoclave facilityon Jan. 29, and have it on-line in February. Right now, thehospital is spending $5,000 a week to ship the wastes off-site. With tens of millions being slashed from thehospital's yearly budget, staff had to look for less costlyalternatives.     "None of us was crazy about autoclaving since there isstill waste at the end," she explained. But Jas said thehospital said the gas sterilizer manufacturer could notgather independent emissions data for permit approval.     Another item that may be on the agenda for hospitaladministrators to consider include training a certifiedworkforce who would be involved only with waste managementin the hospital complex. Jas said she is looking into thisoption to beef-up the education of hospital staff who handlewastes.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996EPA AUDIT POLICY SPELLS RELIEFFOR CERTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATORS     Companies that report self-discovered environmentalviolations within 10 days and act to correct thoseviolations will be eligible for reduced penalties or waiversfor civil violations and no criminal sanctions under theEnvironmental Protection Agency's final policy onenvironmental audits.     The policy, which appeared in the Dec. 22 FederalRegister, does not apply to violations that harm humanhealth and the environment.     The issue of EPA enforcement against self-discoveredviolations has been a sticking point for many companies.     Under the new approach, EPA retains its power to levyfines that equal any economic gain created by the violationin order to "preserve a level playing field." EPA also willoverride state laws shielding results of corporate self-audits from enforcement if the violations threaten publichealth or the environment. At the same time, the agency said"where a state has obtained appropriate sanctions needed todeter such misconduct, there is no need for EPA action."     The final policy is similar to an interim policyreleased in March. The earlier statement applied only toself-audits, while the final statement covers other self-discovery steps such as due diligence. EPA defines duedigilence as systemic efforts to prevent, detect and correctviolations.Audit Results Not 'Privilege'     EPA will continue its policy on not routinelyrequesting the results of corporate self-audits, althoughthe agency reiterated its position that environmental self-audits and related corporate self-discovery activities arenot privileged information protected from public disclosure.This contrasts sharply with an increasing number of statelaws that provide varying degrees of privilege for auditresults.     EPA said it will reduce gravity-based civil penaltiesby up to 75 percent. These penalties, which are based on theseverity of the pollution problem and not on economic gains,could be waived. The policy spells out a list of conditionsthat must be met to become eligible for reduced or no civilpenalties provisions.* * *RISK CHACTERIZATION: The American Industrial Health Council(AIHC) recently released Advances in Risk Characterization,a new publication designed to help risk managers improvedecisionmaking. The 11-page report describes information andterminology risk managers request from risk assessors. Formore information, contact AIHC's Dave Williams at 202-833-2131.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996NEW HAMPSHIRE WASTE REGULATORSAWAIT EPA REPORT, AIR STANDARDS     New Hampshire regulators are holding tight on amendingmedical waste regulations until the Environmental ProtectionAgency's long-awaited report to Congress is released, saidNew Hampshire Department of Environmental Services' CarlWoodbury.     Woodbury said New Hampshire regulators are not onlyanticipating EPA's report but also its new Clean Air Actregulation for emissions from medical waste incinerators.State regulations have already incorporated a treatmentstandard similar to EPA's, he said.     New Hampshire houses one commercial incineratoroperated by Waste Management of New England that acceptsmedical waste, while there are approximately 15 smallincinerators at hospitals across the state.     "A lot of material is still going to landfills,"Woodbury noted. Under state regulations, medical waste mustbe treated before disposal "to achieve high-leveldisinfection plus a four log reduction 104 of Bacillussubtilis, for example by infectious waste incineration,steam sterilization, chemical disinfection, or gassterilization."Autoclave Breaks New Ground     The responsibility is on the manufacturer to provealternative treatment technologies are effective, Woodburysaid, noting that the state requires data with independentlaboratory confirmation. "We don't want to see just themarketers," he added.     But Vicky Jas, manager of the Dartmouth HitchcockMedical Center's Biosafety and Environmental Programs,complained that the state had little regulation foralternative treatment technologies, even the moretraditional autoclaving. "We really started from scratch,"she said. "The only standard the state relied on was whetherthe technology killed the bugs," Jas said.     Woodbury said New Hampshire hospitals are eying how themedical center is managing its wastes to decide what path tofollow in the wake of looming EPA regulation. In August, thehospital shut down its incinerator and has applied tooperate a less-costly, commercial-sized autoclave tosterilize wastes on-site.     After extensive research involving a cost analysis, thehospital opted to get out of the incinerator business, saidthe state's medical waste regulator. "Other hospitals arelooking to them for guidance."     Under New Hampshire regulations, there are certaintreatment and disposal exemptions. Limbs and recognizableorgans are to be disposed of by incineration or interment.Non-infectious blood and body fluids and non-infectioustissues processed by grinding may be disposed of in sanitarysewers. Gloves, gowns and other materials that have not comein contact with significant quantities of blood, body fluidsor secretions should not be handled as infectious wastes.Certain animal carcasses need not be regulated as infectiouswastes, and sharp infectious wastes can be incinerated orlandfilled if treated first. Household sharp infectiouswaste can be handled as municipal solid waste ifcontainerized.     Medical waste cannot be stored at room temperature formore than 72 hours, and waste stored at processingfacilities that receive waste from off-site generatorscannot be stored for more than seven days. The waste isrequired to be stored and transported in a sealed, non-permeable 3-mil polyethylene bag, placed in another bag ofsimilar construction and sealed.     Sharp infectious waste, such as broken glass, scalpelblades and hypodermic needles, must be segregated and en-cased inside rigid, puncture-resistant containers before thematerial is placed in polyethylene bags. Under New Hampshirelaw, sharps are not required to be ground up and renderednon-usable before disposal.     For more information, contact Carl Woodbury, 603-271-2925.CalendarFeb. 13-14: 1996 Conference on Corporate Environmental,Health & Safety Excellence, New York City, sponsored byArthur D. Little Inc. and the Conference Board. Forinformation, contact 212-339-0345.Feb. 28-March 1: Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air ToxicsControl, Clearwater Beach, Fla., sponsored by Air & WasteManagement Association and U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency. For information, call 412-232-3444, ext. 3142.March 20-22: 5th Annual National Workers' Compensation andOccupational Medicine Seminar, San Francisco. Toxic exposureat work is among the topics slated for the seminar. Forinformation and 20-page brochure, contact S.E.A.K. Legal andMedical Publishers, fax 508-540-8304.Around the StatesNEW YORK - New York City Health and Hospitals Corp. (HHC)President Luis Marcos announced that 900 hospital beds willbe eliminated from the system. Marcos said the dramatic cutswould result in greater efficiency and save the city $80million, according to local news reports. Marcos said themove was necessary to remain competitive and that layoffswere not out of the question. After the cut, HHC will beleft with 5,964 beds. At a December board meeting, Marcosnoted a "dramatic decline" in the city's occupancy rates.Health care officials predict the city will eventuallyeliminate some 10,000 hospital beds in the public andprivate sector.ResourcesProtecting Yourself Against Bloodborne Disease, a demo diskillustrating an interactive computer-based training programis available from SAVANT Audiovisuals, Inc. The interactiveprogram, which is designed to reach audiences in clinical,medical and industrial environments, offers instruction onwhat the Occupational Safety and Health Administration(OSHA) expects employees to know about the BloodbornePathogens Standard. It offers instruction on key OSHAregulations and how they apply to various rooms in a typicalhealth care facility. To order the demo or receive freeliterature, contact SAVANT Audiovisuals, Inc., 801 EastChapman Ave., P.O. Box 3670, Fullerton, Calif. 92634; 714-870-7880 or fax 714-526-7400.Custom Medical Online offers a new online service fromCustom Medical Stock Photo, Inc., to view hundreds ofmedical stock photos and catalogues. For information,contact CMSP, 800-373-2677.Innovative Treatment Technologies: Annual Status Report, 7thEdition, describes innovative methods being used athazardous waste sites. For information, call theRCRA/Superfund Hotline at 800-424-9810.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996REUSABLE WASTE CONTAINER ISSUEHIGHLIGHTED AT WASTE EXPO '96     "The Economics and Issues Behind Medical Waste ReusableContainers" is one medical waste topic on the agenda of theupcoming WasteExpo '96 conference in Las Vegas.     Other topics for the May 20-24 meeting include:"Sustained Achievement in Medical Waste Minimization," and"Alternative Medical Waste Treatment Technologies: An ImpactAnalysis of the State Technical Assistance Manual."     For the first time, the meeting includes a new MedicalWaste Pavilion for firms to exhibit waste equipment,technology and services. More than 40 sessions presented bywaste industry experts and environmental professionals areplanned.     Early-bird registration deadline is March 20. Themeeting is co-sponsored by the Waste Equipment TechnologyAssociation, the National Solid Wastes ManagementAssociation, and Waste Age Publications. For information,contact Waste Expo '96, 301-694-5243.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996MEDWASTE NAMES NEWCHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER     Med/Waste, Inc. of Opa Locka, Fla., has named MichaelElkin as its vice president and chief financial officer,replacing James Pekarek, who resigned.     "We are very pleased to have Mike as our chieffinancial officer," said President and Chief ExecutiveOfficer Daniel Stauber. "He's played an integral part inMed/Waste's recent turnaround and emergence as a leadingprovider of medical waste management services in Florida.Our rapid expansion and aggressive growth goals will be wellserved by someone of Mike's experience and expertise."     Prior to joining Med/Waste, Elkin was comptroller forMiami's Tecmarine Lines, Inc., and before that, was chieffinancial officer of Sequest Cruises of Fort Lauderdale.Elkin received his Bachelors Degree from the University ofFlorida, a Masters Degree in finance from FloridaInternational University and a Masters Degree in accountingfrom Nova Southeastern University.     For information, contact Med/Waste, Inc., 305-688-3931.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 9, 1996HOSPITAL ASSOCIATIONELECTS TOP OFFICIALS     The American Hospital Association (AHA) announced thatRonnie Walker, president of Weatherford Hospital Authority-DBA Southwestern Memorial Hospital, Weatherford, Okla., isthe new chair of the group's special forum for small orrural hospitals.     During the one-term term, Walker will serve as a keyspokesperson for small or rural hospitals and oversee a 24-person governing council for the Section for Small or RuralHospitals.     AHA's governing council also elected Patrick Muldoon,president and chief executive officer of North AdamsRegional Hospital, North Adams, Mass., as chair-elect in1996 and will serve as chair of the group's policymaking armnext year.     Members new to the council in 1996 are: Brian Colfack,CEO/administrator, Berger Hospital, Circleville, Ohio;William Gravely, Jr., president, Culpeper Memorial Hospital,Culpeper, Va.; Leslie MacLeod, president, Huggins Hospital,Wolfeboro, N.H.; Gerald Worrick, administrator, Door CountyMemorial Hospital, Sturgeon Bay, Wis.     For information on other AHA news, contact AHA's AliciaMarshall, 325 Seventh St., N.W., Suite 700, Washington, D.C.20004; 202-626-2339.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-8IA059-000325-B019-108http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev03.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001928 text/html 45096HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:17:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:21 GMTContent-length: 44907Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev03.html Sample Issue Copyright NUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS AND TRENDS (377 words) ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLION TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILES (662 words) REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPER THAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS (724 words) AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISV PROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA (293 words) DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALD LLW VITRIFICATION TESTS (429 words) SDMP NRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47 SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY (492 words) ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFERED FOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH (542 words) D&D NRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'S TROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN (278 words) NEWS BRIEFS (252 words) DOE COMPLEX (1805 words) CALENDAR (262 words) CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SLANTS AND TRENDSNO CIGAR: None of the three Nuclear Regulatory Commissionstaff scenarios for the future (or non-future) of thecommission's low-level radioactive waste (LLW) program aresatisfactory, NRC's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste(ACNW) concluded Dec. 29. Facing severe federal budget cuts,the July staff report looked at three scenarios: continuethe current program, reduce the program by eliminating orcutting back various parts, or terminate all parts of theLLW program. The staff concluded the present program couldnot continue at present budgetary levels, but the entireprogram could not be abolished because it requires majorchanges in a number of pieces of federal legislation. Theonly viable solution, therefore, is a drastically reducedprogram (NWN, Oct. 26, 1995, p. 413).   The major failing of the staff report, "is the failure toaddress the question of what the LLW program ought to be inorder to satisfy the mission of the NRC," ACNW Chairman PaulPomeroy said in his letter to NRC Chairman Shirley AnnJackson. The budgetary focus of the report fails to addressNRC's fundamental responsibility to protect the health andsafety of the public. "Budgetary reductions need to be madein accordance with priorities set with reference to theunderlying mission of the NRC," ACNW said.   Necessary elements in the rescaled LLW program are: astaff that includes experts in each of the technologiescritical to evaluation of the siting, environmental impact,operation and closure of LLW facilities; a program thatprovides technical assistance to those preparing licenseapplications for LLW disposal facilities; a program thatmaintains NRC's capability for processing licenseapplications from non-Agreement states for LLW disposalfacilities; and a program that identifies and supportslimited research activities in priority areas and assuresthat the information value is maintained from studies thatare terminated or transferred to other programs.   Some areas targeted for termination or limited support inthe staff report need re-evaluation. These include review oftopical reports and the quality of Agreement-State programsand NRC representation of the U.S. LLW policy.   % Pomeroy's letter to Jackson, 8 pp., is available forpurchase through BPI DocuDial, No. 48-1111, as is the July31 report to the commission from the NRC staff, 29 pp., No.48-1112.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996ARTHUR D. LITTLE AWARDED $7.6 MILLIONTO HELP BELARUS TACKLE MISSILESby Gordon Feller   The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little hasbeen awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the formerSoviet republic of Belarus solve nuclear waste, safety andother environmental problems related to its former StrategicRocket Forces (SRF) bases.   The two-and-a-half-year contract from the Defense NuclearAgency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative Threat Reduction(CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugarlegislation. The program was set up to assist the countriesof the former Soviet Union in elimination of weapons of massdestruction and prevention of their proliferation.   Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel toassess radiation and conventional environmental damage atsites where intercontinental ballistic missiles were based,transported, operated or maintained, and will help thecountry restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclearstate and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.   Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number ofdifferent technical resources within the program to providetraining and technical assistance to the Belarus officialsand experts. The consultants will work with the Belaruspersonnel to analyze the environmental problems at onemissile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee theBelarus technicians as they do environmental restorationwork at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transferenough knowledge to Belarus so that it can complete theenvironmental restoration work at the remaining sites.   Potential environmental problems include heavy metal andlow-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around thesites' perimeters containing unexploded ordnances.   As part of the effort to transfer environmentalrestoration expertise, Arthur D. Little will conductinternational conferences co-sponsored by DNA and theBelarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around the worldwill be invited to Belarus to discuss environmentalrestoration experiences, technologies, and managementissues.   As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed inl993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarusto assist in development of the Environmental RestorationProject. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugarinclude assistance in defense conversion, export controlsystems and training, government-to-governmentcommunications links, and emergency response equipment andtraining.   Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has anespecially high water table and active ground watermovement, which can exacerbate ground water pollution.   Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little on theEnvironmental Restoration Project include the Army Corps ofEngineers' Waterways Experiment Station, Los AlamosTechnical Associates, Technology Management Co., theEnvironmental Chemical Corp., Environmental HazardsSpecialists International, Environmental CareersOrganizations, the World Environment Center, and Clean SitesInc.   Arthur D. Little, which managed the largest environmentalimpact assessment ever conducted in the Former Soviet Unionby a Western company, has handled more than 3,000environmental audits and assessments in 30 countriesthroughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered inCambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around theworld. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,health, and safety consulting; management consulting; andtechnology and product development.RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia's ministerof nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclear smugglingshould be the top item on the agenda for the April G-7summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted tonuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" fordealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control overnuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution toRussia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much lessthan the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russiancivilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have aquestionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt onMikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boostedto $2 billion by 1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996REPROCESSING AT SRS CHEAPERTHAN REPOSITORY, REPORT FINDS   Using existing facilities at DOE's Savannah River Site(SRS), Aiken, S.C., to reprocess civilian spent fuel (SF)would be considerably cheaper than continuing with thecurrent repository program, concluded a report prepared byWestinghouse Savannah River Co. for DOE at the request ofRep Charles Norwood (R-Ga.).   The report, delivered to DOE Aug. 21, is unclassified,but has not been officially released by DOE or Norwood'soffice.(% Available through BPI DocuDial, 28 pp., No. 48-1110.)   Questions about using SRS to reprocess spent civilianfuel and the impact on the civilian waste program promptedNorwood to make the request, an aide said. Reprocessingoperations could provide an economic boon to the regionaround SRS.   The report, Chemical Stabilization of Defense Related andCommercial Spent Nuclear Fuel at the Savannah River Site,said a repository is required, even with reprocessing. But"technical uncertainty would be significantly lessened bythe 20-fold volume reduction, and the conversion of thewaste to a single form containing only short-lived, non-fissile products."Billions To Be Saved?   Westinghouse estimates the annual cost of reprocessingcivilian spent fuel at $350 million a year and the cost fordealing with the current inventory of spent civilian fuel at$8 billion, including estimated repository fees. "Chemicalstabilization is almost certainly less costly than directdisposition technology, maybe by several billion dollars,"the report said.   "These facilities could consolidate and stabilize nuclearwastes into manageable and ultimately disposable forms,thereby providing a bridge to the future when decisions willhave to be made as to the long-term approach to energyproduction, defense needs and nuclear waste management inthis country," the report said.   Besides costs savings, reprocessing civilian SF at SRSsolves on-site storage problems at commercial nuclearpowerplants and allows DOE to comply with the Nuclear WastePolicy Act by accepting SF by 1998, the report said.   Under the plan spelled out in the Westinghouse report, SFnow stored at SRS would be reprocessed and then the facilitycould provide "ongoing treatment services for a wide varietyof defense and commercial spent fuels." Radioactive wasteproduced from the reprocessing operation would be vitrifiedin borosilicate glass logs. DOE could either sellreprocessed civilian fuel back to powerplants or dispose ofit in a repository.Upgrade Costs Omitted   In estimating the cost of reprocessing civilian SF atSRS, the report does not include the costs of upgradesneeded for the F- and H- canyons. John Duane, a Westinghousemanager who helped prepare the report, said the upgradescould be anywhere from minor to major, depending on whattypes of fuel will be reprocessed. It was an oversight thatupgrade costs were omitted; they should be in the report, hesaid.   A standard shear/leach process would be used to processcommercial SF. The report estimates these upgrades wouldcost $100 million. After that, only normal capital upgradeswould be needed, Duane said. Brian Costner, of the EnergyResearch Foundation, an SRS watchdog group, disputes thosefigures. When SRS reprocessing operations stopped in 1992,major upgrades to the facility were never completed.Completing the upgrades is expensive, Costner said. Duane,however, said about three-quarters of the planned upgradeswere completed before the shutdown. The buildings are 40years old, but the reprocessing equipment is fairly new, headded.   Costner thinks the purpose of the report is to buildpolitical support for commercial reprocessing. He expectsreprocessing supporters to use it to press for a change inU.S. policy, which now prohibits civilian SF reprocessing.Reprocessing, however, is gaining support in Congress.   Norwood's office had no comment on whether therepresentative would propose legislation to open SRS forcivilian reprocessing. At press time Jan. 4, Norwood wastouring SRS and would make a decision based on what helearned during the tour, an aide said.   Using a U.S. defense facility to reprocess civilian SF isa new idea and sets a dangerous precedent, said ArjunMakhijani, president of the Institute for Energy andEnvironmental Research. The report is "a clear waste oftaxpayers dollars and a dangerous waste of taxpayerdollars," he said.   No other Congress members contacted by NWN had seen thereport. Nuclear-industry representatives also wereunfamiliar with it or any plans to reprocess civilian fuelat SRS.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996AUSTRALIANS TO USE BATTELLE ISVPROCESS TO CLEAN MARALINGA   An in-situ vitrification (ISV) system developed for DOEby Battelle is receiving international attention. TheAustralians tested the process for treating contaminatedareas of the Maralinga test range in South Australia. Thetests, carried out by Geosafe, a Battelle subsidiary, endedin October 1995.   The British used Maralinga as a  nuclear test site in the1950s and subsequently contaminated several kilometers ofdesert. Most of the contamination is plutonium, and includes21 pits containing equipment contaminated with transuranics.The Australians expect the cleanup of Maralinga to costabout $100 million Australian, equal to $75 million U.S.(NWN, June 6, 1995, p. 243).   The Australians hope to use in-situ treatment to dealwith the pits. The Geosafe tests involved 13 test melts oversix-months. Initial tests used a surrogate for the nuclearmaterials, but the final two tests used actualradionuclides. One five-ton test melt used soil and debriscontaining a kilogram of uranium as well as hazardous metalsand large quantities of scrap metals.   Another test melt used not only uranium-contaminatedsoil, but also a steel plate contaminated with about twograms of plutonium. The Australian Nuclear Science andTechnology Organization is analyzing the radioactivesamples.   The Australians are looking at radionuclide distributionwithin the vitrified material and at the strength of thematerial. They also will conduct leach testing of thevitrified material. Test results should be available earlythis year, Geosafe said.   Test results show the in-situ vitrification process canbe used to treat the 21 contaminated pits, Geosafe said."Most notably, the radioactive testing did not result incontamination of the off-gas hood or piping, indicating veryhigh uranium and plutonium retention efficiencies in thevitrified product," according to a Geosafe test report.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996DESIGN PROBLEMS DELAY FERNALDLLW VITRIFICATION TESTS   Design problems will delay the start-up of a pilot low-level radioactive waste vitrification plant at DOE'sFernald, Ohio, site by 17 months. But the problems will notdelay completion of the 10-year cleanup plan for thefacility, Fernald officials say.   The $21-million vitrification plant, built by GTS Duratekof Columbia, Md., was scheduled for surrogate testing inJuly 1995, but DOE moved the start date of testing with auranium substitute to March 1996, said Perry Richardson, aFernald Environmental Restoration Management Co. (FERMCO)spokesman.   DOE initially had problems getting bids on a melter forthe pilot plant. Originally, DOE requested a melter capableof operating at temperatures of 1,450 degrees C and able toprocess five tons of material per day. DOE revised itsspecification, requesting a melter capable of handling onlyone ton of material per day.   Superfund deadlines forced parallel design of portions ofthe plant that should have been designed in sequence,officials said. The delays do not surprise Richardson. "Thisis the closest thing to research and development we have atFernald," he said. A few "bumps" in the process should beexpected, he added.'We Were Overly Optimistic'   Fernald also overestimated the amount of time the pilotplant could operate. Initial plans were to operate thefacility continuously, but FERMCO decided that was notrealistic. "We were overly optimistic," Richardson said.   For planning purposes, Fernald officials are assuming themelter will operate 30 percent of the time, althoughRichardson said he thinks the actual operational operatingtime will be better.   DOE eventually will vitrify 9,700 tons of uranium milltailings now stored on site at Fernald. Information gatheredfrom the pilot plant operation will be used to design a $200million full-scale vitrification plant, capable ofprocessing 30 tons of material per day.   DOE plans to vitrify all the mill tailings at Fernald andsend the vitrified waste to a disposal facility on theNevada Test Site before 2005, Richardson said.DAVIS BESSE: Toledo Edison Co. Dec. 26 began transferringspent fuel from the fuel storage pool at its Davis Bessenuclear power plant to three dry storage casks at anindependent spent fuel storage facility on the plant site.The three casks will hold 72 fuel assemblies. The plantneeded to free space in the storage pool to receive new fueland to unload the full reactor core during a refuelingoutage in April. Inspectors from the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission's Region III office, Lisle, Ill., are monitoringthe fuel transfer.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SDMPNRC LISTS A MIXED LOT OF 47SITES ON LATEST SDMP TALLY   The latest version of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission'sSite Decommissioning Management Plan (SDMP) list, releasedDec. 26, shows 47 sites that still must be either evaluatedor remediated under the SDMP program. These sites are amixed bag of possibly contaminated sites where remediationwas in danger of falling through the cracks in NRC'slicensing system.   SDMP sites vary in the degree of radiological hazard,decommissioning complexity and cost. Some sites comprisetens of acres that require assessment for radiologicalcontamination; others have contamination known to be limitedto individual buildings or discrete piles of waste orcontaminated soil. Some sites still have active NRC nuclearmaterials licenses.   Some sites already are almost completely cleaned; othershave had little or no remediation.   NRC has removed nine sites from the SDMP list since theprogram began in 1990. Some of these sites have beensuccessfully cleaned; others are cases where NRC deferredoversight to other agencies or determined the site was notsubject to NRC licensing.   Sites are added to the list if they satisfy one or moreof the following criteria:Problems with the viability of the responsible organization,e.g. inability to pay for or unwillingness to performdecommissioning.Presence of large amounts difficult-to-dispose material suchas soil contamination, unused settling ponds or waste inburial grounds.Long-term presence of contaminated, unused facilitybuildings.Previously terminated license.Contamination or potential contamination of the ground waterfrom on-site wastes.   The 47 sites on the new list are:   Indiana (1): Jefferson Proving Ground;   Maryland (2): Anne Arundel County Curtis Bay site;Aberdeen Proving Ground;   Massachusetts (6): Engelhard Corp., Plainville; NuclearMetals Inc., Concord; Texas Instruments Inc., Attleboro;Watertown Arsenal, Watertown; Watertown GSA, Watertown;Wyman-Gordon Co., North Grafton, Mass.   Michigan (4): Brooks & Perkins, Detroit and Livonia; DowChemical Co., Bay City and Midland;   Minnesota (1): 3M Co., Pine County;   Missouri (1): Lake City Army Ammunition Plant,Independence;   New Jersey (3): Heritage Minerals, Lakehurst, N.J.; RTIInc., Rockaway, N.J.; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,Newfield, N.J.   Ohio (11): Advanced Medical Systems Inc., Cleveland;Alcoa, Cleveland; BP Chemicals America Inc., Lima; ChemetronCorp., Cleveland, Ohio, two sites; Clevite, Cleveland; ElkemMetals Inc., Marietta; Horizons Inc., Cleveland; NortheastOhio Regional Sewer District Southerly Plant, Cleveland; RMITitanium Co., Ashtabula; Shieldalloy Metallurgical Corp.,Cambridge;   Oklahoma (5): Fansteel Inc., Muskogee, Okla.; KaiserAluminum, Tulsa, Okla.; Kerr-McGee, Cimarron and Cushing,Okla.; Sequoyah Fuels Corp., Gore, Okla.;   Pennsylvania (13): Babcock & Wilcox, Apollo, and ParksTownship; Cabot Corp., Boyerton, Reading and Revere;Molycorp Inc., Washington and York; Permagrain Products,Media; Pesses Co., METCOA Site, Pulaski; Safety Light Corp.,Bloomsburg; Schott Glass Technologies, Duryea; WestinghouseElectric Corp., Waltz Mill; and Whittaker Corp., Greenville.   Contact: David Fauver Sr., Project Manager, Low-LevelWaste and Decommissioning Projects Branch, Division of WasteManagement, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Mail StopT7F27, Washington, DC 20555; (301) 415-6625.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996ORNL CONTAMINATED SITES OFFEREDFOR JOINT GROUND WATER RESEARCH   DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory, near Oak Ridge,Tenn., is offering use of previously studied field sites atthe laboratory for collaborative ground water research. Pastdisposal of radioactive and mixed radioactive hazardouswaste at Oak Ridge has led to concerns about ground watercontamination that require a better understanding of thecomplex subsurface heterogeneous fractured media. Pastresearch has focused on water and contaminant movement.   Sites the laboratory is making available forcollaborative research include:   Walker Branch Watershed and Melton Branch Watersheds:These small watersheds (0.47 ha and 0.62 ha, respectively)are particularly suitable for studies of subsurfacetransport processes. Each has a trench excavated across itsoutflow region. Trenches are 2.5 m deep and 16 m long, andcontain six pans pressed against the face of the trench tocollect subsurface seepage outflow. A line source for tracerdistribution is buried at the top of each site. Transects ofsolution samplers, tensiometers and piezometers are locatedthroughout the site. Much of the data-collection equipmentis interfaced for computerized data collection.   West Bear Creek Valley Tracer Test Site: This site wasdeveloped for investigating new ground water tracertechniques. It is located in an uncontaminated area, and hasbeen instrumented with more than 70 piezometers, some ofthem multi-level, and a rain gauge. Water levels andtemperatures have been recorded at 30 minute intervals fortwo years. During the last three years, three principaltests have been conducted at this field site:A one-year dissolved-gas tracer test using helium and neonto test the effect of matrix diffusion on solute transport.A natural-gradient test that used injection of colloid-sizetracers, including bacteriophage, microbes and microspheres,to measure fracture-flow velocities.A test using microspheres labeled with DNA as tracers offracture flow.   Fractured Rock Sampling Protocol Site: This site has beenused for tracer tests to study ground water sampling methodsin fractured media. At the site, 5 to 6 m of soil andsaprolite overlies folded and fractured shale and limestone.The site has an injection/pumping well screened from 6 to 20m, three pairs of wells screened from 5 to 7 m and 18 to 20m, and three multilevel wells with five sampling portsinstalled close to the pairs of wells. Many data areavailable from the site, including six pumping tests,natural water levels, tracer tests using bromide, sulfurhexafluoride and colloids, continuous core from three holes,bore-hole flowmeter measurements, point dilution tests,mineralogical data, field parameters, and geochemicalanalyses.   Tritium Test Site: In 1977, 50 curies of tritium werereleased in an open borehole in fractured shale. Tritium wasmonitored in the injection well and in five monitoring wellsfor the first five years, with an additional sampling after16 years (1993). Efforts to remove the tritium by pumpingwere unsuccessful. A large amount of tritium was stillpresent after 16 years. Results of this test have beeninterpreted to indicate the severe limitations of pump-and-treat methods.   Contact: Gary Jacobs, Head of the Earth and EngineeringSciences Section, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak RidgeNational Laboratory, (423) 576-0567, fax (423) 576-3989, e-mail gkj@ornl.gov. More details are available on the WorldWide Web at http://www.esd.ornl.gov/facilities/hydrology/.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996D&DNRC INTENDS TO OKAY PGE'STROJAN DECOMMISSION PLAN   The Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff intends toapprove Portland General Electric (PGE) Co.'s proposeddecommissioning plan for the Trojan Nuclear Power Plant nearRanier, Ore.   The plant was closed down in 1993 and all spent fuel hasbeen removed from the reactor and placed in the spent fuelpool. The pressurizer and the four steam generators havebeen removed from reactor containment and shipped to a low-level radioactive waste disposal facility.   NRC's latest proposed action would allow PGE to completedecommissioning according to its proposed plan, submittedJan. 25, 1995. PGE intends to dismantle the plant using theDECON alternative after a five-year transition period.Transition Period   During the transition period, which began with theJanuary 1993 shutdown date, PGE intends to remove anddispose of selected large components; license and constructan independent spent fuel storage installation (ISFSI); andtransfer fuel to the ISFSI. The utility also would assessenvironmental impacts associated with construction andoperation of the ISFSI.   The DECON phase will consist of the major disassembly anddismantlement of radioactive structures, systems andcomponents. Low-level radioactive waste resulting fromdismantling the plant will be sent to a licensed wastedisposal site for burial.   At the end of the DECON phase, the site, except for theISFSI, will be released for unrestricted use.   Requests for a hearing on NRC's proposed approval ofPGE's decommissioning plan (Docket No. 50-344) must beforwarded to the commission by Jan. 22. See the FederalRegister, Dec. 22, for details and instructions forpetitioning for a hearing. % Copies also are available forpurchase through BPI DocuDial, 3 pp., No. 48-1105.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996NEWS BRIEFSCalifornia and DOE's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratoryhave agreed to work together to evaluate new environmentaltechnologies for certification under the state'sEnvironmental Technology Certification Program (ETCP). TheCalifornia Environmental Protection Agency (Cal/EPA) andLivermore signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) givingthe state access to skilled laboratory personnel andlaboratory facilities to evaluate new technologies inradioactive and hazardous waste management, site cleanup,waste minimization and pollution prevention. In 1993, thestate set up the California Environmental TechnologyPartnership (CETP) to promote research, development,commercialization and export of California-basedenvironmental technology, goods and services. ETCP wasestablished by CalEPA's Department of Toxic SubstancesControl in response to a CETP study of the state's $18billion environmental technology industry that found a needfor a simpler, less cumbersome evaluation and permitprocess. The program provides one-stop scientific andengineering evaluation of new technologies to encouragedevelopment and speed their acceptance. Contact: DanPellissier, CalEPA, (916) 324-9670.NCSL: The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)has introduced a new version of LEGISNET, NCSL's intelligentinformation retrieval system that includes theTransportation Legislative Database (TLDB). TLDB is an on-line information service containing summaries of federal,state and certain local government statutes and regulationsrelating to the transportation of radioactive materials inthe United States. TLDB is operated by NCSL under acooperative agreement with DOE's Office of CivilianRadioactive Waste Management. Contact: Bob Frohling, NCSL,1560 Broadway, Suite 700, Denver, Colo. 80202; (303) 830-2200; fax: (303) 863-8003; e-mail: bob.frohling@ncsl.org.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996DOE COMPLEXDEAR: DOE has revised its Department of Energy AcquisitionRegulation (DEAR) to codify the department's technologytransfer mission for the national laboratories and weaponsproduction facilities operated by management and operating(M&O) contractors. Details of the revised regulation appearin the Dec. 22 Federal Register or % can be purchasedthrough BPI DocuDial, 7 pp., No. 48-1106.Hanford: DOE and the Washington State Department of Ecologyseek public comments on DOE's proposal to amend the HanfordTri-Party Agreement to make it compatible with DOE'sproposal to privatization cleanup of Hanford's radioactivewaste tanks. Under the proposal, private companies willcontract with DOE to treat the wastes and return a treatedproduct to DOE. The department anticipates awarding multiplecontracts to encourage innovation and competition amongcontractors. Selected contractors will invest private fundsto design, construct and operate the facilities needed tomeet the needs of the Tank Waste Remediation Systems. DOEwill define and monitor the requirements to be met byselected contractors in order for treated tank waste to bereturned to DOE control after treatment. DOE will offerincentives to contractors to reduce immobilized wastevolumes and optimize waste loading. The first phase of theprivatization strategy will demonstrate the technical andbusiness viability of using privatized facilities to treatand immobilize the waste. The Phase One treatment facilitywill be capable of treating six to 13 percent of the low-activity tank wastes. In Phase Two, a full-scale productionfacility would be capable of processing and immobilizing theremaining waste on a schedule that would accommodateremoving waste from the single-shell tanks by 2018. Commentsare due Feb. 15. Public meetings are scheduled tentativelyfor Jan. 30 in Portland, Ore., and Feb. 1 in Richland, Wash.For more information, contact: Toby Michelena, WashingtonDepartment of Ecology, (360) 407-7144; Carolyn Haass, DOE,(509) 372-2731; or the Hanford Cleanup Hotline, (800) 321-2008.INEL: The Environmental Management Site-Specific AdvisoryBoard (SSAB) for Idaho National Engineering Laboratory willmeet Jan. 16-17 in Boise, Idaho. The purpose of the meetingis to continue discussions of DOE's prioritizations ofenvironmental management (EM) funds for fiscal year 1998.Other topics include the environmental restoration scopingprocess, prioritization of the INEL SSAB's own activitiesfor the remainder of FY '96 and participation in aneducational activity highlighting research and developmentcapabilities at INEL. Contact: Idaho National EngineeringLaboratory, (800) 708-2680, or Marsha Hardy, JasonAssociates Corp., staff support, (208) 522-1662.Los Alamos: The Environmental Management Site-SpecificAdvisory Board for Los Alamos National Laboratory will meetJan. 9 in Mora, N.M. Contact: Lisa Roybal, EM SSAB, LosAlamos National Laboratory, Northern New Mexico CommunityCollege, 1002 Onate St., Espanola, NM 87352; (800) 753-8970or (505) 753-8970.Oak Ridge: The Environmental Management Site-SpecificAdvisory Board will meet Jan. 17 and Jan. 24 in Oak Ridge,Tenn. The Jan. 24 meeting was called solely to discuss theproposed by-laws for the board. The Jan. 17 meeting willdiscuss not only the by-laws, but a report on anadministrative session held in Denver in November and atechnical presentation on results of the aerial remote-sensing survey of the Oak Ridge Reservation. Contact: SandyPerkins, Site-Specific Advisory Board Coordinator, DOE, OakRidge Operations Office, 105 Broadway, Oak Ridge, TN 37830;(423) 576-1590.UMTRA: DOE has completed cleanup of uranium mill tailingsand contaminated materials from the 61-acre abandoneduranium processing site southwest of Gunnison, Colo., underthe Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action Project (UMTRA).Some 750,000 cubic yards of contaminated material was hauledby truck to a disposal site seven miles east of the oldprocessing site. DOE and the state of Colorado jointly begancleanup of the site in 1991 with demolition of the millbuildings. The disposal cell was excavated in 1992 andtransportation of contaminated material to the cell began in1993. Cleanup activities at the mill site ended in November,and the cleaned areas were backfilled with clean soil to alevel comparable with the surrounding terrain. Constructioncrews completed work on the disposal cell cover in December.The Gunnison mill is the 16th of 24 congressionallydesignated uranium mill tailings sites to be cleaned.Business & TechnologyESRI: Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety (IDNS) decidedin 1992 to use a computerized, integrated GIS/GPS/radiationdetection system to map for remediation the former Kerr-McGee Chemical Corp. thorium milling facility in WestChicago. The department contracted with GIS Solutions Inc.,Springfield, Ill., to assemble and develop a database forthe Kerr-McGee remediation. The company also conducted theGIS analysis based on the GPS data collected in the studyarea. GIS advised IDNS to use ARC/INFO and ArcView GISsoftware from ESRI, which would allow the database to beused for project management. ESRI is a research groupfounded in 1969 to develop methods of handling georeferenceddata. It is the world leader in development of GIS software,with more than 100,000 clients worldwide. Contact: TimRunyon, IDNS, (217) 786-6365; or Bob Lindquist, GISSolutions Inc., (217) 546-3654.NUKEM GmbH of Germany has acquired ENSR Nuclear Services andENSR Nuclear Engineering, the nuclear divisions of ENSRCorp., a key U.S. hazardous waste treatment and remediationfirm. The names of the two divisions have been changed toNUKEM Nuclear Technologies Corp., with two divisions -services and engineering. NUKEM is owned by RWE AG, thefifth largest German corporation, with annual sales of morethan $45 billion. NUKEM is a world leader in engineering anddesign for the nuclear industry, including radioactive wasteprocessing and storage, decommissioning, nuclear materialshandling and processing and related services. Othercompanies in the NUKEM family include WasteChem Ltd., amajor British decommissioning company; DETEC, the leadingGerman decommissioning company; ANSA-A, a French state-of-the-art robotics company; and GNB, a German spent fuelstorage system designer. NUKEM intends use the NuclearTechnologies Corp. to introduce its nuclear technologies toDOE, DOD and the commercial nuclear market. These includeliquid and solid radioactive waste volume reduction,vitrification, pyrolysis, incineration, tritium control,spent fuel services, robotics, engineering, decommissioningand other nuclear waste services. Ruediger Koenig will serveas Nuclear Technologies Corp. president. The existing ENSRcore leadership will remain in place, including JohnRaymont, vice president; Glen Rae, national sales andmarketing manager; Robert Williams, operations manager inthe services division; Detlef Schmidt, general manager inthe engineering division; and Jim Janzen, engineeringdivision manager. Contact: Glen Rae, NUKEM NuclearTechnologies, 250 Berryhill Rd., Suite 500, Columbia, SC29210; (803) 731-1588; fax: (803) 731-8435.Holtec International and U.S. Tool and Die (UST&D) havereceived a $6-million contract to supply spent- and fresh-fuel storage equipment to the Angra Unit 1 nuclear powerplant, owned and operated by FURNAS Centrais Eletricas S.A.,headquartered in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Holtec will serveas prime contractor and UST&D will fabricate the fuelstorage equipment. The reracking will increase the unit'sin-pool fuel storage capacity from 363 storage locations to1,252. Holtec will design, license, remove and volume-reducethe existing racks and install the new racks. UST&D will beresponsible for manufacture and testing of the new racks.The racks are designed to store fuel in a discrete zone two-region storage pattern. Region 1 is designed for storingfresh fuel assemblies and Region 2 for spent fuelassemblies, taking credit for burnup. The racks will be of adetuned cellular construction so as to minimize pool slabloading under seismic conditions. Boral will be used as aneutron poison. All hardware is due to be delivered by May1997 and installation will be completed by October 1997.Contact: Christian Blessing, Holtec International, 2060Fairfax Ave., Cherry Hill, NJ 08003; (609) 424-0999, ext.620.Rust Federal Services has entered into a CooperativeResearch and Development Agreement (CRADA) with Kaiser-HillCo. LLC, operating contractor at DOE's Rocky FlatsEnvironmental Technology Site, for commercialization ofpolymer encapsulation processes for stabilizing low-levelradioactive wastes (LLW) and mixed wastes. Personnel fromRocky Flats developed a process to encapsulate LLW usinglow-density polyethylene. Under the CRADA, Rust will examinethe economic feasibility of using waste plastic in theencapsulation process. Low-density polyethylene, whichincludes post-consumer products such as coffee can andyogurt container lids, now is not recycled in Colorado. Rustis working with its affiliate, Waste Management of ColoradoInc., to determine if post-consumer plastic collection isfeasible. If it is, this could lead to full-scalecommercialization of the technology, with wide-rangingapplications at DOE sites and commercial nuclear plants.Contact: Rust International Inc., 100 Corporate Parkway,Birmingham, AL 35242-2926.SOLUTIONS Software Corp. has available a CD-ROM with all 50titles of the Code of Federal Regulations, including alltext, tables and graphics and Adobe Acrobat search-and-retrieve software, at a cost of about $1 per title. Contact:Mark Wemhoff, SOLUTIONS Software Corp., 1795 Turtle HillRoad, Enterprise, FL 32725; (407) 321-7912; fax: (407) 323-4898 or (407) 321-3098; Internet: solution@env-sol.com;World Wide Web: http://www.env.sol.com.LLW CompactsMassachusetts: The Low-Level Radioactive Waste ManagementBoard will meet Jan. 10 in Boston. The agenda includes adiscussion of possible changes in language on IndependentReview Grants contained in the Draft Volunteer SitesProgram; decommissioning of the Yankee Rowe nuclear powerplant; review of literature on very-low-dose radiationexposure; and discussion of issues surrounding disposal ofradioactive materials via release into sanitary sewersystems. Contact: The Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Low-Level Radioactive Waste Management Board, 100 Cambridge St.,Room 903, Boston, MA 02202; (617) 727-6018; fax: (617) 727-6084.Texas: The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission isrunning about a month behind in its review of the licenseapplication for a low-level waste disposal facility atSierra Blanca in west Texas, said sources in the Texas Low-Level Radioactive Waste Authority (TLLRWA). The commissionoriginally planned to complete its review by the end of theyear, but now are saying it will be the end of January.TLLRWA submitted the last three additional revisions to thelicense application requested by the commission before theend of the year. Revision 12 addressed site closure anddecommissioning; Revision 13 addressed various generaldescription changes, design criteria and features, operatingprocedures, radiological and non-radiological impacts and alist of permits the authority will have obtained prior tooperation; Revision 14 addressed the remaining questionsfrom the commission. The Natural Resources Commission didnot request any more information. Contact: Texas Low-LevelRadioactive Waste Disposal Authority, 7701 North Lamar,Suite 300, Austin, TX 78752; (512) 451-5292.Professional Development41st Annual Underground Corrosion Short Course, May 14-16,West Virginia University, Morgantown, W.Va. Course includesbasic, intermediate and advanced classes covering practical,technical information about the causes of corrosion,instrumentation, corrosion surveys, cathodic protection,pipe coatings, water and wastewater and methods of corrosioncontrol. Contact: Angela Durham; (304) 293-3745.Back to Headline List CopyrightNUCLEAR WASTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996CALENDAR   Jan. 10-11, 1996: Nuclear Waste Technical Review BoardMeeting, Las Vegas. Contact: Paula Alford, Nuclear WasteTechnical Review Board, 1100 Wilson Blvd., Suite 910,Arlington, VA 22209; (703) 235-4473.   Jan. 18, 1996: Central Interstate LLW Compact CommissionMeeting, New Orleans. Contact: Don Rabbe, Central InterstateLow-Level Radioactive Waste Commission, 1033 O St., Suite530, Lincoln, NE 68508; (402) 476-8247.   Jan. 24-26, 1996: Meeting of the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste, Rockville,Md. Contact: Richard K. Major, Chief, Nuclear Waste Branch,NRC; (301) 415-7366.   Feb. 3-6, 1996: National Governors' Association, Fajardo,Puerto Rico. Contact: National Governors' Association, 444N. Capitol St., NW, Suite 250, Washington, DC 20001; (202)624-5300.   Feb. 5-6, 1996: Canadian Nuclear Association/CanadianNuclear Society Winter Seminar, Ottawa, Ontario. Contact:Sylvie Caron, CNS Office, 144 Front St. West, Suite 725,Toronto, Ontario M5J 2L7; (416) 977-7620, ext. 18; fax:(416) 979-8356.   Feb. 25-29, 1996: Waste Management '96, Tucson, Ariz.Theme: HLW, LLW, Mixed Waste and Environmental Restoration -Working Towards a Cleaner Environment. Contact: WM SymposiaInc., 245 S. Plumer, Suite 19, Tucson, AZ 85719; (520) 624-8573; fax: (520) 792-3993.   Feb. 25-29, 1996: American Institute of ChemicalEngineers Spring National Meeting, New Orleans. Contact:AIChExpress Service Center, 345 East 47th St., New York, NY10017-2395; (800) 242-4363.   March 10-14, 1996: International Conference on NuclearEngineering, New Orleans. Sponsored by the American Societyof Mechanical Engineers and the Japan Society of MechanicalEngineers. Contact: Brian Bigalke, ASME, 345 E. 47th St.,New York, NY 10017; (212) 705-7057; fax: (212) 705-7856.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-9IA059-000325-B019-134http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev32.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002005 text/html 19160HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:18:14 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:33 GMTContent-length: 18971Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev32.html Sample Issue Copyright OIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet May 3, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Spring Cleanup Resumes on Alaska's Beaches (372 words) Bulgarian Vessel Sinks, Spills Diesel Fuel Near Stornoway, Scotland (400 words) USCG Tanker Safety Study Group Releases Final Report (203 words) US EPA Extends Compliance Dates for UST operators (362 words) ***WORLD NEWS BRIEFS*** Amoco Pipeline Ruptures in Texas (118 words) US Barge Spills 10,000 Gallons in Texas (292 words) Exxon Rejects Environmental Proposals (69 words) Judge Rules Against Limited Liability in Glacier Bay Spill (108 words) Comprehensive US Contingency Plan Review Due Out Shortly (240 words) Barge Spills 18,000 gallons of Gasoline in Kentucky (185 words) ***HOTLINE*** Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephone (83 words) CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Spring Cleanup Resumes on Alaska's Beaches     On 1 May, Exxon deployed its first five cleanup squads,totaling 100 workers from Seward and Valdez, back to the beachesin Prince William Sound, Alaska, USA.  The beaches were pollutedby nearly 11 million gallons of crude oil that spilled from thetanker Exxon Valdez in March 1989.     For the past several weeks, survey teams walked these beachesto determine both surface and subsurface oiling conditions.  Theteams -- made up of Exxon employees, state and federalrepresentatives, scientists, and land owners -- recorded theirobservations with maps, sketches, and questionnaires that askedabout location, oil coverage, oil characteristics, and theirsuggested method of cleanup.  Thus far, two out of threesurveillance phases are complete: crews have studied close to 480miles of beach in Prince William Sound and the Gulf of Alaska.The third phase will begin this week and will address theremaining priority areas in the Gulf of Alaska (86.4 miles).     At the end of each day, the groups faxed their findings backto Exxon's command center in Anchorage where a Technical AdvisoryGroup (the TAG team) in Anchorage plugged the information into adecision matrix.  The TAG teams are made up of representativesfrom Exxon, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation(ADEC), the US Coast Guard (USCG), and the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration (NOAA).     Days before cleanup was to begin, crews deployed boom inenvironmentally sensitive areas, near commercial fishing areas andwhere wildlife has begun to migrate for the spring.  The squadssent out on 1 May will begin removing tar mats and debris from:Herring Bay; Seal Island; northwest Prince William Sound; southPrince William Sound; and Kenai and the Gulf of Alaska.     Officials have not yet established a general cleanup plan,especially for subsurface oil.  The disagreement has, for the mostpart, centered around the use of bioremediation.  Though there arefew practical alternatives to bioremediation, and although theUSCG, NOAA, and Exxon agree that it is the best solution for thissummer's cleanup, ADEC, which has undergone agency personnelchanges and claims there is not enough time and information tomake a knowledgeable decision, has not yet approved its use.  ADECis expected to give its answer within the next few days.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Bulgarian Vessel Sinks, Spills Diesel Fuel Near Stornoway,Scotland     At 0022 LT on 25 April, the 2,654-ton Bulgarian motor sternfish factory ship Kondor sank three kilometers east of Kebock Head(Lat 58 0.25N, Long 06 18.4W), south of the town of Stornoway, onthe Isle of Lewis, Scotland.  The vessel, owned by OkeanskyRibolov of Bourgas, Bulgaria, was under tow following a groundingon Sgeir Graidach (Lat 57 48N, Long 06 28W).  At 1600 LT, the crewof the fishery protection vessel Sulisker confirmed that thesunken vessel was leaking diesel oil and lubricating oil.  TheKondor's masters estimated that there were 17,000 to 24,000gallons of diesel oil and 1,500 to 1,800 gallons of lubricatingoil in the vessel's bunkers.  "Although there are no estimates ofthe actual amount that has spilled thus far, all of it willeventually seep out," said Ian Stephen, an officer with theStornoway Coast Guard.     Officials were concerned about the proximity of the spill tolocal fish farms and the use of dispersants in this location, eventhough it was a "fairly light spillage," David Deas of the BritishMarine Pollution Control Unit (MPCU) in London told OSIR.  TheMPCU finally gave permission for the Sulisker to apply 2.1 cubictons of dispersant at 2145 LT on the evening of 25 April.  TheMPCU, after approval from local authorities, the NatureConservancy Council, and the Department of Agriculture andFisheries in Scotland, applied an additional four tons ofdispersants from aircraft over the next two days.  The MPCU hastaken no further action after 28 April, according to Deas.     Stephen told OSIR that the diesel fuel slick was surveyedtwice in the last two days -- once by a Coast Guard boat and onceby a Nature Conservancy boat.  Both surveys showed the 1.9- by3.7- kilometer slick to be breaking up and moving north and southaway from the coastline of the Isle of Lewis.  "There was greatconcern about the large number of fish farms in the sea lochsalong the coast," said Stephen, "but it may not be as bad asoriginally feared."     The Kondor, which was a part of a large fleet of "Klondikers"that buy mackerel and herring fish from local fishermen duringon-sea transactions, will continue to leak what remains of itsfuel oil, according to Stephen.  "It is hoped that nature willtake its course and disperse the fuel oil naturally," Deas toldOSIR.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990USCG Tanker Safety Study Group Releases Final Report     The US Coast Guard (USCG) recently released its final reportof the Tanker Safety Study Group.  The five USCG officers in thestudy group, headed by USCG Rear Admiral H.H. Bell, meant the45-page report to be an internal working document.  However, thereport, dated October 1989, was made public two weeks ago.     The report is a comprehensive review of the USCG's US andforeign tankship inspection programs, a review that has not takenplace for over a decade.  Among the problems outlined in thereport, the study group found that: there are too few inspectors,many of whom are overworked or inexperienced; present-day shipsare made with less steel and travel at higher speeds, making themmore vulnerable to cracking; and crews have been reduced, makingcrewmembers fatigued and overworked.  "The age-old problem of toofew people and not enough fully qualified inspectors still exists.These problems have been around for years although their magnitudehas increased rapidly since 1982.  Decreased budgets, manpowercuts, larger ships, more sophisticated shipboard systems, quickerturn-around times, and the shifting emphasis of USCG duties fromsafety to law enforcement have had far-reaching effects on theprogram."     For a copy of the report, contact the OSIR Hotline.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990US EPA Extends Compliance Dates for UST operators     The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recentlyextended the financial responsibility compliance dates for twopetroleum underground storage tank (UST) owners and operators.Petroleum marketers owning between 13 and 99 tanks who wererequired to comply by 26 April 1990, now have until 26 April 1991.Those owning between one and 12 USTs, those having fewer than 100at one site, non-marketers with less than $20 million tangible networth, and local governments have until 26 October 1991 to complyinstead of 26 October 1990.     The requirements fall under subtitle I of the ResourceConservation and Recovery Act, which demands that owners andoperators of USTs meet certain financial responsibilities incleanup and third-party damages resulting from leaks.  Petroleummarketers owning 1,000 or more USTs and non-marketers with morethan $20 million in tangible net worth were required to comply inJanuary 1989; and petroleum marketers owning between 100 and 999USTs were required to comply in October 1989.     The EPA recognizes that those in the third and fourthcompliance groups, however, need more time to comply.  Many ofthem cannot obtain insurance because they cannot meet insurers'underwriting requirements.  "We heard loud and clear ... aboutunnecessary hardships that would be imposed by the earliercompliance dates," said EPA Administrator William K. Reilly.  "Insome cases, the affected service station or store is the onlyavailable facility for miles around and without adequate assurancefunding would have had to close.  The challenge we face along withCongress and the states is to protect groundwater and theenvironment from leaking USTs while making sure that mom-and-popgas stations and other small operators are not subjected toneedless economic hardships because of real problems in securingthe required insurance arrangements.  This is a problem that weintend to solve in order to make this important program succeed."     To date, 34 states have enacted legislation creating stateassurance funds to help owners comply with the requirements and toclean up releases.  However, the EPA has approved only seven ofthese to be used as compliance mechanisms.  The states and the EPAwill use the additional time to approve the funds and make themoperational.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Amoco Pipeline Ruptures in Texas     On 24 April, an Amoco pipeline ruptured and spilled anestimated 50,000 gallons of crude oil into Millsap Lake, inMillsap, Texas, USA.  Amoco spotted the four-inch-thick slick fromthe air, and immediately hired local contractors to begin cleanupefforts with sorbent booms and vacuum trucks.  Though workersplaced boom around the water intakes, heavy rains and localflooding caused some oil and sorbent pads to be washed past thebooms and into the nearby Brazos River.  The Texas Department ofHealth sampled the lake water, which services 300 customers, anddetermined that Millsap's water requirements can be safely met byadjusting the water intake to a depth of 30-48 inches.  Officialsexpect environmental damage to be minimal.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990US Barge Spills 10,000 Gallons in Texas     The 246-foot US tank barge MGM 2001 leaked approximately10,000 gallons of #2 diesel fuel into the Colorado River at theWay Energy dock, Texas City, Texas, USA, on 22 April.  Workersfrom Georgia Transporters of Panama City, Florida, USA -- theoperator of the tug that was pulling both the MGM 2001 and the MGM2002 -- noticed the leak near the #1 starboard tank.  Diversconfirmed reports of a crack three to ten inches wide and five tosix feet long.  The barge carried a total of 500,000 gallons.     The tug's operator first contacted the two companies in thearea, Way Energy and Hoechst Celanese Chemical, for assistance.Celanese sent out about 300 feet of boom until Martin Gas Marine,the owner of the barges, hired Garner Environmental Services ofHouston, Texas, to set up an additional 2,500 feet of containmentand sorbent boom around the barge, and at two locations across theentrance to the Colorado River turning basin.  With the help ofsorbent pads and sweeps and vacuum trucks, crews were able torecover about 44,000 gallons of oil/water.  Salvage crews pumpedthe remaining oil in the tank to barge MGM 2002.  "This cleanupwent better than the one a month ago in Freeport, Texas (OSIR, 29March)," Richard Rhodes, USCG investigation officer in charge ofpollution, told OSIR.  "This time we had better weather and tides ... and it was in an ideal area.  In the Freeport spill, thetides switched three times on us."     The barge is currently undergoing permanent repairs at theChannel Shipyard in Channelview, Texas.  An investigation into thecause of the accident is underway.  "The captain says he didn'thit anything," said Rhodes, "but I can't imagine how that crackgot there."Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Exxon Rejects Environmental ProposalsAt Exxon's annual shareholders meeting on 25 April in Houston,Texas, USA (OSIR, 24 April), Exxon overwhelmingly rejected sixproposals by a small portion of the 1,850 shareholders present toestablish "responsible" environmental policies, including aproposal to adopt the "Valdez Principles," a set of corporateguidelines to safeguard the environment.  Exxon further impliedthat the company has no intention of voluntarily replacing itstanker fleet with double-hulled vessels.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Judge Rules Against Limited Liability in Glacier Bay Spill     US District Court Judge H. Russel Holland recently ruled thatthe owner (Trinidad Shipping Co.) and operators of the tankerGlacier Bay, which spilled 160,000 gallons of crude oil into CookInlet, Alaska, USA, in 1987 may not limit their liability to $6.6million, the value of the ship and its cargo, under the LiabilityLimitation Act of 1851.  In its complaint, Trinidad claimed thatthe 1851 law held precedence over the Trans-Alaska PipelineAuthorization Act (TAPAA), which holds a spiller liable for $14million and the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund liable foranother $86 million.  But Holland ruled that TAPAA repealed theLimitation Act in this instance.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Comprehensive US Contingency Plan Review Due Out Shortly     In an October 1989 US General Accounting Office study on theadequacy of preparation and response of the US Coast Guard (USCG)to the Exxon Valdez oil spill, the USCG reported that it hadinitiated a nationwide study of contingency plans, "because of thePresident's concern about the nation's ability to respond to majorspills."     The USCG study has since evolved into a review by the entirefederal government including the fourteen agencies that make upthe National Response Team -- the Environmental Protection Agency,the Department of Defense, the Department of Energy, theDepartment of Commerce, the Department of Agriculture, theDepartment of Transportation, the State Department, the Departmentof Labor, the Department of Justice, the Department of Health andHuman Services, the Department of the Interior, the FederalEmergency Management Administration, the Nuclear RegulatoryCommission -- and all the USCG Regional Response Teams, accordingto Commander Doug Lentsch of the USCG Chief Pollution ResponseBranch in Washington, DC, USA.  The review includes a total of 75reports from these various agencies.  "It will be a snapshot intime, as to where we stood at the time the report was done,"Lentsch told OSIR.  "The basis of it is well-founded.  What thepoliticians will do with it is unknown."  According to Lentsch,the nationwide US contingency plan review, still awaiting thesignatures of the Environmental Protection Agency and theSecretary of Transportation, is due out in a few weeks.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Barge Spills 18,000 gallons of Gasoline in Kentucky     On 23 April, the 206-foot US barge Chotin 2880 struck asubmerged object and spilled an estimated 18,000 gallons ofunleaded gasoline while mooring at the Southern States Petroleumfacility on the Ohio River, Owensboro, Kentucky, USA.  Accordingto the USCG Marine Safety Office in Louisville, Kentucky, thesubmerged object, believed to be a "D" ring off of the mooringcell, caused an 18-inch by 2-inch crack in the vessel's hull,approximately six inches below the waterline.  Although crewssmelled gasoline, they did not observe a sheen, since most of thegasoline evaporated in the warm weather.  A local cooperative,Owensboro Cooperative, deployed boom around the vessel andoffloaded the remaining product.  The lightering of the vesselcaused the crack to rise above the waterline, which stopped thedischarge.  The vessel is currently on its way to Owensboro RiverService for permanent repairs.     To prevent barges from hitting the "D" rings in the future,USCG Lt. Terry Hoover told OSIR, the local towing company willinstall fenders between the barges and the mooring cells andSouthern States will weld metal beams outside the mooring cells.Back to Headline List CopyrightOIL SPILL INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetMay 3, 1990Editor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephoneEditor's note: OSIR subscribers may now call me on a new telephoneline.  Please make note of the new number: 1-617-641-5110 -- A.S. . . . Exxon recently pleaded not guilty to federal chargesstemming from the Exxon Valdez oil spill.  The company will go ontrial 18 June . . . If you need more information on these briefnotes or any article in this issue, contact the OSIR Hotline; Tel:1-617-641-5110 or 617-648-8700; Fax: 1-617-648-8707; Tlx: 650 1009891 MCI UW.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-10IA059-000325-B019-157http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev46.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002024 text/html 7052HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:18:41 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:37 GMTContent-length: 6864Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev46.html Sample Issue Copyright OZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ------------------------------ New Ozone Depleter Suit to be Filed (211 words) --------------- Industry Urges Contractors to Make Phaseout Plans (330 words) DuPont Says It Will Phase Out HCFCs 10 Years Early (332 words) CopyrightOZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996New Ozone Depleter Suit to be FiledThe Environmental Law Foundation (ELF), U.S. Public InterestResearch Group (PIRG), Earthday 2000 and Ozone Action will file suit January 6, 1996, against refrigerator manufacturers Maytag and Sanyo and their retailers Montgomery Ward, Circuit City and Basic Living Products. The suit alleges that the parties are in violation of the Clean Air Act in failing to label products manufactured with and containing CFCs.The Clean Air Act states that all products containing ormanufactured with CFC must be labeled to warn consumers that thechlorfluorocarbons are harmful to public health and the environment.  Manufacturers Amana, GE and Whirlpool replaced CFCs with HCFCs in their refrigerators. As a result of another recent settlement with ELF, Ozone Action and Earthday 2000, these three manufacturers are required to halt all advertising that their HCFC refrigerators are "ozone free" or "CFC free."According to ELF associate attorney Christine Mailloux, "TheCFC-containing refrigerators sold by Maytag and Sanyo pose far moreof a public threat than those containing HCFCs. Especially with other manufacturers selling HCFC-based models in the same stores, it is imperative that Maytag, Sanyo and their retailers comply with federal law to help consumers make more environmentally conscious decisions."For details contact Kalee Krieder at 202/265-6738.(OZONE ACTION RELEASE: 12/21)Back to Headline List CopyrightOZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Industry Urges Contractors to Make Phaseout PlansAs the CFC phaseout takes effect, heating, ventilation and air conditioning industry contractors are being urged to make good ontheir New Year's resolutions to start a retrofit/replacement program and to do it now.Even though the use of equipment using CFCs is still legitimate, the cost of the refrigerant will continue to climb as time passes.  End users who have not looked at their options for phasing out equipment that uses CFCs will "have to think about the future," says Tom Crane, manager of communications for fluorine products of AlliedSignal Chemicals.Melody Dixon-Brown, marketing communications program manager forDuPont Fluoro-products warns that complacency is the major problem."It's prudent to have a transition plan," she said.  At the beginning of 1996, Dixon-Brown estimates that three million commercial refrigeration systems and 67,000 centrifugal chillers in the U.S. will still operate on CFCs, representing $135 billion of refrigeration and a/c equipment.Dixon-Brown predicts that those still operating CFC-using productswill begin running into serious shortages within two to five years.Speaking for Elf Atochem, Harold Lamb, business manager for refrigerants is not so sanguine: "I suspect we'll see spot shortages during the next year," said Lamb, who predicts shortages may become acute by 1997.  The tax on CFCs in the U.S. is now $5.35 per pound and will rise again in 1996.Supermarkets in particular need to investigate options after takinginventory of their existing equipment and its projected life,manufacturers advise.  Retrofitting can be expensive but even changing to the use of more costly HFCs over HCFCs makes sense when equipment can expect a long service life since the refrigerant is not due to be phased out.  In some cases it will, in the long run, be less expensive to replace equipment entirely, the industry advises.  The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and DuPont suggest that the time to convince customers to switch to alternative refrigerants is during routine service jobs.(RSES JOURNAL: DECEMBER 1995, p.24)Back to Headline List CopyrightOZONE DEPLETION NETWORK ONLINE TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996DuPont Says It Will Phase Out HCFCs 10 Years EarlyDuPont, in an effort to stem criticism of its production of ozonedestroying products, says it will phase out HCFCs 10 years earlierthan the Montreal Protocol requires.Earl Clark, senior refrigerant engineer for the company's CFC Retrofit Program announced the plan at the Mechanical Service Contractors of America's 10th annual conference in San Antonio recently.  Under the Protocol, a 100 percent phaseout of HCFC production is called for by 2030.  DuPont says it will discontinue sale of R-22 in new equipment by January 1, 2020.  The company, according to Clark, is working on an "aggressive industry program for R-22 replacements" to be in use by that date.The gradual phaseout planned from 1996 through 2030 will probably be accomplished in Europe by 2015, Clark said.  The Clean Air Act nowsays that a loss of 15 percent of HCFCs used in industrial air conditioning units of 50 pounds or more constitutes a violation and that fines of up to 25,000 per day may be levied by the EPA.DuPont remains an advocate of HCFC in centrifugal and screwchillers, however, along with residential air conditioners,commercial and transport refrigeration and in heat pumps.  DuPont says advantages of R-22 include low toxicity and  ozone depletion potential (ODP) 20 times lower than R-11 or R-12.HCFC-123, said Clark, is vital to DuPont's success, and points outthat its ODP and global warming potential (GWP) are far lower thanany other refrigerant.  The company also revealed that a two-year inhalation study completed in 1991 indicated that the benign tumors found in lab animals had "little relevance to man."  HCFC-123 is DuPont's replacement for R-11 since their operating characteristics are similar and the same lubricants can be used.DuPont is now producing HFC-134a as its replacement for R-12 andR-500 in centrifugal and screw chillers.  The product's ODP and GWPare 0.0 and 0.28 compared with R-12's ODP OF 1.0 and its GWP of 3.0.(ACHR NEWS: 12/18, p.17)Back to Headline List WT03-B37-11IA059-000325-B019-197http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev04.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002052 text/html 102368HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:18:54 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:22 GMTContent-length: 102178Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev04.html Sample Issue Copyright RADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNet September 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HEALTH BEAT PARENTAL CELL DAMAGE MAY BE LINKED TO ALPHA RADIATION EXPOSURE (259 words) RADON IN WATER ADVISORY BOARD CRITICIZES EPA WATER GUIDELINES (242 words) VIEWPOINT ANSWERING QUESTIONS ABOUT RADON TESTING AND MITIGATION (811 words) NEW LANDAUER RELO PROGRAM RAISES MANY QUESTIONS (1088 words) NEWS BRIEFS INTERNATIONAL RADON SYMPOSIUM SET FOR SEPTEMBER 1992 (45 words) RADON DOCUMENTARY TO AIR AGAIN (57 words) AD COUNCIL DEVELOPS NEW PUBLIC SERVICE RADON CAMPAIGN (64 words) DOW CORNING HALTS SALE OF "FIRE STOP" (95 words) BOWSER-MORNER OPENS NEW CALIBRATION FACILITY (111 words) ATTORNEYS SAY IAQ LITIGATION GROWING FAST (183 words) RELOCATION COUNCIL INTRODUCES DISCLOSURE FORM (36 words) CLINTONS' TO TEST THEIR ARKANSAS MANSION THIS FALL (47 words) RESEARCH FAMILY PET MAY BE "WATCH DOG" FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS (721 words) MITIGATION NEWS CARBON MONOXIDE, BACKDRAFTING ISSUES ADDRESSED (1236 words) RADON AND BACKDRAFTING: AN ADDENDUM TO EPA MITIGATION STANDARDS (54 words) INDOOR AIR POLLUTION FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HALT BOGUS AIR FILTER CLAIMS (364 words) RADON FACTS RADON AND CIGARETTE SMOKING (32 words) LEGAL NEWS RADON HAS ITS DAY IN MARYLAND COURT (370 words) CERCLA: EPA ISSUES RULE ON LENDER LIABILITY (367 words) REAL ESTATE HOME BUYER'S AND SELLER'S GUIDE TO RADON: REVIEW (610 words) DRAFT EPA RADON TESTING PROTOCOLS (332 words) RADON MAPPING EPA "GEOLOGICAL PROBABILITY OF ELEVATED INDOOR RADON" MAP DISTRIBUTED, CRITICIZED (242 words) LEGISLATIVE UPDATE RADON LEGISLATION AND RELOCATION PROPERTY TRANSFERS (2451 words) HR 3258 REVIEWERS MAKE COMMENTS, SHARE CONCERNS (1158 words) CALENDAR OF RADON EVENTS SEPTEMBER (38 words) OCTOBER (51 words) RADON QUOTES DISCLOSURE AND RADON. WHAT THE RELOCATION INDUSTRY SAYS (40 words) EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW: GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE SECTOR RESPONSES ARE VARIED (1437 words) RADON FACTS RADON LUNG CANCER DEATHS AVERTED PER YEAR AFTER IMPLEMENTATION OF RADON_RESISTANT BUILDING CODES (24 words) RISK ASSESSMENT THE CHANGING FACE OF RISK ASSESMENT (298 words) RADON NEWS HEADLINES School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools is (38 words) Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states to (17 words) Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a (16 words) New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams will (35 words) RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program. (27 words) RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants. (7 words) Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of final (21 words) EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on the (49 words) LETTERS READER'S VIEWS (937 words) CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992PARENTAL CELL DAMAGE MAY BE LINKED TO ALPHA RADIATIONEXPOSUREThe possibility that exposure to ionizing alpha radiation may damagedescendent human cells could help explain the "Gardner Phenomena,"in which cases of children's leukemia are believed to have beencaused by father's employment at a British nuclear facility.Scientists now have some reason to believe alpha radiation emittedby radon and plutonium may be responsible for those chromosomalabberations.These findings, however, are extremely controversial because theychallenge traditional knowledge and involve scientists leaping fromone biological principle to another in order to make their case.The scientists examining alpha radiation and its effects linkedleukemia among children to their fathers, who worked at a nuclearfuel reprocessing plant. Research data indicate increased risk ofleukemia (six to eight times) in the offspring of fathers receivingtotal radiation does of 100 millisieverts or greater prior toconception.From examining the results of laboratory tests, the researchersbelieve they have found an unexpected mechanism associated withalpha radiation -- chromosomal abberations which occur in anapparently random fashion -- in descendent cells. The chromosomalabberations shed new light on the potential damage alpha radiationmay cause."If a comparable phenomena could be demonstrated in spermatogonial(sperm forming) stem cells," says researcher Eric Wright, "then itis possible that a similar abberation could arise in sperm."Whilst our experiments don't actually address the GardnerPhenomena," Wright says, "they do offer a biological mechanismworth thinking about if you are going to take the alleged paternaltransmission of radiation damage seriously."  Wright is researchleader at the British Medical Research Council's Radiobiology Unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992ADVISORY BOARD CRITICIZES EPA WATER GUIDELINESGuidelines created by the U.S. EPA to assist public water utilitiesdispose of wastes created during the radionuclide removal processneed more work, according to EPA's own Science Advisory Board(SAB). The SAB Radiation Advisory Committee says it's worriedEPA's non-binding guidelines will "by default ... become thestandard."According to committeeman Richard G. Sextro, in the absence of"specific" federal regulations, EPA's guidelines for removingradioactive wastes from treated drinking water will be viewed as astandard and cause states to spend billions of dollars to comply.Greg Helms of EPA's Office of Ground Water says the agency doesn'thave authority to "require" anything specific regarding disposal oftreated ground water waste.A 27-member California congressional delegation says it disagreeswith EPA's proposed radon in water rule. In a letter to PresidentBush, the group called EPA's proposed rule "very stringent andcostly," adding that the $3.7 billion compliance price tag will onlyreduce "on average, about one percent of the public's total exposureto radon according to EPA's Science Advisory Board." Californiarepresentatives asked Bush to direct EPA Administrator WilliamReilly to conduct a full multi-media risk assessment in order toproduce a comprehensive cost effective radon reduction program forthe U.S.The delegates also asked Bush to direct EPA to adopt a radon indrinking water standard consistent with the goals of the IndoorRadon Abatement Act of 1988.Contact: Scott Abel (317) 843-0804Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992ANSWERING QUESTIONS ABOUT RADON TESTING AND MITIGATIONRecently I spoke at a radon meeting sponsored by the National CivicLeague. A number of county health officials and neighborhood housinggroups were in attendance. The meetingTs purpose was to develop aradon action plan designed to reach local communities. But, itbecame clear early in the meeting that neither of these groups had avery good grasp of basic radon fundamentals, nor were theyconvinced there was a radon problem in their area.I'm sure they aren't much different than any average American. Yes,they've heard of radon, but radon is a problem in someone else'shome or neighborhood, not in their's.EPA has been trying since 1988 to convince the public radon is aserious health threat. Their efforts have probably made them feelmuch like the "boy who cried wolf" because nobody seems to bepaying attention. Government officials have known the danger ofradon exposure for many years. In fact, in the early 1940's the U.S.Public Health Service warned the Atomic Energy Commission aboutradon and its threat to uranium miners. Unfortunately, theCommission chose to ignore the warnings, and as taxpayers, we arenow compensating the miners' families for their exposure.As you may know, radon didn't make headlines until it became a"crisis" in the home of Stanley Watras. He and his family wereforced to vacate their house until their radon problem could becorrected. When you stop to think about it, radon is still that way inthe majority of homes. Until someone moves, there is no radoncrisis, even if they know it is there!My company has tested thousands of homes for radon. But more-often-than-not, when home owners learn they have elevated levelsthey usually don't take any action to lower their exposure. Initiallythey might be concerned enough to start calling local "experts" untilthey find someone who will calm their fears and tell them not toworry. It seems the only time radon indeed becomes a crisis whichleads to action is when it comes time to sell a home. When sellersbecome buyers, however, they are far more likely to insist on lowradon levels. Ironic? Perhaps. But, it's not such a bad situation,because two houses get fixed as a result of the original transaction.Radon isn't really much different than other health-related issues.We generally don't do anything until we are forced to do so. Doctorstell us we must lower our cholesterol, quit smoking, loose weight,etc. or we may face the possibility of premature death. Look at thechange AIDS has brought to our society due to the tremendous feargenerated by public information. EPA took a lot of heat last yearover their public service ad campaign. The sad thing is the mostsevere criticism of the campaign was due to a set of billboardsdeclaring "Radon is a Severe Risk in this Area" showing an X-Ray ofa pair of lungs. Some who saw the ads said they were "scared" thevisability of the ads would lower their property values. They couldcare less, it seems, about the health risk radon poses.I'm not a health physicist, but I do review a lot of scientificinformation about radon that seems to validate the old adage "wherethere is smoke, there is fire." Some researchers now believe radonexposure may cause damage to genes that prevent tumors. Othersreport possible links to leukemia, cancer of the liver, breast andbrain. I know there are those who will read these words and respondwith "show me the bodies." Although that evidence may be providedin the future, until it is, we will just have to "smell the smoke."When I was a small child, I can remember seeing ads with doctorsadvertising Lucky Strikes and Chesterfields. When scientists beganraising the possibility that cigarette smoking might cause lungcancer, other experts derided their research saying "prove it." But Iask, where are those critics now?The funny thing about radon is that the actions of one lawyer may besaving more lives than the efforts of all health professionalscombined. Several years ago, Dick Mansfield, chief attorney for theEmployee Relocation Council, began evaluating environmentalpollutants. He issued a white paper in the late 1980's advising allmembers of the relocation industry to test homes for radon beforetaking them into inventory. He has since been criticized for thatdecision but remains resolute in his position. Even though hisdirection was designed to protect corporations against futureliability, the end result is that he may be responsible for savingthousands of lives over the next decade or two. Ironic, isn't it, butthen again, pioneers always seem to get arrows in their backs.Richard Jordan - Editor & Publisher, Radon News Digest.Contact: (317) 843-0804Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992NEW LANDAUER RELO PROGRAM RAISES MANY QUESTIONSDespite less than favorable sales of radon detectors over the pastseveral years, Glenwood, Illinois-based Landauer, Inc. has reason tobe excited about radon. The AMEX-listed corporation recently rolledout a new testing and mitigation program designed to help relocationcompanies reduce administrative costs while increasing Landauer'sshare of the radon detector market. According to company brochures,the program would take the "corporation, relocation company,transferee and real estate agent out of the testing and mitigationprocess."Landauer calls their new relocation marketing scheme the HomeBuyer's Preferred Radon Protection Program. It is a novel idea withpotential. In fact, at first glance, I'm sure it sounds very attractiveto relocation administrators, many of which are alreadyoverburdened by increasing environmental concerns.HERE'S HOW IT WORKSThe Landauer plan is sold as a service agreement provided by thecorporation or relocation company to the buyer at closing. Afterclosing is completed, Landauer sends the buyer a RADTRAK( alphatrack detector (manufactured by Landauer), which the buyer deploysin the home, removing and returning it to Landauer after 120 days.Landauer analyzes the device and provides results to the buyer, nowthe owner of the home.If levels of radon gas of 4 pCi/l or higher are detected by Landauer,the home will be mitigated by a Landauer selected mitigator at nocost to the buyer or relocation company. Landauer provides for post-mitigation testing "to confirm the radon concentration has beenreduced to below 4 pCi/l."WHAT'S THE PROBLEM?Company brochures tout Landauer's RADTRAK long-term  alpha trackdetector as the type of test kit "recommended by the EPA," addingthat short-term tests "may produce a false positive or negativeresulting in unneccessary mitigation, or worse, an undetected healthhazard."Landauer ought to know a lot about "false" test results. Rememberthe Landauer Quick Screen( detector? That device, also touted bythe company as reliable, was sold all over the United States to anunknown number of consumers and yet never managed to pass EPAproficiency tests. In fact, according to officials with the company,Landauer never bothered to alert those consumers who relied on theQuick Screen that their test results might not be accurate. Somestates, like Pennsylvania, ordered the device off retail shelves andout of the state.In addition, Landauer's ability to provide accurate results have beencalled into question once again. According to the EPA, the company'smost recent attempt to pass their alpha track detector through theRMP failed. According to EPA staffers, Landauer has been "delisted"from the U.S. EPA's RMP program for failing to pass the latest roundof blind tests. Will Landauer fail to notify recent RADTRAKcustomers as well?SOMETHING IS WRONG WITH THIS PICTUREAlthough Landauer's program seems to be a great potential money-maker for the company and its stockholders, it deserves scrutiny bythe radon and relocation industries.For starters, it is commonly believed that the soon-to-be-released"Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" will not "recommend"long-term test devices, but rather, short-term tests, when testingis performed as a result of a real property transfer. As a majorplayer in the industry, Landauer  should have planned their marketingmaterials to reflect this.Second, Landauer shouldn't be in the radon business if they can'tmeet EPA proficiency standards. That's just asking for trouble. Andnot just for the company, but for the entire radon and relocationindustries. Negative media coverage of radon service companies likeLandauer, who fail to meet EPA criteria, yet continue to offerservices to the public, can damage the credibility of the entire radonindustry, giving the public another reason not to test or mitigate.Third, Landauer's plan, although perfectly legal, leaves itscustomers open to intense scrutiny, and perhaps, liability. AlthoughLandauer's Brett Ladda describes the program as "no different thangoing to the doctor" (Landauer provides the test, analyzes it,remediates if necessary and then provides a confirmatory test andresults, similar to physicians who both examine patients andprescribe treatment), the plan does not provide enough details to beattractive to the relocation industry. For instance, who will auditthe test results? How can homeowners be assured that Landauerdevices will detect radon without a confirmatory reading from anindependent firm of their choice? What does Landauer know aboutmitigation? What experience do they have mitigating homes? Howwill they ensure their "network" of mitigation contractors willactually do the job right -- and that their work will meet EPAstandards? And, perhaps more importantly, do they guarantee theirwork?A GOOD IDEA, BUT POORLY PLANNEDAlthough the concept of the Landauer plan is not such a bad ideafrom a consumer savings point of view, choosing Landauer foranything radon-related could be a mistake for a corporation orrelocation company. It's a public relations disaster waiting tohappen. For instance, if one of Landauer's RADTRAK detectors werediscovered to have performed poorly, the media would first point toLandauer as "the fox guarding the henhouse," comparing thecompany's service agreements with those currently under firebetween physicians, insurance companies and home health careproviders.Good reporters would then do a "history" of Landauer, pointing outthe company's size, revenues, other business dealings,  the QuickScreen fiasco and the company's current delisting. Landauer and itsclients would be portrayed in a negative light.The way I see it, Landauer has two options. One -- Landauer couldstop pretending to be a radon service company.  After passing EPAproficiency tests, Landauer could begin making improvements to itsplan to make it more marketable.Two -- Landauer could drop out of the radon testing and mitigationindustry altogether.  The companyTs error-ladden radon efforts arenothing but a liability. Its past record speaks for itself. Today,Landauer is still attempting to sell its new testing and mitigationplan to a fictional corporate America . They call the plan "the nohassles solution to radon" -- as if hassles top the corporaterelocation gripe list. In the real world of radon and relocation,liability is of more concern. And, liability concerns can only be putto rest when all environmental defects have been disclosed. Withoutaddressing disclosure, the Landauer plan falls short of "preferred"and offers little "protection" to anyone.Scott Abel is associate editor of Radon News Digest and president ofReincarnate Marketing and Design Group, Indianapolis. Abel, afreelance journalist, has been an observer of the radon industrysince 1987. Contact: (317) 843-0804.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992INTERNATIONAL RADON SYMPOSIUM SET FOR SEPTEMBER 1992"Assessing the Risk," the 1992 International Symposium on Radonand Radon Reduction Technology, September 22-25, 1992, SheratonPark Place Hotel, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Sponsored by the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency and the Conference of RadiationControl Program Directors. Contact: Diana Fry (502) 227-4543.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON DOCUMENTARY TO AIR AGAINThe American Medical Association and EPA have joined together toproduce a half-hour documentary on radon. The program has airedseveral times already this year and is scheduled to be shown againOctober, 10, at 12:30 p.m. on cabel channel CNBC. Copies of the videoalso are available by calling 800-933-4AMT. ($29.95)Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992AD COUNCIL DEVELOPS NEW PUBLIC SERVICE RADON CAMPAIGNThe Advertising Council is in the process of developing new TVpublic service announcements due to be released in mid-August ofthis year.According to the Council, radon hotline volume is one way to assessthe impact of the advertising campaigns to date. Recent hotlinevolume (Jan-July 1992) included 43,033 calls, twice as many callsas were logged in all of 1991.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992DOW CORNING HALTS SALE OF "FIRE STOP"Dow Corning recently withdrew its "Fire Stop Intumescent WrapStrip 2002" from the market. Recent testing of the wrap striprevealed what the company calls "some performance limitations"which develop as the product ages.Dow Corning says it will no longer sell the product and advisescontractors and suppliers to return all unused wrap strip forreplacement. The company is looking into whether or not retrofitswill be necessary "in homes where Dow Corning Wrap Strippreviously had been installed."For more information contact: Greg Whitaker (517) 496-8378 orDave Horschig (517) 496-5206.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992BOWSER-MORNER OPENS NEW CALIBRATION FACILITYBowser-Morner, Inc., an independent, accredited testing facility inDayton, Ohio, has opened a commercial radon calibration laboratorythe company says is identical to the chambers used by the U.S. EPAin size, air flow, temperature, humidity controls, radon source,monitoring methods and equipment.The lab's quality assurance program features periodic datacomparisons with both EPA environmental laboratories inMontgomery, Alabama and Las Vegas, Nevada; and the Department ofEnergy's Environmental Measurements Laboratory in New York.Editor's Note: Commercialcalibration facilities calibratemeasurement devices for radon service providers. The quality ofcalibrations conducted for radon service providers affects theaccuracy of radon measurement results provided to consumers(Source U.S. EPA).Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992ATTORNEYS SAY IAQ LITIGATION GROWING FASTAccording to attorneys interviewed by Indoor Air Quality Update(IAQU), the courts have seen a tremendous increase in indoor airquality (IAQ) lawsuits. The attorneys say as plaintiffs' interest inIAQ lawsuits rise, so too will the interest and attention of thedesign and construction industries.Attorneys interviewed by the monthly trade journal say thatalthough many past lawsuits have centered around residentialpollutants, the focus is now shifting. In the future, they predict,more and more IAQ lawsuits will center on commerical, industrialand multi-family residential properties.Building designers, construction contractors and building operators,attorneys say, should ensure the safety of their tenants by testingfor the presence of all possible known contaminants and routinelyinspecting HVAC systems for problems.Frank Cross, author of "Legal Responses to Indoor Air Pollution"says, "Most building managers are hesitant to do this, in part,because they may not want to know, and in part because they don'twant to unnecessarily alarm their tenants. "But if they want toavoid future litigation," Cross told IAQU, "this (testing and HVACinspections) could make a big difference."Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RELOCATION COUNCIL INTRODUCES DISCLOSURE FORMThe relocation industry introduced a homeowner's disclosurestatement at this year's Corporate Relocation Council meeting inChicago. The homeowner disclosure statement is a form designed fortransferees to disclose any known housing problems, including radongas.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992CLINTONS' TO TEST THEIR ARKANSAS MANSION THIS FALLAccording to Clinton/Gore media relations associates, Democraticpresidential candidate, Gov. Bill Clinton, will test the Arkansasgovernor's mansion for radon this fall. Clinton staffers say thecandidate is aware of the radon problem, and, if elected, would helpfocus more attention on indoor air quality issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992FAMILY PET MAY BE "WATCH DOG" FOR ENVIRONMENTAL RISKSMan's best friend might also be his best doctor. "The family dog andother pets can be ideal sentinels of health hazards in yourenvironment," says researcher Dr. Lawrence T. Glickman of PurdueUniversity's School of Veternary Medicine. "Now, for the first time,a state health department is considering using animals to helpidentify human diseases caused by environmental factors, in hopesof spotting health problems before they happen or diagnosing themwhen they do."North Carolina is considering such a system, following a Mayconference at which Glickman and other public-health expertsexplored the possibility.Glickman and Dr. Ralph C. Richardson, also of the Purdue School ofVeternary Medicine, say using animals as health sentinels hasseveral advantages."Pets are ideal health sentinels because they intimately share thesame environment as their owners and often eat the same things,"says Glickman, an epidemiologist and head of the Department ofVeternary Pathobiology.Richardson, professor of small animal medicine and oncology andhead of Purdue's Department of Veternary Clinical Sciences, says,"Dogs acquire diseases sooner because of their shorter lifespans.This gives us a chance to perhaps figure out why a disease develops,thereby allowing owners to take preventative measures forthemselves and for the other animals in the environment."Two years ago Glickman chaired the National Academy of Sciences'Committee on   Animals as Monitors of Environmental Hazards,which reviewed and evaluated the usefulness of animal studies inassessing health risks for people.The committee found that although many scientists view animalsentinels as valuable indicators of environmental hazards, theapproach has not been widely accepted. Part of the reason, Glickmansays, is that such studies rely on epidemiology as the basic tool, andthat the science is relatively new. Epidemiology is the study of howdisease develops and spreads into a population.Another reason, Glickman says, is that many government fundingagencies are unaware of the value of such animal studies. "But Ihope that the report might help legitimize this approach," he says.The committee published its report last summer. One of the group'srecommendations was to require the reporting of environmentallycaused animal diseases to appropriate state or federal agencies,which would allow the data collected to be shared with public healthofficials."It's done for infectious diseases like rabies, so it just makes senseto do it for something like bladder cancer, which can affect people,too," Glickman notes.The report also recommended making the best use of animal-exposure and disease record systems via computer not only forcompanion animals and livestock, but also fish and wildlife. Inaddition, the report noted more and more veternary and biologicalsciences schools are offering courses and graduate programs inepidemiology, with an  emphasis on environmental health.Glickman has done several animal-sentinel studies, including one onbreast cancer and diet in dogs. Another study linked bladder cancerin dogs to owners' using flea and tick dips on the animals and livingnear areas sprayed with insecticides.Glickman also is part of a Purdue study of dogs to assess theirowners' exposure to radon gas in the home. The first phase of theresearch involved attaching radon detection collars to about 30 petdogs in Tippecanoe County, Indiana, to measure home radon levels.Phase one has been completed and researchers hope to obtain fundingfor phase two, which will compare radon levels in homes of dogswith lung cancer and a control group without cancer from the sameneighborhood.Purdue's Comparative Oncology Program, which seeks novel andeffective ways to treat animals afflicated with cancer, includes atumorregistry of tissue samples suspected of being cancerous.The programTs most recent work on animals as human healthsentinels found owners of dogs with cancer used 2, 4-D herbicide ontheir lawns and/or used a lawn-care company about one-third moreoften than did owners of dogs without the disease. Maligantlymphoma in dogs is very similar to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma inpeople. 2, 4-D also is one of the components in Agent Orange, thedefoliant used during the Vietnam War."We definitely want to help animals with better diagnosis andtreatment," says Richardson. "But the dream is to use animals thatmay have been exposed to environmental hazards as sentinels forhow cancer develops in people."By Ellen Rantz.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992CARBON MONOXIDE, BACKDRAFTING ISSUES ADDRESSEDThere is a risk of carbon monoxide poisoning in any building withfuel burning equipment. In some buildings this risk is essentially nil,such as houses that use electricity for home and water heating,clothes drying, and cooking and that do not have attached garageswhere gasoline engines may be operated. In other buildings, the riskof carbon monoxide poisoning is also very low, such as houses withnewer, high-efficiency, closed-combustion furnaces, boilers, orwater heaters. However, the overwhelming majority of houses haveboilers, fireplaces, furnaces and water heaters that use house air tosupport combustion and depend upon traditional chimneys or flues tovent combustion products to the outdoors. When combustion productsspill into the house (backdraft), the potential for carbon monoxidepoisoning is established.Unfortunately, many conventional boilers, fireplaces, furnaces andwater heaters spill combustion products into the home. Spillagecommonly occurs during the first minute or two of ignition until thechimney is sufficiently warm to draw combustion products to thetop. The longer the spillage occurs, the greater the risk. Completespillage may result from several causes: a blocked chimney, adisconected flue, a cracked heat exchanger, or an insufficientamount of air to support the draft up the chimney. The lattercondition occurs when the combustion appliance is located in aspace that is under negative pressure (depressurized) relative to theoutdoors. The amount of depressurization depends on the air-tightness of the space containing the combustion appliance and thecapacity of other exhaust devices as well as duct design and leakagein forced-air heating/cooling systems.Fortunately, carbon monoxide is usually found in very smallconcentrations in combustion gases from properly maintainedfurnaces, boilers and water heaters. However, when combustion isstarved for oxygen, an atom of oxygen is stripped from carbondioxide (CO2, a common combustion byproduct) and carbon monoxide(CO) is produced.WHAT'S THE RISK OF CO POISONING?Several hundred people die from carbon monoxide produced bycombustion appliances in the home each year. Several thousandadditional people have less dramatic symptoms of carbon monoxidepoisoning (headaches, nausea, shortness of breath) although not allthe symptoms may be attributed to carbon monoxide.WHO SHOULD BE CONCERNED?Any contractor, tradesperson, inspector, or sponsor who makesmodification of ventilation rates in houses should be concernedabout combustion spillage. This includes those who: install exhaustfans and devices, modify HVAC systems, and/or modify airtightnessof buildings or install mitigation systems. Mitigation contractorshave been alerted to this concern since 1986 by the New York StateEnergy Office (NYSEO) and, since 1988 by the U.S. EPA. These alertscited previous guidance directed to low-income weatherizationproviders and other contractors by the U.S. Department of Energy(DOE). Portions of DOE's guidance reflect tests required by building codes.WHICH TEST IS BEST?First, any of the described tests is better than none. Second, eachtest is like a tool -- one may fit a specific radon mitigator in asituation better than another contractor in another situation. Selectthe test that best fits your situation (understanding limitations),conduct it, document and report it.WHY NOT PROVIDE CLIENT WITH A DETECTOR?Passive carbon monoxide detectors are available for about $3.However, there are several concerns about such detectors: first, theminimum sensitivity of such detectors may be above the thresholdof health effects; second, the detectors must periodically bereplaced (for example, every month); and third, the detector requiresa significant CO exposure that may not be discovered by the occupantin time.WHAT ABOUT HEAT-SENSITIVE DETECTORS?These devices are probably fine as a back-up but are not a substitutefor spillage testing when working on a house. Such detectors requirethe client to monitor the detector.WHY NOT MEASURE CARBON DIOXIDE NEAR COMBUSTION APPLIANCESTO DETECT SPILLAGE?If you have a carbon dioxide monitor (several hundred to severalthousand dollars) or hand pump and detector tubes (several hundreddollars), you can measure for it. For most radon mitigation, aninexpensive smoke bottle will be adequate to test for spillage associated withdepressurization (conditions may be related to radon mitigation). Of course, acarbon dioxide test may reflect other defects (e.g. cracked heat exchanger) notrelated to radon.WHY NOT USE A BLOWER DOOR TO CHECK SPILLAGE?A blower door is a great diagnostic tool in the hands of a skilledoperator, especially for advanced indoor air quality work. If you usea blower door and understand interzonal analysis, use your blowerdoor in your spillage checks. However, a blower door is not arequirement for testing for backdrafting.WHO HAS DIED FROM CO DUE TO RADON MITIGATION?The best available evidence suggests about 10 percent of houseswith conventional combustion appliances have unacceptable spillagedue to depressurization. Most radon mitigation increasesdepressurization. A brief test for spillage, requiring several minutesby an EPA-approved conractor, is not unreasonable. No EPA-approvedcontractor should reduce one environmental health risk while increasinganother.GIVE ME A SIMPLE CHECKLIST SO I CAN GUARANTEE I'LL NEVER HAVEA PROBLEM.There are simple procedures and checklists to help you test forspillage, as previously identified. However, there is not any one testthat will ensure future maintenance and use of combustionappliances. Thus, it is unclear how a reasonable person could expector offer anunconditional guarantee.ADDITIONAL SOURCES FOR BACKDRAFTING INFORMATION* National Fuel Gas Code, Appendix H (pages 2223.1-89), 1988,"Recommended Procedures for Safety Inspection of an ExistingAppliance Installation." This procedure includes a combustionappliance spillage test (at the draft hood using smoke) whileexterior windows and doors, fireplace dampers, and the doorbetween the combustion appliance and the remainder of the houseare closed and exhaust fans and devices are operated.* American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air ConditioningEngineers, ASHRE Standard 62-1989, Appendix B, "PositiveCombustion Air Supply." This procedure includes combustion spillagetesting involving measuring the ratio of dilution air in the stackabove the draft hood (40 percent minimum) under "closed house"conditions and with all commonly used exhaust fans and devicesoperated. This test should not be performed when the inside-outsidetemperature difference is more the 30 degrees farenheit (18 degreescelsius) or wind velocity is more than 5 mph (2.2 m/s).* "Procedure for Determining the Safety of Residential Chimneys"in Chimney Safety Test User's Manual (Second Edition) prepared forthe Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CHMC) by Scanada -Sheltair Consortium (January 12, 1988). This document outlines atwo-step procedure: the first step involves a simple paperexcercise; and, if necessary, a more rigorous "worst casesimulation" test using pressure measurement in spaces containingcombustion devices as well as spillage tests.* "Worst Case Draft Test"  required by the Minnesota Department ofJobs and Training, St. Paul, MN., for all weatherization contractorsusing state administered federal funds. This procedure outlines asimple pressure measurement in flues under "closed house"conditions and with all commonly used exhaust fans and devicesoperating.* "Retrofit Ventilation System Guide," 1991 (November), EnergyConservatory, Minneapolis, MN., for blower door operators. Thisprocedure outlines an indoor air quality strategy involvingcombustion spillage tests using simple equipment and procedures.Radon mitigation contractors may wish to check with local HVACinspectors, HVAC contractors, or low-income weatherizationproviders about these or similar procedures. Each procedure hasadvantages and disadvantages that should be considered.BILL ANGELL, MIDWEST UNIVERSITIES RADON CONSORTIUMBack to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON AND BACKDRAFTING: AN ADDENDUM TO EPA MITIGATIONSTANDARDS5.8  All buildings where active depressurization systems have beeninstalled "shall" be tested for backdrafting of combustionappliances immediately upon completion of the mitigation systeminstallation. Any backdrafting caused by the installed mitigationsystem "shall" be corrected immediately. The mitigation system"shall not" be operated until backdrafting conditions are corrected.Source: EPA draft standards.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992FEDERAL INVESTIGATORS HALT BOGUS AIR FILTER CLAIMS"Phototron" indoor greenhouse claimed to remove everything,including radon and pet odors.Phototron indoor greenhouse isn't all it's cracked up to be. At least,that's the opinion of investigators at the Federal Trade Commission(FTC), who charge that San Diego-based Pyraponic Industries II, Inc.and it's owner, Jeffery Julian DeMarco, made false andunsubstantiated claims that their "Phototron" indoor air cleanerwould remove all indoor air contaminants.According to the FTC, Pyraponic ran advertisements in a variety ofnational magazines claiming it's "Phototron natural home airpurifier" would remove "radon, formaldehyde, pet odors, kitchen andbathroom smells, cigarette smoke" and, at the same time,"replentish oxygen 33 times, along with the fresh scent of theplants of your choice." Furthermore, the ads claimed a Phototroncould eliminate all pollutants in a 1,000 square foot area.FTC staffers agreed to a consent decree to settle the charges withPryaponic, which prohibits the firm from representing in the futurethat its products remove all indoor air contaminants.The decree also requires the company's future ads be based on"competent and reliable scientific evidence supporting its claimsthat Phototron is a viable substitute, or is superior to, any other aircleaning products, or is effective within a specific size area."A January 1992 General Accounting Office report makes it clearmisrepresentation and public manipulation in the air and waterfiltration and treatment industries is occuring. The report warnsconsumers that disjointed regulation of these emerging industrieshas left the door open for unscrupulous businesspersons.Policing air and water cleaning systems is something the FTC doesunder its "Green Claims" category. FTC staffers say complaints thatfocus on a company's attempt to take advantage of public concernabout the environment are becoming more common.  Several claimshave been made to date by the FTC against water and air purificationcompanies.Editor's Note: Consent agreements (decrees) are forsettlement purposes only and are not an admission ofparticipation in an unlawful act. Consent orders carry the force oflaw, once finalized by the agency, with respect to futureactions. Violations can result in fines as high as $10,000.For more information contact the FTC at (202) 326-2161.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON AND CIGARETTE SMOKINGSmoking, smokers & radon gasCurrent smokers face lung cancer risk 20 times that of never-smokers. Former smokers risk is about 8 times that of never-smokers.Source: U.S. EPABack to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON HAS ITS DAY IN MARYLAND COURTIn the Spring 1992 issue of RND, we reported the story of aBaltimore, Maryland tenant who broke her lease after discoveringher rental home had an indoor radon level of 9 pCi/l.The renter, Nina Bingham, moved out of the home immediately afterdiscovering the elevated radon level and was sued by the owner ofthe rental unit for past rent, damages and legal fees.Unfortunately for Bingham, her lease agreement did not include aprovision (relating to radon or other indoor air pollutants) forbreaking the lease, the judge reluctantly sided with the propertyowner, ruling that Bingham did not follow proper protocol forbreaking a lease in the State of Maryland.Cindy Scott Hibert, a producer at WMAR TV Channel 2 in Baltimore,the station which originally reported on the  story, told RND "theproblem with Nina was that she didn't follow the proper steps. If shejust would have followed our county statutes -- which requireproper return of keys, notification, and  the establishment of anescrow account for rent payments -- the judge would have ruled inher favor."Hilbert, a licensed attorney, says  the most  interesting twist tothis emotional story is that the realtor who arranged the leaseproduced a document releasing Bingham from it."Unfortunately, Nina didn't want to sign it," Hilbert says. "Sheshould have."Hilbert says although the judge determined an elevated radon leveldoes pose a health risk to Bingham and her children, he had no legalgrounds to support his personal feeling that Bingham had done theright thing."I'm just praying that a tenant (with an elevated radon level in aleased property) will come forward and follow the law as it regardsbreaking leases."Breaking a lease for reasons of elevated radon is possible (inMaryland, or elsewhere) if it is done so by the books," Hilbert says."I can't wait," she added. "Then we'll really see some changes."Editor's Note: Our original story was based, in part, on an articlereported in the Midwest AARST Radon Reporter. The  article reportedBingham had won the case, which she did, until a motion by theplaintiff's attorney forced the judge to rule against Bingham forimproperly breaking her lease.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992CERCLA: EPA ISSUES RULE ON LENDER LIABILITYThe U.S. EPA's long-awaited rule on lender liability was published inthe Federal Register, April 29, 1992 (57 Fed Reg 18344). The ruleprovides protections to lenders from  contamination they areinnocent of causing.The rule was issued to clarify statutory phrases in theComprehensive Environmental Response, Liability and CompensationAct (CERCLA), pertaining to property ownership and liability forpollution cleanup.The "security interest exemption," as defined by EPA, specifies therange of activities which may be conducted by an entity/person whomaintains  "indicia" ownership of a facility for security interests -- without such activities being deemed "participation" in managingthe secured  property.The resulting EPA final rule adopts a new test for "participation." Inbrief, a lender participates in property management only if thelender either exercises decision-making control over environmentalcompliance issues on the property, or, where the actions of thelender create or assume responsibility for the day-to-day operationsof the property. The agency also determined that a governmentlender, receiver or conservator  which involuntarily aquires acontaminated property is entitled to "innocent landowner" third-party defense provided under CERCLA Section 101 (35)(a)(ii) and(107)(B)(3).According to environmental attorneys interviewed by RND, agovernment entity, not-for-profit organization or university, forexample, which acquired a property as a gift, would qualify for theinnocent landowner defense. Under CERCLA there are three defensesunder which a property holder may be absolved of liability. If thepollution was caused by 1) an act of a third-party with whom theproperty holder has no contractual relationship; 2) an act of God; or3) an act of War.Although radon gas is listed  in the Hazardous Waste Regulations (40CFR 302.4)(Appendix B), environmental attorneys say they aren'tclear whether or not radon is actually a CERCLA issue."Theoretically," one attorney  says,"itTs a CERCLA issue. But, alender making a residential loan probably wouldn't be concernedabout radon.Nevertheless, lenders should be concerned about radon. They'll wantto do their environmental due dilligence upfront, whether they arerequired to do so by law or not."Editor's Note: EPA has classified radon as a "Class A" carcinogen.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992HOME BUYER'S AND SELLER'S GUIDE TO RADON: REVIEWDraft copy yields variety of responses; comments shed light onconcerns.There has been much speculation as to what the soon-to-be-releasedEPA "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" will advise. Thepurpose of the guide, according to EPA, is to help both home buyer'sand seller's become informed about radon and its dangers, learn howto test a home and, should it be necessary, determine the best wayto remediate.A draft copy of the "Real Estate Guide" (October 1991) along withinterviews with EPA officials reveals some of the agency's possiblerecommendations for radon testing during a real property transfer.EPA advises buyers of homes that have already been tested for radonto "select your own professional radon contractor." In addition, theagency instructs buyers to find out: 1) The results of the previoustest, 2) Who conducted it, and, 3) Where in the house the test wasperformed.Buyers of homes that have not previously been tested for radon areadvised to: 1) Make sure a radon test is done as soon as possible, 2)"Work with the seller to arrange testing," 3) Make sure the test isconducted on the lowest level in which the buyer intends to use.In addition, the draft includes sections on test results and what theymean, radon in water, remediation, selecting a mitigator, EPA's RMPprogram, radon myths and a copy of the risk chart from the"Citizen'sGuide".INDUSTRY COMMENTSAs usual, many radon industry members submitted comments to EPAexpressing their concerns about the contents of the draft "RealEstate Guide". Many of these concerns were expressed in the reviewcomments submitted by the radon industry via the AmericanAssociation of Radon Scientists and Technologists (AARST). Some ofthese concerns are detailed in the followingAARST COMMENTS.AARST recommends that EPA change the words "lowest living area"to "lowest liveable area" before finalizing the document. AARSTreviewers say the "lowest living area" instruction (contained in thedraft) does not provide enough direction for the buyer of a realproperty, which may result in a "grey area" in need ofinterpretation. In many cases, AARST reviewers say, a buyer of ahome relies on a real estate agent to interpret these unclear issues.Real estate agents, the reviewers say, have a vested interest inmaking certain that radon results are low and that his/herinterpretation of what constitutes the "lowest living area" may notbe in the best interest of the buyer.Instead of following EPA's lead, AARST reviewers offer several"good" reasons for continuing the "lowest liveable area" approach.The basement, according to one EPA  contractor, can be easily andconsistently maintained under closed house conditions. Thismeasurement location gives the most consistent readings in bothsummer and winter. Confirmation of results, he says, is moreconsistent, thus avoiding the confusion of the larger measurementvariations found during first floor testing.As an interesting twist, results of an informal survey of AARSTmembers also was provided to EPA. The survey found that most radonindustry leaders believe the "lowest liveable area" of a home shouldbe tested at a minimum. A majority of those surveyed said theybelieve that both the "lowest liveable area" and "lowest livingarea" should be tested simultaneously.Sixty-seven percent of those polled said they support a singlemeasurement period with duplicate measurements versus 36 percentwho said they would support a recommended follow-up test.According to EPA's Rita Hoyt, the draft guide currently is undergoingan internal review. The agency hopes to release the final version ofthe "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" this fall.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992DRAFT EPA RADON TESTING PROTOCOLSThe following is taken from a draft version of EPA's "Buyer's andSeller's Guide to Radon." These are NOT the finalized radon testingprotocols for real estate transactions. Draft documents arepresented here for your review. Please be sure to check with the EPAbefore making decisions based on information contained in anygovernment document draft. EPA says it expects to release the finaldocument later this fall.TESTING PROTOCOL ONEProtocol 1(a). Take a short-term test.Protocol 1(b). If your results are 4 pCi/l or higher, take a follow-upshort-term test to be sure.MITIGATION OPTIONSUnder protocol 1 (a) or (b): Fix the home if the average of the firstand second tests is 4 pCi/l or more.TESTING PROTOCOL TWOProtocol 2. Take two short-term tests at the same time.MITIGATION OPTIONSUnder protocol 2: Fix the home if the average of the two tests is 4pCi/l or more.TESTING PROTOCOL THREEProtocol 3. Test the home with a continuous monitor for at least 48hours -- preferably longer.MITIGATION OPTIONSUnder protocol 3: Fix the home if the average radon level is 4 pCi/lor more.RADON TEST DEVICE PLACEMENTAccording to a recent EPA draft, the testing device(s) should beplaced in the lowest level of the home suitable for occupancy. Forexample, the basement, if it is used frequently. If you are the seller,and currently not using the basement, you may still want to test thebasement if it could be used by a buyer without renovations. The testshould be conducted in a room used regularly (like a living room, playroom, den or bedroom, but not a kitchen or bath).In selecting a testing option, you may want to consider factors suchas cost, accuracy, availability of tamper-resistant features, andhow soon you can get test results. Your State Radon Office can helpyou decide which option is best for you.Source: EPA draft document.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992EPA "GEOLOGICAL PROBABILITY OF ELEVATED INDOOR RADON" MAPDISTRIBUTED, CRITICIZEDAttendees of the National Association of Counties annual meeting inMinneapolis, Minnesota this past July, received  draft copies of theU.S. EPA's "Geological Probability of Elevated Indoor Radon" map.The map is designed to reflect NURE data, as well as radon testingdata from both EPA and U.S. Geologic Surveys.The map, still in draft form, is a political football, some governmentinsiders say, because it is highly generalized and fails to provideenough specific data.Several state radon program directors say they agree. "Theusefulness of the map (to the public), is not very great," says oneprogram director whose opinion seems to be shared by severalothers interviewed by RND. Program directors who have seen thedraft, say the map is better than nothing, but needs some improvement beforebeing released to the public.Local and state government representatives say they have madetheir concerns about the map known to EPA, but says one, "we're notsure they'll do anything to address our concerns."Mike Hanson of the Ohio Geologic Survey says the map leavessomething to be desired. For instance, Hanson says, in some areas,where we know 60 percent of the homes are likely to have elevatedradon levels of 4-20 pCi/l, the map says otherwise.Another problem is that the map is based on "lowest liveable space"readings. States are concerned their test databases would becomeobsolete because of new protocols in the Citizen's Guide.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON LEGISLATION AND RELOCATION PROPERTY TRANSFERSNational, state and local radon legislation reviewedAs the downturn in the U.S. economy continues, every corporatedepartment is under pressure to reduce costs and relocation is noexception. Some companies are reducing relocation costs bytransferring fewer employees and all are carefully scrutinizingtheir relocation policy for cost-cutting opportunities. In the pastseveral months, I have been asked whether there have been anyrecent events that would justify saving money by eliminating radontests. The answer to the question is an uncategorical "no." In fact,there has been a spate of recent state and federal legislationdesigned to encourage radon testing and awareness.STATE LEGISLATIONThe following is a list of radon legislation compiled by theConference of Radiation Control, an association of state and localradiation control programmers showing both proposed and enactedlegislation in the 18 states in which the issue has come before thelegislature (as of February 1992).California -- AB765, Chapter 1.5. Establishes requirements for thecertification of radon measurement laboratories, radon testing andconsulting specialists, and radon mitigation contractors.Connecticut -- Sec. 19a-14b, General Statutes. Requires anycompany that performs testing or mitigation to be certified by thestate, and mandates publication of a list of these companies.S.234. Addresses radon hazards in schools.District of Columbia -- Proposed "Indoor Safe Air Act." Wouldestablish procedures for testing and abatement of radon gas andradon progeny in District of Columbia buildings.Illinois -- HB1611, The Radon Testing Act.Authorizes the Department of Environment to establish aregistration program for individuals and companies that test forradon.HB 2709, The Radon Mitigation Act. This is basically an omnibus act,authorizing the Department of Environment to conduct a wide rangeof activities including surveys, public education programs, and otherradon-related activities.Indiana -- IC 13-1-14. Authorizes rules to establish and operateprograms for the certification of individuals engaged in testing forradon gas in buildings and in soil, and the abatement of radon gas inbuildings.Iowa -- Chapter 136B of the Iowa Code. Mandates that persons whodo testing and mitigation be certified by the state. Establishesrequirements for reporting test results on non-public buildings, andoutlines department spot-check validity measurements andreporting procedures.Kansas -- Proposed HB 2408. Would require state certification ofpersons providing devices or services related to radon testing andmitigation.Maine -- Chapter 165 Revised Statutes Annotated, Title 22, sec. 771et seq. Establishes a program to register firms and individualsinvolved with radon testing, consulting, or other remedial servicesto ensure accurate radon testing, to encourage safe and effectivemitigation of dangerous radon levels, and to protect propertyowners from unqualified or unscrupulous vendors.Massachusetts -- Proposed HB 548. Would establish requirementsfor persons testing and mitigating radon. Would require that aradon test be done by the seller of any residential dwelling andwould require pertinent information about the test be madeavailable to a prospective buyer.Proposed HB 2099. Would require any peron who tests for andmitigates radon to be certified by the state and to file timelyreports.Proposed HB 3160. Would provide a tax credit for testing andabatement of radon gas.New Hampshire -- RSA 125:9. States that the director of theDivision of Public Health Services shall conduct inspections of allbuildings and dwellings, upon request, for the presence of radon orother health hazards present in indoor air. Provides education,technical consultation, and recommendations for abatement of suchhealth hazards in conjunction with the University of New Hampsirecooperative extension service.RSA 477:4a. States that, prior to the execution of any contract forthe purchase and sale of any interest in real propoerty that includesa building, the seller or the seller's agent shall provide notice to thebuyer that radon may be found in some areas of New Hampshire.New Jersey -- PL 1985, Chapter 408. Establishes a state radonprogram.PL 1986, Chapter 83. Establishes a certification program for radontesters and mitigators.PL 1989, Chapter 189. Mandates that newconstruction be tested for radon.New York -- S. 6496, A. 8594. Directs the State Energy Office todevelop and implement a radon diagnosis assistance program andpromote radon remediation actions in at least one of every fourfamily residences with elevated radon levels. Also establishesresearch grants for not-for-profit organizations.S. 7690, A. 9978. Provides financial assistance for the performanceof radon diagnostic services and the preparation of specificationsfor appropriate, energy-efficicient mitigation measures for one- tofour-family residences with elevated radon levels.S. 9594, A. 11717. Directs the State Energy Office to develop andimplement a radon detection, public information, and technicalassistance program, to further energy conservation and assist andpromote radon remediation.Ohio -- Am. Susb. HB 279. Establishes a state program forlicensure of individuals and businesses involved in radontesting and mitigation activities, and requires the Public HealthCouncil to establish rules regarding the licensing program;requires the Director of Health to administer and enforce theprogram in accordance with the Public Health Council's rules;establishes civil and criminal penalties for violation of laws andrules governing radon licensure; and establishes a standard ofliability for license holders.Pennsylvania -- SB 857. Authorizes low-interest loans forradon gas mitigation and appropriation.HB 687. Provides personal income tax credits for expensesincurred for home radon-reduction projects.HB 956. Requires radon testing and notification before certain realproperty transactions, and provides a remedy for failure to do so.HB 2001. Requires radon testing and notification for sale ofresidential property; imposes administrative penalties; andimposes powers and duties on the Department of EnvironmentalResources.Rhode Island. Has proposed an act that would authorize the Directorof Health to promulgate regulations and conduct programs related toradon control. The act would also create a state radon trust fund.Virginia -- Section 32.2-299 A.1. Provides for a program ofeducation and technical assistance related to radon.Section 32.1-299 A.2. Requires the State Department of Health tomake available the U.S. EPA Radon Mitigator Proficiency (RMP) andRadon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) lists.Section 32.1. Requires that persons screening, testing or mitigatingradon be listed as proficient by EPA.Washington -- SHB 2662. Authorizes the certification of person whoperform radon gas or radon progeny measurements, including samplecollection, analysis, or interpretation of such measurements, and ofthose who perform radon mitigation of buildings for radon gas orradon progeny; and authorizes fees for certification.SHB 1535. An act relating to radon testing required by the StateBuilding Code Council.Wisconsin -- Act 399. Authorizes the development anddissemination of radon information, and the coordination of aprogram to measure radon gas, perform home surveys, developtraining materials, and conduct training classes.Most of the aforementioned legislation concerns certification orlicensing of companies engaged in testing for, or mitigation of,radon. It is likely that the majority of states will have this type oflegislation in place within the next few years. Licensing andregistration of testers and mitigators is a positive change forrelocation because it upgrades the overall quality of testers andremediators and identifies a pool of qualified companies available tothe relocation administrator.It is more difficult to predict whether more states will enactmandatory testing and/or disclosure statutes. However, given theincreasingly broad court interpretations of the duty to disclose, theNational Association of Realtors' recommendation that its statemembers propose and lobby for state disclosure laws, and currentfederal legislation (discussed below), it is likely that a substantialnumber of states will enact radon testing and disclosure legislationin the coming years.The significance of state laws to the relocation administrator isthat such legislation may conflict with a company's relocationpolicies in some way. In all cases to date, state requirements withrespect to testing and disclosure are minimum standards, and thereis nothing wrong in exceeding them. For example, a company maydecide to require mitigation as well as disclosure of test results.However, varying state laws necessitate that a company's radonpolicy also vary according to the state from which the employee istransferred.FEDERAL LEGISLATIONFor the past several years, I have been reporting on billsintroduced before the U.S. House and Senate on the subject of radon.Few have been voted on. On March 10 of this year, the Senate passedS. 792, a reauthorization of the Indoor Radon Abatement Act of1988, known as the Indoor Radon Abatement Reauthorization Act of1991. This very comprehensive bill is likely to be modified inconference, should the House pass its radon bill, H.R. 3258, the"Radon Awareness and Disclosure Act." The House bill has not comeup for a vote as of the date this article was written, but is expectedto pass if the House is able to vote on it in this an election year.Among the provision of S. 792 of interest to relocation:1) Federally mandates the EPA's development of a "Home Buyer's andSeller's Guide to Radon," a document specifically aimed at the realestate process. As with the "Citizen's Guide to Radon," E-R-C andother organizations have been working with and advising EPA on thecontent of this document for more than a year. The current draftpresently is undergoing review by the administrator of EPA. (Editor'sNote: EPA staffers say the document should be released sometimethis fall.)2) The "CitizenTs Guide to Radon" is described in the legislation.This guide already has been completed.3) The bill requires that "every original mortgage institution"provide the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon" to eachperson "from whom it receives or for whom it prepares a writtenapplication for an applicable mortgage loan." In addition, it barsfederally chartered secondary mortgage institutions frompurchasing any loans in which this requirement has not been met.The application for a mortgage usually is made after the contract ofsale is signed by the buyer. In order to reduce pressure to amendcontracts based on the warnings in this brochure, it is likely thatreal estate agents will begin making the booklets available at orbefore the signing of the contracts, should this part of the bill beadopted into law.4) The bill also provides for federal radon disclosure. Anyresidential dwelling or multi-unit structure owned by the federalgovernment or any government corporation located in a high priorityradon area (as defined below) will have to be tested prior to thecontract of sale, and the results of that test disclosed to thepotential buyer.5) The bill requires EPA to come up with a list of high priority radonareas, based on indoor radon test results and geology. The countrywould be divided into three such zones, each ranking the likelihoodof finding indoor radon. However, EPA will not change itsrecommendation that all homes, regardless of their location, betested. See Radon Map page 11.6) EPA, in conjunction with other agencies, will be required todevise model construction standards for radon resistant housing. Allfederally assisted housing, and federal office and other structuresare to be built using this technology in high priority radon areas.The remainder of the bill contains outreach, research, and disclosureprovisions, all of which are designed to increase radon awarenessamong the general public and encourage testing and disclosure.EPA ACTIVITIESRegardless of whether any federal legislation is passed this year,EPA will continue to carry out its mandate under the 1988 Act toprovide information to the public on the dangers of indoor radonpollution and its elimination. EPA's Radon Division currently has anumber of projects underway. The ones most directly affectingrelocation are the publication of the previously mentioned "Citizen'sGuide to Radon" and the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide to Radon."In addition, it has begun programs to provide information and grantsto state radiation control departments, to perform research on radontesting and mitigation, to perform research and devise recommendedmodel building codes for radon-resistant construction, to administerthe Radon Contractor Proficiency (RCP) program, and to devise andimplement public information campaigns aimed at persuading thepublic to test for and mitigate indoor radon. EPA already hasproduced the first draft of a national radon potential map thatdivides the U.S. into three radon zones, similar to the requirementsof S. 792.Acting on the advice of E-R-C and other real estate groups, EPA hascommitted to producing the "Home Buyer's and Seller's Guide toRadon" as a supplement to the "CitizenTs Guide," aimed strictly atthe real estate transaction. Besides being a more concise documentthan the "Citizen's Guide," the "Real Estate Guide" will recommendshort-term testing protocol that is not as time consuming and,hopefully, not as expensive as the two-test recommendation in the"Citizen's Guide."After months of consulting with outside groups and scientists, EPAnarrowed the possible testing methodologies to eight, and asked foran opinion from its Science Advisory Board as to the efficacy ofeach. Although the board has yet to return its recommendations, itappears likely that the "Real Estate Guide" will recommend eitherone short-term test in the lowest liveable area of the house, or twoshort-term simultaneous tests in the lowest living area.WHAT THIS MEANS TO RELOCATIONThe relocation industry took an early, pro-active stance concerningindoor radon. Because of the policies that were enacted years ago, ithas been argued that a potential spate of claims and lawsuits hasbeen avoided.When EPA began to reconsider its recommended testing procedures,the scope of the testing and remediation required to limit liabilitybecame unclear. When released in the "Citizen's Guide" and the "RealEstate Guide", these recommendations essentially will form theminimum standard for any relocation policy.Absent any federal or state law to the contrary, relocationadministrators will be free to reevaluate their radon policies,bringing them into compliance with the recommendations of EPApublications, making judgements about, for example, whether it isnecessary, from a liability point of view, to remediate homes withlevels moderately above 4 pCi/l, or whether simple disclosure willadequately protect against liability.All of these decisions will be made in an environment in which, ifEPA is sucessful, all home buyers will be better informed aboutindoor radon potentials.By Richard Mansfield III. Mansfield is a partner in the Washington,DC, law firm of Mansfield & Muse. He has served as general counselof the Employee Relocation Council since 1977. Reprinted withpermission from Mobility, 1992. Mobility is the official publicationof the Employee Relocation Council, Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992HR 3258 REVIEWERS MAKE COMMENTS, SHARE CONCERNSAs radon-related bills develop and mature on Capitol Hill, bothprivate and public sector lobbyists spend considerable effortorganizing letter writing campaigns, telephone trees andencouraging industry members to make known their concerns. Duringthe formulation and development of House Bill 3258, and itscompanion, Senate Bill 792, the radon industry showed it is noexception to the rule.On March 10 of this year, the Senate passed S. 792, a reauthorizationof the Indoor Radon Abatement Act of 1988, known as the IndoorRadon Abatement Reauthorization Act of 1991. This verycomprehensive bill is likely to be modified in conference, should theHouse pass its radon bill, H.R. 3258, the "Radon Awareness andDisclosure Act."The comment period for H.R. 3258 drew a variety of responses,including comments providing insight into organizations and theirconcern for the radon issue. Of particular interest to our readers arecomments submitted by Richard Martin (AARST), Dr. Jill Lipoti (NewJersey, Department of Environmental Protection), Bob Chase(National Education Association and the National Parents andTeachers Association), and representatives for the NationalAssociation of Home Builders (NAHB) and the Consumer Associationof America.NAHBNAHB comments indicate the organization supports "prescriptiveconstruction techniques only in areas where radon is a problem."NAHB says its members might need an "incentive" to cooperatevolunarily, such as a limitation on liability for builders who build toEPA construction standards or state equivalents.As has been the case in the past, NAHB says it "does not believetying radon testing to the home sales transaction is the answer."The primary objection, short-term test reliance. As a justificationfor their objection to testing new homes as a condition of sale,NAHB says its members believe testing should only be done while thehomeowner is actually living in the home. In addition, they say, "newhomes take up to a year to settle" so testing a brand new house thathas not fully settled "is likely" to produce a false reading.The association says its members already are complaining thatbanks are refusing to make loans for homes where testing isrequired as a condition of sale -- "out of fear for future legalliability."CONSUMER FEDERATIONThe Consumer Federation for America, in conjunction with theAmerican Cancer Society, the American Lung Association, theAmerican Public Health Association and the U.S. Public InterestResearch Group, made their feelings about H.R. 3258 known tolegislators as well.Representatives from these organizations say they believe thepublic can no longer rely on realtors, builders, salespersons or theradon industry to inform them about radon. The reason: ignorance.These organizations say they believe the American public is in needof an education when it comes to radon, especially if they are tomake decisions about testing and mitigation voluntarily.According to a national survey conducted by the Federation, fewAmericans are prepared to make such decisions by themselves. Whensurvey respondants were asked "Why is radon a problem?", 17percent replied because it can cause high blood pressure, 15 percentbelieved the gas caused unpleasant odors, and an additional sixpercent said they believed it discolored walls and furniture.As far as testing is concerned, nearly half of all respondants knewnext to nothing about radon testing.According to the Federation survey, 45 percent of Americanssurveyed answered the question "How do you detect radon?"incorrectly. Twenty-two percent of the respondants said radon couldbe detected by smell, 12 percent by stains on walls and 11 percentby using a Geiger counter.The Federation says its supports H.R. 3258 because "it addressestwo fundamental issues for consumers: saving lives and protectingconsumers in radon-related transactions. Protection? From what?According to the Federation, consumers need protections frompotentially unscrupulous radon contractors and test devicemanufacturers who fail to participate and pass proficiency exams.Civil penalties should be put in place, the Federation says, "to act asa deterrent."PARENTS AND TEACHERSThe NEA and PTA, both organizations specifically concerned aboutradon in schools, say a two-tiered approach is needed to address theissue in America's schools. First, they say, schools in high radonpriority areas should be tested as soon as possible. Schools notlocated in high radon priority areas should be allowed four yearsfrom the date of enactment to test.In determining compliance, NEA says it believes the legislationshould specify waivers to school districts which have already testedand/or mitigated -- providing all EPA protocol, including parent andteacher notification of testing and mitigation results, werefollowed.NEA also says it supports an "ongoing annual notification rule"requiring schools to keep parents notified of the mitigation processprogress until completed.NEW JERSEY DEPThe New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection says itsupports the continuation of grant assistance to state programsfound in H.R. 3258, however, the agency says, "more" stateassistance is needed. The agency says it believes the feds must kickin additional support, including 75 percent program costs, in orderfor most states to continue existing and planned radon programs.They cite a recent Conference of Radiation Control ProgramDirectors survey which indicates state radon programs are in dangerof being cut back. The survey found that if State Indoor Radon Grantsare not extended beyond fiscal year 1991, 84 percent of theresponding state radon program leaders said they "would be forcedto reduce their radon program, drastically."Thirty-four percent said they would eliminate staff, while sixpercent would have to abandon their programs entirely.NJDEP, no doubt echoing the opinions of other states with existingradon programs and legislation, suggests exempting personsparticipating in state programs from mandatory participation in afederal program, in order to "avoid placing undue burden on regulatedindividuals in states which already have a state certificationprogram, the requirements of which, in most cases, far exceed thoselisted in H.R. 3258."AARSTRepresenting the radon industry, Rich Martin, president of DMA-RADTECH, said H.R. 3258 would help reduce cancer risk byproviding increased industry professionalism by mandatingparticipation in testing and mitigation programs. Mandatoryparticipation in RMP/RCP programs, the association says, will help"elevate the quality" of radon related services to a minimumcompetence level acceptable to a federal agency.Not unlike the Consumer Federation, AARST also supports the civilpenalties contained in the bill.  those contractors who choose not tofollow the laws regarding certification and participation.The radon industry association says if H.R. 3258 is enacted it willhelp reduce cancers risk by: 1) providing financial assistance toschools which need to test and/or mitigate but cannot afford to doso, 2) requiring schools that test or mitigate to utilize approvedfirms or individuals who have satisfactorily passed certificationprograms, and, 3) forming a Presidential Commission on RadonAwareness designed to assure radon public outreach programs reachtheir specific goals.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992SEPTEMBERSeptember 26, 1992 -- RCP Biennial re-exam. In conjunction withthe 1992 International Symposium on Radon and Radon Reduction,Minneapolis, MN, at the Sheridan Park Place Hotel. Applicationpackage fax request to ICF, Inc. at (703) 218-2669.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992OCTOBEROctober 18-20, 1992 -- Environments for People. Golden GateHoliday Inn, San Francisco, CA. Sponsored by ASHRAE. Informationcall Jim Norman at (404) 636-8400.October 19-21, 1992 -- Indoor Air Quality Continuing EducationCourse.  American Industrial Hygiene Association, sponsor. Salt LakeCity, UT. Contact Continuing Education at (216) 873-2442.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992DISCLOSURE AND RADON. WHAT THE RELOCATION INDUSTRY SAYSWhat is the Employee Relocation Council's position on disclosure ofradon testing results during a relocation property transfer?"Disclosure is critical," says the Employee Relocation Counil's ChiefCounsel, Richard Mansfield. "We recommend all houses be tested andresults be disclosed."Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992EPA RADON PROGRAM REVIEW: GOVERNMENT, PRIVATE SECTORRESPONSES ARE VARIEDLast fall, radon industry professionals participated in an intra-agency review of EPA's Radon Program. Comprised of members ofgovernment and the private sector, the agency's Radon ProgramReview Panel was charged with assessing the program's pastefforts, current progress and future direction. Their effortsproduced a draft report, sent to reviewers earlier this year, whichassessed the costs and effectiveness of a range of radon controlstrategies and contained the Panel's findings and recommendationsfor improving the radon program.EPA REVIEWERSEPA says it is looking for "opportunities for pursuing newdirections" in an effort to increase radon reduction in the U.S. Theagency says the review was conducted with three objectives inmind:1) to examine the appropriateness of program goals and EPA'sprogress in achieving them;2) to evaluate the effectiveness of the current approach; and3) to identify alternative approaches and determine what they mightenable EPA to accomplish.EPA representatives on the panel included senior managers who wereresponsible for recommending actions which would improve theradon program and determine the appropriate role government shouldplay in reducing public risk. Four major recommendations wereissued.1) EPA should focus on the greatest risks first. In the near-term,EPA should target its efforts and resources on high radon potenitalareas and smoking-related risk. EPA survey data indicate about halfof the homes over the action level are located in areas comprising(as a group) about one-fifth of the country. This same area isestimated to contain a significant portion of the lives projected tobe saved if all U.S. homes above the current 4 pCi/l action level weretested and mitigated. Current epidemiological data indicate bothsmokers and former smokers face over 90 percent of radon risk.While EPA should not abandon its efforts in other areas, thesefactors must shape EPA's policy.2) EPA should work now to support the long-term strategies ofpromoting radon-resistant new construction and testing andmitigation in connection with real estate transfers. Beginning intargeted areas, EPA should encourage and support pilot projects atthe State and local level and explore new approaches to implementthese strategies. EPA experience to date indicate the vast majorityof radon risk reduction occurs in the context of real estatetransactions and adoption of new construction standards has thepotential for very cost-effective risk reduction -- in some casessaving both lives and dollars. While the risk reductions offered bythese strategies are modest at first, over the long-term, they offerthe possibility of very large risk reductions. Only through thesestrategies can EPA aspire to its ultimate statutory goal ofapproaching ambient levels in all U.S. homes.3) A new strategy for public information. As a health risk controlledprimarily by individual citizens, EPA has properly set for itself acentral and independent goal of informing the public about radonrisk. The public's generally weak response suggests EPA must movebeyond a program of nationwide public information efforts such asthe "Citizen's Guide" and the Advertising Council's public serviceannouncement campaign. In the short-term, EPA's public informationefforts should focus on high radon potential areas and populations. Inthe long-term, efforts should be directed toward construction ofradon-resistant new homes and testing and mitigation of existinghomes when they are sold.4) EPA should develop a coordinated research plan. EPA hassuccessfully supported a wide range of radon testing, mitigation,and characterization research. With basic technologies established,EPA must develop a long-term plan to prioritize and coordinatepotential future research in areas such as health effects,measurement, mitigation technology, geographic targeting, and riskcommunication approaches.THE PRIVATE SECTORPrivate sector reviewers developed recommendations addressingseveral dozen issues which affect the radon industry. Ofsignificance are three of the panel's findings relating to radon andpublic information, resistant building techniques and radon testingat point of sale.1) Reducing Risk by Radon Resistant Construction. The paneldetermined "if all new homes built in designated areas" were builtwith radon-resistant features, an estimated 30-50 lung cancersdeaths would be averted each year. The panel noted the rate of livessaved would increase each year."Radon resistant new homes," the panel says, "are also speciallysealed and weatherized, which, in addition to retarding radon entry,can make the home substantially more energy efficient. Thisincreaseed efficiency is estimated to yield a substantial energycredit."2) Reducing radon risk at real estate transactions. Because mostradon testing and mitigation currently occurs during real estatetransactions, the panel says "testing and mitigation of all homessold would yield steadily increasing risk reduction each year."According to the panel, nationwide testing and mitigation of allhome sold (when necessary) would avert an estimated 110 lungcancer deaths at a cost of $700,000 per life saved. The panel notedrequiring distribution of radon information when homes arepurchased with federal-guaranteed mortgages would offer onlymoderate risk reduction -- averting an estimated 10-15 lung cancerdeaths each year.Editor's Note: It would take approximately 10 years of informationdistribution in federal-related mortgages to produce lung cancerdeath reductions equal to or greater than one year of requiring radontesting and mitigation during all real property transfers.3) Public Information. The reviewers determined that state and localpublic information and incentive programs have yielded "limitedresponses." EPA's experience to date suggests, the panel says,"public information alone is not enough to contribute significantlyto future risk reduction."Public information may make its most significant risk reductioncontribution by providing support for long-term institutionalchanges encouraging both actions to reduce radon risk when homesare sold and the adoption of radon resistant new construction codes.Other key issues examined by the panel include:What role should government play in dealing with radon in homes?The panel says it believes government bears a special responsibilityto inform the public about radon. Success in fulfilling this roleshould be measured by the quality of information provided and theextent of improvement in public understanding -- not necesarily theamount of testing and mitigation it triggers.When public protection cannot be achieved with stronger action,government should move beyond providing information. The paneldetermined government's role should be shaped by level of risk. And,it's role in informing the public should be stronger in areas withhigher levels of risk. Both federal and state, as well as localgovernments, health and consumer organizations, should play acritical role.What should be the ultimate goals of the radon program?The reviewers make five suggestions, first of which is radonreduction. Informing the public and building a private sector radontesting and mitigation industry also is critical, the panel says.Moving beyond solely providing information to achieve reduction isnext on the list with recommendations to establish "separate butcomplementary" short- and long-term goals by which to judgesuccess. Improving and maintaining credibility, ranked fourth andfifth.To what extent should special efforts be made to reach smokers andformer smokers?Because of substantial risk differentials between smokers, formersmokers and non-smokers, EPA should make a strong effort to targetsmokers and former smokers.The panel recommends EPA urge organizations and agenciesproviding anti-smoking programs to warn smokers radon is a serioushazard to their health  even if they stop. Exploring specific ways totarget current and former smokers is a must, they say.How can EPA most effectively increase testing and mitigation at thetime of real estate transfers?Voluntary testing in connection with real estate transactions iscurrently too infrequent to result in significant risk reductions, thepanel says. Such voluntary testing will not increase significantlyuntil action is taken to remove or reduce some of the obstacles (e.g.workable testing protocols.The panel also says the agency should seriously examine radonescrow accounts and dissemination of radon information at the timeof a real estate property transfer.Is there a need for additional radon-related research?EPA's radon-related research efforts have been successful, the panelsays, however, they are in need of greater coordination. EPA needs acomprehensive, prioritized and coordinated plan to guide its futureresearch activities. Further research topics include health effectsand risk to smokers, former smokers and never smokers,measurement device accuracy, correlations between short- andlong-term measurements, new testing devices, tamper resistantmeasurement techniques, ambient radon levels in high radonpotential areas, mitigation technology, geographic targetingresearch and risk communication.Editor's Note: It will interesting to see how these recommendationsaffect future EPA activities.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RADON LUNG CANCER DEATHS AVERTED PER YEAR AFTERIMPLEMENTATION OF RADON_RESISTANT BUILDING CODESFirst year: 30-50Second year: 60-90After 10: 300-400Assuming 100 Percent Implementation of Radon-Resistant BuildingCodes. Source: US EPABack to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992THE CHANGING FACE OF RISK ASSESMENTAs a young industry with many critics, professional riskassessors say they are re-examining the way in which theydetermine environmental risks. The industry is searching for thebest methods of determining risk by making swift strides away fromdefining risk by "maximum worst case exposure" standards andmoving toward a "reasonable maximum exposure" unit of measure.According to industry news articles, changing the way assessorsmeasure risk will make a big difference in how a site is evaluatedand treated. Risk assessors say they are ready to move towardevaluating environmental hazards by using the "weight of evidence"approach, which if adopted by the industry, would put radon higherup on the EPA priority list.Under the "weight of evidence approach," assessors would compileall relevant data, including animal and human toxicology studies,extrapolated estimates of risk and all additional informationavailable on a potential hazard, to help make a determination of risk.Estimates of risk would then be made by examining all dataavailable and formulating a "reasonable maximum exposure."The risk assessment industry is not alone in seeking change. TwoNuclear Regulatory Committees are examining risk assessmentmethods; the interagency Federa; Coordinating Council on Science,Engineering and Technology is attempting to standardize the U.S.government's health and environmental risk assessment methods.Vice President Danforth Quayle's Council on Competitiveness isevaluating biotechnology risk assessment policy. The U.S. Congressand the White House have agreed to set up the Risk Assessment andManagement Commission. And, EPA Chief William Reilly isprioritizing environmental hazards so EPA can perform bureaucratictriage.Should the EPA and risk assessors adopt the "weight of evidence"approach, and bureuacrats begin funding environmental cleanupprogram based on risk to the public, funding for the radon issueshould get a significant boost.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992School Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools isSchool Surveys. Data from the U.S. EPA survey of U.S. schools isscheduled to be released this fall. According to the agency, 928schools have been surveyed over the course of the past year or so.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992Residential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states toResidential data. Out this fall. Montana & Virginia are two states tobe included in this report.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992Mitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop aMitigation standard. Lou Nelson is working with AARST to develop a"consensus standard" for radon mitigation.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992New RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams willNew RMP Measurement Protocols. Due out in August. Exams willreflect new measurement protocols, new device specific protocolsand the changes relating to radon and the latest "Citizen's Guide toRadon." Exams start this November.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.RMP Participants. As of July, 1451 participants in the EPA program.506 primary, 1259 secondary, 314 both. Number of people whopassed the individual operator test -- 278.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.RCP Participants. As of July, 931 participants.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992Backdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of finalBackdrafting. Of importance to mitigators, Section 5.8 of finalmitigation standards out this fall. Will require mitigators testsystems for backdrafting.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992EPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on theEPA Mitigation Program. Officials say they are working on thefollowing issues: radon mitigation and entry into sub-soil;measurement of radon content in various types of buildingmaterials, including concrete; research in large buildings withelevated radon levels; computer models for determiningindoor air mixing rates; backdrafting issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightRADON NEWS DIGEST via NewsNetSeptember 1992READER'S VIEWSDear Editor:I would appreciate it very much if you would publish this letter. Theso-called "radon experts" in the Ohio Department of Health haveargued with me that radon companies that utilize continuousmonitors are not primarly laboratories and for that reason theirhandlers need not be licensed as primary labs, nor need they pay the$600 license fee required by the state.As a result of their false interpretation of our State law(3701-69-08), there are testers using continuous monitors who havenot paid their State registration fee and are not licensed to operateprimary laboratories according to EPA definitions.A continuous monitor has been defined by EPA as a primary lab. It isnot fair to those of us who have paid their laboratory license fees toallow these people to compete with us in the radon testing marketwithout having paid the $600 license fee. Some of these people arein further violation of the law since they are not maintaining theircurrent listing in the EPA RMP Round. This fact again gives thesepeople a further advantage to offer cheaper radon testing services.I had to fly to Las Vegas to the EPA Radon facility on order tomaintain my current listing for continuous monitors. Flight, hotel,cab fare, etc., cost me $650, which I now have to pass on to theconsumer.Therefore, I am asking that the DOH immediately enforce the law byordering non-licensed and non-EPA listed primary labs to ceaseradon testing using continuous monitors.The success of the newly-enacted State Radon Licensure Programdepends on its fair and equitable enforcement for all.Helmar H. A. Dollwet, PhDAkron, OHEditor's note: We contacted the Ohio radon program and were toldthat the state "as of now" does not require continuous monitoroperators to meet the requirements of a primary radon laboratory.State officials told RND that continuous monitors are considered "atool" and for that reason operators of those devices need not meetprimary lab requirements.We also contacted EPA and they seem to be in agreement with Mr.Dollwet, although at presstime, we were unable to get through tothose "in the know" at the agency. We will follow-up on this issueand report our findings in a future issue.Mr. Dollwet, meanwhile, has found his own solution. He says, if theState of Ohio won't make the situation right he will refuse to payfuture State licensing fees.Dear Editor:I just received the enclosed bulletin from Mr. Cris Collie of theEmployee Relocation Council. (The bulletin alerts those concernedwith real estate property transfers that H.R. 11, a House billcontaining a proposal to place a cap of $5,000 on allowable movingexpense deductions, needs an immediate response from radonindustry members.)With the consumer deficient awareness of the radon hazard and theapathetic attitude of many in the federal and state governments,radon testing where it is not mandatory will be an expense that willnot be considered. It is addressed at the lattermost orientation ofthe employee's move and close to the cumulative dollar total.To be perfectly frank, my past experience as an executive with alarge Fortune 200 company leads me to believe that expenses whichhave tangible value will be considered as foremost. The family willforego the expense of radon testing and other "nuisance" expenses.They do this so as to escape the burden of taxes.Since we are so directly Involved, we point out the dangers of thisbill, H.R. 11. I believe we as the representatives of an industry, mustpoint out the detrimental health effects of this bill. Though theprofit motive is important, the paramount motive is to save lives.Nick NickitasTampa, FLEditor's Note: We contacted Mr. Collie, who told RND that the Househas already passed the bill, although, the Senate is consideringanother, more favorable version. Contact Mr. Collie at 202-857-0857for information on how you can help make sure radon-related issuesare not left out.Dear Editor:The United States Code of Federal Regulations includes an entiresection (10 CFR 20) devoted to both occupational and non-occupational exposure to many forms of radiation. However, there isnot one mention of indoor radon exposure despite the fact thatradon-related research has produced the most complete body ofevidence that radon exposure causes lung cancer.For miners, radiation is an occupational hazard. In an attempt tominimize exposure, miners are restricted to a total yearly dose of 4WLM and must wear respirators if the concentration of radon in themine reaches 16 pCi/l.Although it is quite common for indoor radon levels to reach 16pCi/l in many U.S. homes, government regulations offer moreprotection from radiation exposure in mines than they do in ourhomes.Why is it that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission believesoccupational radiation exposure should be limited to 500 MREM peryear in nuclear facilities while residents of homes with a 4 pCi/lradon level are allowed to receive over 650 MREM of exposure (12hours per day in the home, 340 days per year)?If regulations governing radiation exposure at nuclear powerfacilities were applied to residential radon exposure the NRC policywould make better sense. We must treat radon as the health hazardthat it is. And, according to the U.S. EPA, radon is a Group Acarcinogen with solid human data directly linking it to cancer.Dick ManningVice President, American Association of Radon Scientists andTechnologistsBack to Headline List WT03-B37-12IA059-000325-B019-224http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev28.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002144 text/html 39475HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:19:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:31 GMTContent-length: 39286Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev28.html Sample Issue Copyright REPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNet JANUARY 5, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS & TRENDS (312 words) DOE TO DEVELOP DEEP BOREHOLE SAMPLING TECHNIQUES IN MICROBIOLOGY PROGRAM (658 words) RISK OF CANCER FROM LOW-LEVEL EXPOSURE TO RADIATION COULD BE HIGHER THAN THOUGHT (340 words) GAO OFFERS DOD ADVICE ON MINIMIZING AMOUNT OF UNUSED HAZARDOUS WASTE SENT FOR DISPOSAL (553 words) EPA REGION 5 PROPOSES INCREASE IN PENALTY AGAINST WESTINGHOUSE FOR FMPC VIOLATIONS (572 words) BATTELLE SENSOR FOR DETECTING CONTAMINANTS IN SOIL TO BE MORE ACCURATE, LESS EXPENSIVE (334 words) ARMY TESTING COMPOSTING OF SOIL TO ELIMINATE EXPLOSIVE CONTAMINATION (183 words) DOE'S IDAHO AND RICHLAND OFFICES SEEK BETTER CLEANUP TECHNOLOGIES (521 words) DROUGHT MAY BE TO BLAME FOR HIGH URANIUM LEVEL OF CONTAMINATION IN GROUND WATER AT FMPC (624 words) LAWRENCE LIVERMORE ASKS EPA TO REVIEW REFUSAL ON HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT (266 words) DOE 'TIGER TEAMS' TO CHECK LIVERMORE LATE NEXT MONTH (132 words) HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense Nuclear (107 words) OTHER BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY NEWS ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order (97 words) Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct (66 words) Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the (65 words) DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec. (104 words) CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990SLANTS & TRENDSNEW READINGS OF URANIUM CONTAMINATION in wells drilled at the FeedMaterials Production Center may be alarming the public needlessly. Regularmonitoring of ground water contamination in an admittedly contaminated arealast spring showed a sudden spike in uranium concentrations,and comments by officials from the U.S.  Department of Energy and OhioEnvironmental Protection Agency were misinterpreted.ALTHOUGH THE LEVELS WERE 10-30 TIMES as high as proposed standards by thefederal EPA, results in the lower end of that range were fully expected.When word of higher readings came out early this month, newspapers andnewswire services quickly said the officials suspected new contaminationand even contended the water supply of Cincinnati, 18 miles away, andDayton, 40 miles away, might be endangered.NO SUCH THREAT EXISTS, the officials tell DPW, and they never hinted atone. Graham Mitchell of Ohio EPA explained his comment about thecontamination possibly being more recent meant it might have happened 10years ago instead of 20 years ago. And while contaminated wells are tappinga part of the same aquifer used for drinking water for Dayton, the pollutedplume extends only about 1.5 miles from the plant and is heading away fromthat city. Even though it is headed generally toward Cincinnati, both DOEand Ohio EPA officials are confident it can be stopped long short of there."I don't think it will ever have the chance to get to Cincinnati," saidMitchell.IF FERNALD AND ROCKY FLATS LOOK BAD, the explosion at a high-level nuclearwaste dump at Kyshtym in the USSR was much worse than anyone has admitted,the Soviets now say.  That accident in the late 1950s released not the 2million curies admitted by Soviet officials only a year ago, but 20 millioncuries. This compares to the 50 million curies released by the Chernobylcivilian nuclear accident.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DOE TO DEVELOP DEEP BOREHOLE SAMPLINGTECHNIQUES IN MICROBIOLOGY PROGRAM    Department of Energy will develop and evaluate sampling techniques infiscal 1990 and 1991 under its Deep Microbiology Program. This will befollowed by an accelerated five-year (FY'92-96) Phase II research programincluding field experimentation to test new concepts with contaminatedzones at one or more DOE sites.    The 15- to 20-year goal of the program is to contribute new scientificinformation that will make bioremediation of contaminated DOE sites easier,the agency says in an implementation plan. Experience gained at the DOEsites will be transferred to other agencies and to private industry. Themost important scientific goal of the transitional program is to obtaincomparative information on subsurface microbial communities among DOEsites.    At present, DOE says, "no cost-effective technologies exist for cleanupof ground water contamination at depths of 400-600 ft. or greater." Bystudying the presence, diversity and adaptability of deep microorganisms atvarious sites, DOE hopes to contribute to, and speed the cleanup of, deepaquifers. "Recently discovered deep microorganisms obtained [last year]during Phase 1 appear to be physiologically capable of degradingrecalcitrant organic chemicals (and possibly organic-radionuclidecomplexes), and their activity may be enhanced in-situ to eliminate ortransform contaminants," says the implementation plan.    DOE's Richland and Idaho Operations Offices, Pacific NorthwestLaboratory's Environmental Sciences Research Center and the Idaho NationalLaboratory, run by EG&G Inc., will provide financial and scientificsupport. DOE's Office of Energy Research Subsurface Science Program isfunding competitive research and essential logistical tasks to ensureaseptic samples are obtained.    DOE will implement the transitional program at INEL and the Hanfordsite. Results at the first site will meet two or more scientificobjectives in the program plan and provide scientific and technologicalexperience needed to confirm results or meet objectives at the next site.Site sampling and analysis will be completed sequentially throughactivities at INEL, Hanford and the Nevada Test Site. Operational andscientific payoffs of FY'90 activities are as follows:    o Savage Island Exploratory Borehole (Hanford). Operational:Development of microbial tracers; initial experience in hard-rock samplingprotocols; refinement of rotary-mud drilling methods for partiallyconsolidated sediments. Scientific:  First indication of microbes in deepzones with different hydrochemistry from SRS; improved detection ofmicrobial contamination with labelled natural bacteria.    o Snake River Deep Interbed Probe (INEL). Operational: Enhanced use ofhard-rock and unconsolidated sampling for use at Hanford; specificevaluation of use of new air/argon drilling technique for microbial sampleacquisition. Scientific:  Substantiation of lack of organisms inlow-permeability formations; determination of organism distributionpatterns in fracture flow terrain at DOE sites; determination of organismphysiology and distribution in high-flow ground water.    o Aseptic Sampling Technology Development (Hanford). Operational:Development and evaluation of new aseptic sampling methods for collectionof high-quality microbiological samples in varied and complexhydrogeologic systems at DOE sites.    o Western States Mixed Softrock/Hardrock Sequence (Hanford/YakimaBarricade).  Operational: Use of verified aspectic techniques for mixedsoft- and hard-rock sequence; demonstation of particle/colloid andmicrobial tracer efficiency under complex hydrologic conditionsrepresentative of DOE sites. Scientific: Widening range of lithologies,geochemistry and permeabilities to maximize comparative opportunities withSRS; varied ground water age and recharge sources to make unique genetic,physiological and metabolic comparisons to organisms at SRS and INEL.    o Subsurface Hardrock Spatial Variability Experiment (NTS).Operational: Refine statistical sampling strategy to assessmulti-dimensional distribution of organisms; improve techniques forisolation of microbes from hard-rock samples.  Scientific: Document rockfracture control on organism distribution; identify minimum sample size todefine macroscopic population characteristics; unique data-set on microbialdistributions for application of geostatistical techniques.    o Contaminated Site/Bioremediation Research Site (FY'91). Operational:Use of specialized aseptic sampling techniques in chemically contaminatedenvironments; co-quantification of chemical and microbiologicaldistribution with depth; use of proven tracer technology to document sampleintegrity. Scientific: Effects of organic/inorganic contaminants onmicrobial populations, activity and diversity; indentification/isolation ofcontaminant-adapted or contaminant-using organisms; microbial distributionsin a representative site requiring bioremediaton.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990RISK OF CANCER FROM LOW-LEVEL EXPOSURETO RADIATION COULD BE HIGHER THAN THOUGHT    The risk of developing cancer from exposure to low levels of X-rays andgamma rays could be as high as 3-4 times greater than those previouslyestimated, but epidemiological studies of nuclear weapons workers appear toshow only that the risks are as high as expected, says a National ResearchCouncil committee.    The committee updated findings of the BEIR III panel, which issued itsreport on health effects from alpha particle emitters. Higher riskestimates presented in the new report, BEIR V, stem from new risk models,revised dose estimates for survivors of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomicbombs, and additional epidemiological data on cancers and other healtheffects experienced by both A-bomb survivors and persons exposed toradiation for medical purposes.    The new report notes several studies reviewed on nuclear workerepidemiology "have yet to accumulate a sufficient number of deaths to reachany sensible conclusions relating to individual types of cancer. The mostconsistent result ...  is that the risk estimates for all types of cancercombined and for all types of leukemia combined are consistent with therisk estimates" in BEIR V.    The worker studies include reviews of British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.(Windscale Plant and Sellafield Plant) in the United Kingdom; Hanford Site,Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge Y-12 Plant, and Rocky FlatsNuclear Weapons Plant, in the U.S.; and Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. inCanada, along with studies of workers at civilian nuclear plants.    Energy Secretary James D. Watkins on Dec. 20 directed Peter Brush,acting assistant secretary for environment, safety and health, to reviewthe BEIR V report and its potential implications for DOE's nuclearoperations, including making recommendations for modifying operations,where needed. Watkins called for an interim report within 90 days and afinal report by June 30, 1990.    Health Effects of Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation isavailable for $35 in paperback or $40 in hardcover from the NationalAcademy Press, 2101 Consitution Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 20418, (800)624-6242 or (202) 334-3313.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990GAO OFFERS DOD ADVICE ON MINIMIZING AMOUNTOF UNUSED HAZARDOUS WASTE SENT FOR DISPOSAL    The Department of Defense fails to minimize unused hazardous materialstransferred for disposal, the General Accounting Office says in a newlyreleased report. The accounting arm of Congress based its analysis on arandom sample from 10 installations, finding that 40% of the waste wasunused hazardous materials.    Hazardous materials with a $250 million acquisition value weretransferred for disposal during fiscal 1986-88, says the report, preparedat the request of Rep. Vic Fazio (D-Calif.), chairman of the HouseGovernment Operations Subcommittee on the Environment. Materials initiallyworth more than $195 million were disposed of in FY'86-88 by sales to thepublic (43%), disposal service contracts (31%), reuse within DOD (13%),transfer/donation to non-DOD users (12%) and miscellaneous disposals (lessthan 1%). The remainder will stay in storage until a decision is reached onthe manner in which the materials will be disposed of.    The inventory control procedure of first-in, first-out (FIFO), whichcan minimize the chance of hazardous materials becoming hazardous wastedue to shelf-life expiration, is not always followed because of a lack ofinternal controls, GAO found. Some exceptions to the procedure arepermitted that do not fully take into account extra costs incurred in thedisposal of hazmat.    DOD does not always follow its regulations that the condition ofhazardous materials be evaluated periodically, GAO points out. The rulesalso say shelf life is extended after inspection and testing at the depotor installation, when possible. Officials contacted by GAO blame the lackof evaluations on funding constraints, inadequate emphasis by management ora lack of guidance to users on how to evaluate hazmat conditions. Suchmaterials sometimes are transferred for disposal without testing orevaluation to see if shelf-lives could be extended, GAO maintains, and someArmy installations keep hazmats in their inventories for an extended periodof time without evaluating their condition.    DOD uses the same management procedures for hazardous and nonhazardousmaterials, GAO notes. If it had special procedures for managing hazmatinventories, the report concludes, the cost of unnecessary disposal andpotential liability for environmental damage and future cleanup costs couldbe decreased.    Some improvements are on the way, GAO adds. The Navy establishedinstructions June 20, 1989, to improve life-cycle management of itshazmats. The rules address management of hazmat inventories, includingcontrols over their procurement, management procedures for excess hazmatsand waste, quality assurance evaluations, documentation, and record-keepingand reporting. These elements bring a structure to the management of wastesin the Navy, GAO contends, pointing out that the Air Force and Army have nocomparable effort under way.    GAO wants each service to provide special attention to inventorymanagement procedures for hazmats. These should include directing theDefense Logistics Agency and the General Services Administration, throughthe memorandum of agreement between DOD and the GSA, to make greater useof direct delivery contracts for hazmats with a short shelf-life; supplyorganizations to make greater use of FIFO procedures for short shelf-lifehazmats and to discourage exceptions; and supply depots and installationsto evaluate the condition of hazmats consistently through periodic testingor inspections before sending them out for disposal.    Free copies of "Hazardous Waste -- Attention to DOD Inventories ofHazardous Materials Needed," GAO/NSIAD-90-11, are available from GAO, Box6015, Gaithersburg, Md. 20877, (301) 275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990EPA REGION 5 PROPOSES INCREASE IN PENALTYAGAINST WESTINGHOUSE FOR FMPC VIOLATIONS    Westinghouse Materials Co. of Ohio would receive a much stiffer finethan initially proposed for violations at the Feed Materials ProductionCenter at Fernald, under a motion filed by the Environmental ProtectionAgency Region 5. The amended complaint, filed Dec. 19, asks for $330,500and is based on violations discovered at the facility after an initialfiling of a Feb. 9, 1989, complaint with a proposed fine of $196,500.    During two inspections last August and October, EPA found more than 25new and recurring violations of federal hazardous waste regulations.Specifically, EPA alleges that Westinghouse has failed to complete requiredwaste analyses and waste determination plans; failed to designate itself asoperator on the hazardous waste permit application; continued to monitorground water inadequately; and submitted inadequate closure plans,operating records, job descriptions and training records.    EPA filed this latest motion with Administrative Law Judge Thomas Hoya.If Hoya grants the motion to amend the original complaint and boost thepenalty, Westinghouse will have the right to request a hearing to contestany new allegations made by the federal government.    In a related note, the Department of Energy says it is dropping itsappeal of a $78 million judgment by the U.S. District Court for theSouthern District of Ohio resolving a $300 million suit filed in 1985 bythe facility's neighbors, who maintain that radioactive emissions overthree decades from the plutonium-processing plant have endangered theirhealth, caused emotional distress and lowered the property value of theirhouses (DPW, July 7, 1989).    "We're not going to pursue our appeal," explained DOE attorney StevenWakefield, but "the bad news is that the department discovered earlier [inthe week of Dec. 17] that it cannot pay the judgment from a fund it hadplanned to use." DOE had wanted to use a federal contingency fund, but wasbarred from doing so because the suit was initially filed against acontractor, not the government.  DOE now must seek a separate appropriationfrom Congress to establish the fund.    The plaintiffs accepted the decision -- with the money earmarked forlifetime epidemiological studies and health monitoring -- but the finalagreement and acceptance by Judge S. Arthur Spiegel was held up as DOEdisagreed with plaintiffs over the decision's interpretation (DPW, Sept. 1,1989). Two private companies in the area had complained that someof the industrial waste pollution for which they had been cited separatelywas due to FMPC's operations. One corporate complainant said his firm'sproperty value also was diminished, but the court said he would have tofile separately for compensation.    DOE had appealed the decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals for theSixth Circuit, arguing the accord barred any future claims, but plaintiffscontended that it covered only emotional distress and reduction of propertyvalues. They demanded they could still file to obtain funds to covercleanup work; DOE had said some of the $78 million could be earmarked forcleanup.    The suit had involved FMPC's operations by NLO, a subsidiary ofNational Lead of Ohio, the former contractor, which went out of business.Because of NLO's departure, DOE had to step in as defendant. The change inthe operations and maintenance contract came after the initial filing andbefore the settlement. The contract was transferred to Westinghouse at endof 1985. Activities at the plant were suspended last year to speed updecontamination.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990BATTELLE SENSOR FOR DETECTING CONTAMINANTSIN SOIL TO BE MORE ACCURATE, LESS EXPENSIVE    Battelle Memorial Institute's device for improving detection of fueloil, stored gasoline, solvents and other organic liquids dumped or leakinginto soil (DPW, Dec. 22, 1989) is expected to be more accurate,less expensive and simpler to use than current competing technologies.Developed by researchers at Department of Energy's Pacific NorthwestLaboratory, operated by Battelle, the device will be made available forcommercialization and manufacture.    Battelle's new sensor, constructed from materials costing less thanthose employed in current devices, could be used by environmentalresearchers to measure the amount and location of organic liquids thathave seeped into the soil.  "It could be used to detect leaks in newstorage tanks as well as to monitor the severity of leaks from olderstorage facilities," suggests John W. Cary of Battelle's Earth andEnvironmental Sciences Center.    Cary created the sensor to assist Battelle researchers in their studiesof how organic fluids move in the subsurface environment and how to reduceor repair their ecological effects. "Traditionally, devices such as 'gypsumblocks' are used to measure water content within soil," he explained."These measuring instruments are more expensive and do not detect organicliquids. On the other hand, most sensors that are used to detect organicliquids in soils detect vapors rather than the presence of liquid. These,too, are expensive."    The sensor features an optical switch containing a solid-stateinfrared-light-emitting device joined to a porous disk made of ceramic,fritted glass, PTFE (Teflon) or various carbon-based materials. Whichmaterial is selected determines whether water or organic liquid is absorbedinto the pores.    The disk is placed into the soil where liquid, if present, is absorbed.Light transmitted through the disk is measured and is proportionate to theamount of water or organic liquid that is absorbed into the pores. Theamount of liquid in the disk can be related to the amount of liquid in thesurrounding soil. The disk remains in the soil the entire time themeasurement is made.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990ARMY TESTING COMPOSTING OF SOILTO ELIMINATE EXPLOSIVE CONTAMINATION    The U.S. Army's 19,700-acre Umatill Depot near Hermiston, Ore., will bethe testing site for an experiment in treating soil contaminated byexplosives. The composting experiment will use microorganisms to consumethe contaminants in soils and sediments, explains Capt. Craig Myler,project officer for the Army's Toxic and Hazardous Materials Agency(USATHAMA).    Because microbes do not naturally feed quickly enough on TNT particles,they will be coaxed in tests in special greenhouses, where soil is enrichedwith addi tional microbe food sources, such as hay, straw, manure orlivestock feed. Much of the contamination comes from dry ponds used 25years ago to settle out high-explosive residues, Myler says. The explosivematerial seeped through the ponds' sandy bottoms.    Contamination also had spread across some 1,100 acres used for disposalof rocket fuels, battery acid, explosives and propellants. Some of thesepollutants, which include nitrates, nitrites, cyanide and metals, havemigrated to ground water. The composting system is less expensive thanincineration, the only alternative. Burning the residue costs about $300per ton, or as much as three times that for composting.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DOE'S IDAHO AND RICHLAND OFFICESSEEK BETTER CLEANUP TECHNOLOGIES    The Department of Energy's Idaho and Richland Operations offices willseek better technologies to solve waste management and environmentalrestoration problems in Idaho and Washington under a new agreement. Theaccord will address Secretary James D. Watkins' Environmental Restorationand Waste Management Five-Year Plan initiatives announced earlier this year(DPW, Sept. 1, 1989).    The new agreement will run through Sept. 30, 1994, providing forcollaboration on waste management and environmental restoration issuesamong the Boise and Richland offices, their contractors, and universitiesin Washington, Oregon, Idaho and Montana. Funding for the activities willbe provided by DOE as part of Idaho and Richland Operations offices'approved spending plans.    The agreement encompasses, but is not limited to: (1) establishing aDOE team to address parallel research needs and activities; (2) focusing ofcombined expertise on objectives of regional interest and nationalimportance; (3) drawing on existing working relationships effectively touse technical expertise and experience to assure appropriate resourceapplication in specific areas of waste management and environmentalrestoration; and (4) developing a consortium of the laboratories and otherDOE contractors with northwestern and mountain states universities forpromoting waste management and environmental restoration education througheducational training support and research and development opportunities.    The accord involves nine areas of collaboration: stabilizing ordestroying waste on site; quantifying potential health and environmentalrisks and exposure reductions; processing wastes to recover potentiallyuseful materials; treating solid and liquid wastes using high temperatures;developing robotic waste retrieval technologies; differentiating specificwaste sites; demonstrating technologies; developing waste minimizationtechniques; and collaborating with universities on research and training.Additional areas might be added.    The first tier in a three-tiered management will be a committee ofoperations office managers, laboratory directors and operating contractorpresidents/general managers. The second tier will be a six-member steeringcommittee from each operations office and up to two representatives fromtheir laboratory or operating contractor. It will be co-chaired by theoperations office representatives. The third tier will consist of activityproject managers, with an Idaho National Engineering Laboratory and aHanford project manager for each activity.    "The collaborative agreement provides a means for better use of time,talent and funds in solving waste management and environmental restorationissues important to the Pacific Northwest and the nation," said Watkins."An important part of this agreement involves collaboration not justbetween different groups in one federal agency, but with regionaluniversities as well.    "We expect the universities to play an important role in research onwaste cleanup issues and in developing education and training programs inwaste management and environmental-related areas," Watkins added. "Webelieve the education and training programs fostered by this agreement willproduce the additional skilled people needed to clean up both industrialand DOE wastes." Since he first arrived on the job, Watkins has complainedthat he could not find enough trained and experienced people to mount theeffort he would like.    The agreement was signed by the two operations offices, BattellePacific Northwest Laboratory, Westinghouse Hanford Co., Westinghouse IdahoNuclear Co., EG&G Idaho Inc., Mountain State Energy Co. and UNC Geotech.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DROUGHT MAY BE TO BLAME FOR HIGH URANIUMLEVEL OF CONTAMINATION IN GROUND WATER AT FMPC    Surprisingly high uranium contamination levels found in wells drilled70 ft.  into the Great Miami River Aquifer from a point in the southwestcorner of the Feed Materials Production Center at Fernald, Ohio, could havebeen the result of last summer's drought, says Andrew Avel, deputyenvironmental manager of the Department of Energy's Site Office.    The contamination had been known for years, but the concentrationlevels unexpectedly rose from 309 + 51 parts per billion (ppb) insamplings taken in late February 1989 and reported the following month, to851 + 136 ppb in tests made on May 11 and results received June 19, andfell back down to to 232 + 39 ppb in samples taken July 28 and resultsreached on Sept. 7, DPW was told by Avel.    One theory is that the contamination results from a temporary, partialdrying of the aquifer during a drought last summer. All the readings aremany times higher than U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's unreleasedproposed standard of 30 ppb; there are no standards in place today. Thereduced rainfall could have caused the ground water flow to reverse itsnormal southerly course and place the test wells downstream, instead ofupstream, of contamination sources in the nuclear weapons facility, DPWwas told. Renewed rainfall could have returned the gradient to its normalcourse, according to this line of thinking at DOE.    The readings were taken by Advanced Sciences Inc., contractor to theDepartment of Energy, not to Westinghouse Materials Co. of Ohio (WMCO),operations and management prime contractor at FMPC. They are part of theremedial investigation/ feasibility study (RIFS) to characterize theenvironment surrounding the plant.  Now in the effort's "RI" stage, thetests on wells within the plant site were made to gather information for adata base for future environmental restoration.    The results were first released publicly about two weeks ago by WMCO'sAdvisory Committee, an independent group of local citizens, who had beenbriefed by WMCO in a regularly scheduled quarterly meeting that touched onthe results of the monitoring of the wells. The readings' results wereburied in the citizen group's press release and picked up Jan. 3 by theCincinnati Enquirer.    The contaminated plume appears to be moving south at a rate of about200 ft.  per year and now extends some 1.5 miles away from the plant. Thecontaminated water wells tap into the Great Miami River Aquifer. No knownpolluted water is used for drinking, but some water unsafe for drinking istreated and used for industrial purposes. Ohio EPA wants to assureavailability of water supplies from the aquifer even though the main watersupply for Cincinnati is the Ohio River.    The monitoring wells were drilled specifically for the test; they arenot used to draw water for other purposes. Production wells in the area arechecked often, Avel said, and those that have been identified ascontaminated are no longer being used for drinking water. The few outlyingwells in use for drinking water have readings essentially at backgroundlevel and are being monitored.    DOE is working on an agreement with the state and EPA to find asolution to the contaminated water. One option under consideration is topump out the water from the contaminated plume, treat it and return it tothe surface of the ground, DPW has been told, but there is no commitmentyet to take any particular action.  DOE maintains that the 1989 readingspose no new threat to the public and are not evidence of any new instanceof contamination from FMPC, although that may be the public perception. "Weare concerned, but it's really nothing that surprises us," Avel told DPW.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990LAWRENCE LIVERMORE ASKS EPA TO REVIEWREFUSAL ON HAZARDOUS WASTE PERMIT    Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) has delivered the plansfor operating its incinerator and hazardous waste storage and treatmentfacility to the California Department of Health Services (DHS) and the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency. The 12 volumes are the documentation LLNLneeds to obtain a permit to run the facility.    They were provided in response to notification of EPA's proposedintention to deny a hazardous waste permit for nearly all waste operationsat LLNL. The material was delivered in person at a Dec. 18 meeting withagency officials, but there has been no comment from EPA since, oneofficial from LLNL's Environmental Protection Department (EPD) told DPW.    A second EPD official, Susi Jackson, said, "We have worked hard tocomply with regulatory agenda requirements and have documented ouraccomplishements and plans for the future in this highly detaileddocumentation." She noted that the report "includes a health riskassessment of our existing incinerator and other documents that reflect ourresponse to regulatory agency concerns.    Jackson said LLNL's goal is "to work with EPA and DHS to ensure thatour waste storage and treatment facilities are absolutely in compliancewith existing laws. We have worked closely with the agencies to resolveall outstanding issues related to the permit applications.    The lab has "made a strong effort to meet agency requirements and toassure them of [LLNL's] commitment to operate its facility in anenvironmentally sound manner, consistent with regulatory requirements. Byexpediting our efforts, we have completed all construction and other tasksthat were scheduled for the next several years under regulatoryrequirements.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990DOE 'TIGER TEAMS' TO CHECKLIVERMORE LATE NEXT MONTH    A Department of Energy "Tiger Team" will inspect the Lawrence LivermoreNational Laboratory late next month to assess its compliance withenvironmental, health and safety regulations. These 25-person investigativeteams are visiting all 18 major facilities in the nuclear weapons complexplus dozens of other laboratories and installations. They already havebeen to Rocky Flats, Fernald, Mound, Pantex, Y-12 and a civilian nuclearenergy facility in New York State.    Tiger Team members will visit LLNL within a few weeks to makepre-assessments and develop an agenda for the full-scale investigation,tentatively set for Feb.  26, explains John Clatworthy, a hazards controlofficer. Clatworthy has just returned to LLNL after spending a year at DOEheadquarters as technical and science advisor to the director of the Officeof Weapons Safety and Operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990HOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense NuclearHOUSE PANEL TO VISIT ROCKY FLATS: The House Armed Services Defense NuclearFacilities Panel will visit the Rocky Flats Plant in Golden, Colo., Jan.16 to conduct its own investigation of safety concerns and review plans forrestaring the plutonium trigger manufacturing operations there. Themeeting, requested by Chairman John M. Spratt Jr. (D-S.C.), an ex-officiomember of the panel, follows a Dec. 1, 1989, decision by Energy SecretaryJames D. Watkins to extend the planned Nov. 13 shutdown of activities thereuntil higher environmental and safety standards are imposed, the safetycorrections are verified by an independent group of experts, and a newsafety program implemented.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-order    ICF Kaiser Engineers, Oakland, Calif., has received a task-ordercontract from the Energy Department for environmental support services atthe Nevada Test Site. The contract, worth up to $5 million over the nextthree years, was awarded by DOE contractor Reynolds Electrical &Engineering Co., Inc. Under the accord, ICF will provide environmentalservices, training programs, laboratory support, and quality assurance andcontol (QA/QC) assistance. ICF has opened a Las Vegas office to support thework. Contact: ICF Kaiser Engineers, Renaissance Executive Suites, 2255-ARenaissance Dr., Suites 22-23, Las Vegas, Nev. 89119, (702) 739-9011, fax:(702) 798-4865.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to direct    Battelle Memorial Institute has selected Donald A. Kane to directHanford operations for the Energy Department's Environmental ManagementOperations (EMO), created earlier this year. EMO, operated by Battelle,offers environmental restoration services to DOE and other federalagencies. Activities include risk assessment, environmental auditing,regulatory compliance and occupational safety and health. Contact:Battelle, Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Battelle Blvd., P.O. Box 999,Richland, Wash. 99352, (509) 375-2242.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the    Defense Department Environmental Compliance will be the focus of the17th Environmental Symposium of the American Defense PreparednessAssociation (ADPA), April 18-20 in Atlanta. The conference is designed tobring together DOD officials and private companies, educationalinstitutions, professional societies, and state and federal regulatoryagencies. Contact: Vincent Ciccone, Law Environmental Inc., Woodbridge,Va., (703) 643-1489, or Col. Bruce Holt, ADPA, Arlington, Va., (703)522-1820.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPORT ON DEFENSE PLANT WASTES via NewsNetJANUARY 5, 1990    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.    DOE's Epidemiological Research Panel met in Albuquerque, N.M., Dec.28-29 to hear testimony from officials with the Centers for Disease Controlin Atlanta, New York University's Institute of Environmental Medicine, thegovernment of the Rongelap Atoll in the Marshall Islands, the New MexicoTumor Registry, the International Commission on Radiological Protection,and several Department of Energy programs. A draft of the panel's report,released last month, called on DOE to revamp its epidemiology program (DPW,Dec. 8, 1989). Contact:  Nona Shepard, Secretarial Panel for theEvaluation of Epidemiologic Research Activities for the Department ofEnergy, 1000 Independence Ave., Rm. GF-209, Washington, D.C. (202)586-3773.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-13IA059-000325-B019-249http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev20.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002216 text/html 37135HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:20:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:26 GMTContent-length: 36946Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev20.html Sample Issue Copyright SOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SLANTS & TRENDS (356 words) MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISED FOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS (332 words) 'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES SAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT (277 words) STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS (695 words) VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTE VOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES (741 words) EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONS COULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS (292 words) SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATION FOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION (316 words) EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARD FOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING (97 words) BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGE ENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS (394 words) INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLE OF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS (305 words) INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVAL AFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE (571 words) HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASE RECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING (158 words) SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLES TO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS (292 words) CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SLANTS & TRENDSSUPERFUND TAKES A HIT - EPA shut down the federal Superfundprogram this week because the agency was unable to paynearly 2,000 of its employees in that program along with8,000 contractors who perform remediation work. TheSuperfund was not affected immediately by the shutdown ofthe federal government because most of those employees arepaid directly from the fund, rather than from budgetappropriations, said Jim Mathews, deputy assistantadministrator for EPA's Office of Solid Waste and EmergencyResponse.     Although Congress has not reauthorized the program orissued its allotment for the current fiscal year, Superfundhad operated since October from a surplus in last year'sfund, Mathews explained. That money ran out Jan. 2, and theagency began shutting down the program. Only emergencypersonnel will continue working, reducing the agency'sprogram employees from more than 3,000 to 80. SeveralSuperfund sites will continue cleanups during the shutdown,although many will be forced to stop operations, he said.Contact: Jim Mathews, EPA, (202) 260-4610.* * *IN ONE POCKET, OUT THE OTHER - EPA has fined the Departmentof Interior's (DOI), National Parks Service for violatingthe Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) by storinghazardous waste at the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. Thefacility stored hazardous waste without a RCRA permitbetween March and October of last year, EPA said. The wastecontained acetone, chromium, lead, xylene, phenol, arsenicand mercury, EPA contended. EPA also cited DOI for storingwaste in rusted, leaking containers. EPA fined the DOIfacility $243,800 and ordered it to develop a hazardouswaste management plan.* * *EPA BACKS BACT - Proposed new source review (NSR) rulesunder development by EPA probably will recommend a "topdown" approach for determining the best available controltechnology (BACT) such as technology used to controlemissions from landfills, EPA officials said. The rules alsowill give states some flexibility in determining whichcontrol method to use. The proposal, EPA officials said,will allow states to develop their own BACT determinationcriteria as long as they consider the leading technologiescurrently available.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996MID-SIZED FIRMS DID WELL, NOW POISEDFOR MORE GROWTH, COMPANY REPORTS     Mid-sized solid waste companies had the most pronouncedgrowth in the industry during 1995, with revenues increasing69 percent to $2 billion, and that trend should continue,according to a report by Raymond James & Associates, afinancial analysis company in St. Petersburg, Fla.     In general terms, the report said, acquisition growthaccelerated over the past 12 months. The top 13 solid wastecompanies are expected to increase their revenues by 21percent, with a major revenue component driven byacquisitions, the report also said.     The report cited USA Waste's recently announced mergerwith Western Waste for $530 million (SWR, Dec. 21, 1995, p.391). If completed, this transaction would raise USA Wasteto third ranking by size in the U.S. solid waste market,Raymond James noted.     In addition, the report said, considerably improvedfinancing costs over the past year made the financingenvironment for solid waste companies, particularly smallergrowth companies, better than any time in the past.Smaller Companies Cited     On financing issues, the report explained, "We wish tostress that the improvement in the cost of financing hasbeen most notable for the smaller waste service companies. Alonger track record leading to enhanced credibility hasenabled these companies to dramatically lower their costs ofcapital and benefit not only from lower rates, but from theaccess to longer term financing and attractively pricedequity."     Those financing options were "very limited" as recentlyas 15 to 18 months ago, Raymond James explained.     However, the document also noted that presently, "Thelow financing costs clearly provide more attractive dynamicsfor public companies to pursue acquisitions."     In general, the analysis said, long term financingrates for all companies, as represented by 30 year Treasurybonds, have dropped considerably, thus providing a backdropfor continued aggressive acquisition.     The report, Solid Waste 1995: Mid-Sized Companies LeadIndustry in a Torrid Acquisition Pace, is available fromRaymond James. Contact: William Fisher, (800) 237-5643.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996'GREEN WALL' ON ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUESSAID TO HURT CORPORATE MANAGEMENT     Communication problems between business andenvironmental staff members can prevent companies fromsuccessfully managing corporate environmental issues,according to a survey of major U.S. firms.     In its primary finding, the survey done by Arthur D.Little Inc. reported a "green wall" that blockscommunication exists in many companies. For example,managers for environment, health and safety programs at the185 corporations Arthur D. Little surveyed often cited theirfailure to convince management that environmental programsare important to their firm's success.     Numerous company officials responded that environment,health, and safety functions are often viewed as an outsideoperation with a sole mission of "keeping the company out oftrouble," Arthur D. Little also reported. More than 70percent of those responding cited either a lack ofacceptance of environmental issues, or a separateenvironmental "culture" as blocking integratingenvironmental functions into their firms' business plans.Contact: Diane Millikan, (617) 498-5896.* * *     Norton Performance Plastics Corp., Wayne, N.J., hasintroduced a line of plastic tubing the company said can beincinerated without creating hazardous by-products. Contact:Jackie Swartzberg, (201) 696-4700.     Oracle Environmental Corp., Houston, is offering abrochure and technical data sheets explaining informationmanagement solutions for environmental compliance issues.Contact: Larry Orecklin, (415) 506-9229.     Scepter Recycling Inc., Bicknell, Ind., has acquiredAlumax Recycling's recycling centers in Houston andArlington, Texas. Scepter also acquired Alumax's interest inMetales Ligas Especiales S.A., C.B., a recycling company inMexico. Contact: Larry Neal, (812) 735-2500.     Solvent Kleene Inc., Peabody, Mass., has introduced its"D-Greeze 1000" non-toxic, non-flammable degreaser/cleanerthat the company claimed is also non-hazardous. Contact: TomKutai, (508) 531-2279.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996STUDY SAYS MRFS ARE ENVIRONMENTALLYSOUND, CREATE NO HEALTH PROBLEMS     Although they are not always the most economicallyviable systems, state and local governments increasingly usematerial recovery facilities (MRFs) for managing municipalsolid waste (MSW), according to a new study (SWR, Dec. 14,1995, p. 383).     "I suspect the reason is [the] public press forrecycling," said Philip Shepherd, coauthor of the report,Environmental, Economic, and Energy Impacts of MaterialRecovery Facilities, in making a personal assessment ofinterest in MRFs.     The report, by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), EPAand the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),evaluates the economic, energy and environmental aspects ofMRFs by studying six facilities.     Although the report found nothing revolutionary, saidShepherd of NREL, it is designed to be a decision-makingtool that helps solid waste managers weigh the outcomes ofdifferent management options. The primary objectives of theevaluation were to understand the effects of MRFs'operations on public health and the environment along withoccupational health and safety functions, the documentexplained.     If the study found anything noteworthy, Shepherd said,it was that MRFs do not use a significant amount of energywhen compared to other components of an integrated solidwaste management system (ISWMS). The fuel use associatedwith collecting various recyclables, however, dominates theoverall energy consumption of MRF operations, the governmentstudy also reported.Environmental Effects     The document details the six MRFs' effects on ambientair quality, receiving waters and community noise levels.The health and safety evaluation section addressed exposureto chemicals, biological and energy aspects of MRFs based inSouth Holbrook, N.Y.; Montgomery County, Md.; Albuquerque,N.M.; Hartford, Conn.; Rice County, Minn.; and OrangeCounty, Fla.     MRFs do not pose significant threats to either publichealth or the environment, according to the study. Nuisanceconditions, such as fugitive dust and excessive noise, canbe easily mitigated through roadway maintenance andenclosing equipment. Potential health and safety hazards forworkers can be controlled by implementing the OccupationalSafety and Health Administration's (OSHA) worker protectionprograms, the study also concluded.     The agencies also did a case study of the multi-purposerecycling facility in South Holbrook owned and operated bythe Islip (N.Y.) Resource Recovery Agency. That facility hasthe capacity to handle 240 tons of recyclables during aneight-hour shift, including newspapers, corrugatedcardboard, mixed paper, metals, tin cans, plastics, flintglass and aluminum. On alternate Wednesdays, vehiclesdeliver either newspapers or mixed recyclables to the MRF.The recyclables are then hand-sorted from conveyor belts.     The federal evaluators found no air pollution levelsexceeding the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS)at the Islip MRF. Values for carbon monoxide and mercuryvapor were considerably lower than the applicable OSHAlimits, the report also said. Measurements of volatileorganic compounds (VOCs) resulted in concentrations nogreater than 10 ug/m3, with the exception of three compoundsin the range of 1 to 60 ug/m3 range at a site upwind of thefacility.Worker Exposure Low     OSHA's portion of the evaluation there measuredworkers' exposure to nuisance dusts, silica, and metals bycollecting breathing zone samples from selected workerstaken periodically over their eight-hour shifts. The highesttotal of respirable dust levels were found on the tippingfloor, a total of 3.39 mg/m3 for all dust and 0.55 mg/m3 forrespirable dust. All exposure levels, however, wereconsiderably lower than the federal permissible exposurelimits (PELs), according to the report.     Airborne and surface bacteria and fungi samples werecollected inside the building. Levels were relativelyconsistent among locations inside the facility, with nospecific areas exhibiting unusually high or low levels.However, OSHA has not yet established PELs for either fungior bacteria, the study noted. To determine the ergonomicsfactors involved in the facility, the evaluators videotapedseveral operations in the facility's picking booth.     They found only one potential ergonomics risk factor:the work station's configuration, which required workers toreach across the full width of the conveyor for picking andsorting various recyclable items. The report is availablefrom the National Technical Information Service, U.S.Department of Commerce, 5285 Port Royal Rd., Springfield, VA22161. Contact: (703) 487-4650.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996VARIABLE-RATE SYSTEMS REDUCE WASTEVOLUME IN SEVERAL CAROLINA CITIES     Several local governments in North Carolina havelowered the amount of solid waste generated by up to 30percent through charging customers for the volume of wastethey generate, rather than assessing a fixed fee, accordingto the North Carolina Recycling Association (NCRA).     The association surveyed several local governments inthat state that have converted to charging customersvariable rates based on the volume of waste they generate.However, NCRA also reports there are several problems withcharging by the weight of solid waste generated.     For example, Yadkin County, N.C., adopted a sticker-based program in 1994 in which customers deliver trash intheir own 30-gallon bags to one of seven sites, NCRA said.For additional trash, they can buy a 50-cent sticker foreach bag, and recyclables are accepted without charge.     Yadkin County officials reported 30-percent reductionin solid waste. Motine Kenney, solid waste coordinator forthat local government, said, "We did a countywide survey,and people in the county said they'd rather go with a unitprice program than pay for someone else's garbage."Wilmington Reports Waste Reduction     In another example, the city of Wilmington, N.C.,charges $12.90 per week to pick up a 90-gallon can of refuseand $9.90 weekly for picking up a 40-gallon can. Excesswaste can be disposed of in 33-gallon bags that each cost$1, and residents also can get twice weekly pickup of the90-gallon can for $27.50.     Wilmington officials reported a 10 percent reduction insolid waste going to landfills, and a 42 percent increase inboth recycling and yard waste, NCRA said. However, NCRA alsoreported the system there has created administrativeproblems. In areas near low-income housing projects,residents often dumped excess garbage in streets and intocommercial dumpsters, they said.     Even after dropping the program for those low-incomehousing projects, illegal dumping has increased inWilmington, according to Bill Reed, superintendent foroperations for Wilmington's solid waste department. "If youinstitute a variable-rate program, be sure you have anadequate enforcement mechanism set up," Reed cautions otherlocal governments.     In another case cited by the state association, JonesCounty in eastern North Carolina has operated a variable-rate program based on volume since 1972. Under that system,bags are sold wholesale to area businesses and then resoldto residential consumers for $1.25 each.     The county has since added pickup of recyclables, whichare collected along with residential waste and stored in aseparate trailer towed by the refuse truck. Then, crews takeall materials collected to a transfer station, where thewaste is sent to a landfill and recyclables are sold.     "It's been a good system for us," according to CountyManager Larry Matthews. "It's clean and it's well acceptedby our citizens. This was our first solid waste system, andour first recycling system, so we can't really do acomparison. But I'm sure it's an incentive to reduce andrecycle."     However, those successful systems are based on thevolume of waste, rather than on its weight, NCRA stressed.In addition, the association noted, there are severaldrawbacks to charging residents by the weight of waste, sothere has been little interest in using that method.     A primary obstacle to weight-based pricing has beendeveloping truck-mounted scales that can meet standardsdeveloped by the National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST), NCRA explained. For a typical residentialrefuse can, NIST requires scales accurate to within a halfpound to two pounds, which can be difficult standard forsome local operations.     Using those scales also adds to the processing time forhandling refuse, NCRA noted. In addition, those units costapproximately $16,000 to retrofit per processor, NCRA said.High Interest Level     Despite some problems local governments have reportedwith variable-rate systems, interest in those systemsremains high, the association also reported. Beth Graves, ofthe North Carolina Office of Waste Reduction, said shefrequently gets calls from local governments interested inpursuing  variable-rate programs and 80 North Carolinaofficials participated in a satellite conference held onthose systems by EPA, NCRA noted.     In addition, more local governments will consider usingvariable-rate disposal fees as cost-cutting moves continue,NCRA predicted. "I believe that unearthing the costs fromthe general tax fund will provide tremendous incentives forpeople to reduce their wastes," according to Craig Barry,NCRA's Executive Director. Contact: NCRA, (919) 851-8444.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996EPA OFFICIALS: BUDGET REDUCTIONSCOULD CAUSE MAJOR STAFF LAYOFFS     Up to one-fourth of EPA's staff may be laid off byspring unless congressional Republicans substantiallyincrease the agency's long-term funding that is independentof the current federal shutdown, according to EPAAdministrator Carol Browner. That means it may take longerfor the agency to act on solid waste issues.     About one-third of the employees who promulgateregulations, issue permits and perform inspections could belaid off if Congress eventually prevails on the EPAappropriations bill vetoed by President Clinton, agencyofficials also said.     Researchers and employees involved in environmentalcleanups would not be cut. The statement is a break fromprevious announcements, where EPA said it could not predictthe depth of the personnel reductions.Bond Defends Cuts     At a press conference, President Clinton said he vetoedthe $5.7 billion spending bill - that called for a 21percent decrease from fiscal 1995 allocations - becauseenvironmental enforcement would be cut 25 percent, safedrinking water aid to local governments would be slashed 45percent and the air would become more polluted. The cutsalso would condemn "10 million children under the age of 12to living near toxic waste sites that might not be cleanedup for years," Clinton said.     The spending bill (H.R. 2099) contains six policyriders designed to prevent EPA from acting in several areas,along with a 50 percent cut in funding to implement theMontreal treaty for protection of the ozone layer.     In response to earlier attacks by Democrats on EPAfunding cuts, Sen. Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), chairman of theappropriations subcommittee that handles the agency'sfunding, said cuts in the agency's funding were based onrecommendations from several organizations, including theNational Academy of Public Administration.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SEVERAL SENATORS BACK LEGISLATIONFOR A 'MODEST' CWA MODIFICATION     Key Senators on the Environment Committee support fine-tuning the Clean Water Act (CWA) - and not the majorrollback of the law approved last year by the House.     In the first of a series of hearings on reauthorizingthe CWA, Chairman John Chafee (R-R.I.) said he favors amodest bill with a limited agenda. The Senate would be hardpressed, he said, to pass a more ambitious package forchanging the CWA, such as H.R. 961, which the House approvedMay 16, 1995.     The CWA is a "major success story," said the panel'sranking Democrat Max Baucus of Montana. House efforts to"gut" it were "shortsighted, misdirected and wrongheaded,"he said. "No CWA reauthorization would be better than theone the House suggested."     A frequent critic of environmental laws, Sen.Christopher Bond (R-Mo.), said the CWA helped rehabilitatethe Mississippi River. Water quality has improved over thepast two decades, Bond said. Bond said he plans, however, to"fix" CWA stormwater provisions he considers "broken." Localentities and states should not be forced to spend exorbitantsums, Bond added.     "We have cities spending upwards of $650,000 to obtain[stormwater discharge] permits. This expenditure does notresult in cleaner waters...Assessing humungous [CWA] finesagainst small communities with limited resources is probablythe dumbest thing you can do if you want to improve theenvironment," Bond said.     Sen. Larry Pressler (R-S.D.) urged the committee toconsider his bill, S. 1390, that would allow CWA fines to beinvested in local pollution prevention and remediation.     In order to make $2 billion in loans to states annuallyfor the next 30 years, $10 billion needs to be invested inthe wastewater state revolving fund (SRF) over the nextseven years, said Robert Perciasepe, head of EPA's wateroffice. President Clinton requested $1.59 billion in fiscal1996 to support the SRF program.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996EDF TAPS ACTRESS JOANNE WOODWARDFOR TV DOCUMENTARY ON RECYCLING     Actress Joanne Woodward will appear in a televisiondocumentary and in radio and television public serviceannouncements (PSAs) to urge consumers to buy products madefrom recycled materials and save landfill space, accordingto the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF).     EDF said Woodward has made a half-hour documentarydescribing for consumers the life cycle of recycled productsand how to find recycled goods in their local supermarkets.     EDF said it will make the documentary and PSAsavailable to broadcasters, and also will provide thedocumentary to schools and community groups. Contact: EDF,(202) 387-3500.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996BOTH PARTIES MISSED CHANCE TO CHANGEENVIRONMENTAL REGIME, ANALYST SAYS     Both political parties share the blame for Congressfailing to pass meaningful reform of the nation'senvironmental laws last year, including those that regulatesolid waste, according to an analysis done by Paul Portney,president of Resources for the Future (RFF).     Writing in the organization's publication, Resources,Portney said the national debate over reform to require morerisk assessment and cost-benefit analysis for major federalenvironmental statutes, including key parts of the safeDrinking Water Act and the Clean Water Act, was framedinaccurately. One side claimed the effort to require thoselaws was an "heroic attempt to rescue the U.S. economy froma welter of rules" made by unelected bureaucrats, Portneysaid.     The other side, led by congressional Democrats, arguedthat the Republicans were making "thinly veiled effort" toundo 25 years of environmental gains "just to benefit fat-cat corporations," Portney's analysis said.Both Sides Seen At Fault     Portney contended that the Republicans "underminedtheir own efforts" at regulatory reform by cutting EPA'sbudget and tacking riders onto an appropriations bill toprohibit the agency from enforcing some air and waterquality regulations.     "If Congress thinks that particular regulations areill-advised, it can and should openly debate and change thelaws that gave rise to those regulations - not use theappropriations process to make 'stealth' amendments," hewrote.     The Democrats, Portney added, also "bear responsibilityfor the failure of regulatory reform" because they opposedother measures backed by Republicans in the Senate and Housethat would not have eliminated environmental regulations.     Actually, he said, only the Senate bill would havesubjected existing regulations to any review at all, and"even then, it would direct regulatory officials to undoregulations only when they could not satisfy themselves thattheir rules did more harm than good."     Portney also wrote, "With the many possible advantagesof and reasonable concerns about the use of cost-benefitanalysis in regulation, the congressional debate ought to beclear and focused."     "Rather," he said, "the debate has been dominated byfalse claims that regulation is strangling the economy orthat popular safeguards will be wiped off the books byreform legislation."     "We deserve and should insist upon more, though thesmart money is probably best wagered on more cartooncaricatures," Portney concluded. Contact: RFF, (202) 328-5025.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996INDUSTRIAL PARK WOULD START CYCLEOF LOCAL WASTE TO RAW MATERIALS     Wastes generated by one company could become useful rawmaterials for a nearby firm under the concept of an "Eco-Industrial Park" (EIP) now in the planning stages inBaltimore.     According to the Cornell Center for the Environment,the concept being developed in an industrial area ofBaltimore would allow one firm to acquire a new source ofprofit while reducing its waste disposal and transportationcosts, while a nearby company gets a convenient source ofraw materials with the additional benefit of reducing itscosts for transporting those materials.     The area has been designated as a demonstration site bythe President's Council for Sustainable Development.Cornell's environment center proposed the project and isinvolved in its planning and implementation through its Workand Environment Initiative (WEI).     According to a study done by WEI, petroleum-basedindustries in Fairfield must dispose of a waste mixture ofoil and water, which then could be separated into usable oiland water. In addition, construction and demolition debrisfrom industries there could be reprocessed into aggregatefor asphalt production, or refining landscape mulch fromwood.     In turn, WEI said, those waste materials could be usedby new industries as part of their production process. WEIsaid the project could attract more than $1 billion in newinvestments and thousands of new jobs to the area. Theincentives for that investment, WEI said, would beinherently high-performance companies, several modes oftransportation, and skilled workers. WEI said the projectcould provide "a high return on assets for employers, animproved local eco-system for the community and sustainablehigh quality jobs."     Edward Cohen-Rosenthal, WEI's director, said theproject had the potential of "marrying high workplace andenvironmental practices" and increasing profits while alsodecreasing waste and pollution." Contact: Edward Cohen-Rosenthal, WEI, (607) 255-8160.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996INDIANA SEEKS SUBTITLE D APPROVALAFTER YEARS OF FUNDING SHORTAGE     Environmental officials in Indiana anticipate full EPAapproval of the state's solid waste program under Subtitle Dthis summer, after years of delay.     When severe budget cuts hit Indiana's solid wasteprogram in 1993, the U.S. EPA notified the IndianaDepartment of Environmental Management (IDEM) officials thatapproval of their state's Subtitle D program was contingenton the Indiana agency finding sufficient funds to supportthe program (SWR, Nov. 18, 1993).     Funding dried up that year after IDEM ended the statesolid waste division's permit application and operation feeprograms because they resembled a water management programfee structure that had been invalidated by a state court.     Having straightened out funding problems, IDEM plans tosubmit the application for complete approval of the SubtitleD program this spring, and hopes for approval by summer,according to Scott Dinwiddie, an official of the IndianaOffice of Solid and Hazardous Waste (OSHW).     Meanwhile, OSHW has done considerable work to preparefor that approval. Since 1994, the state has closed 10municipal solid waste landfills (MSWLs), leaving the totalat 50.     At the same time, the number of transfer stations hasgrown to 48, according to the 1995 edition of the OSHW'sSummary of Indiana Solid Waste Facility Data. The state has10 construction-demolition landfills, 17 restricted-wastelandfills, two incinerators and 49 composting facilities,according to the government report. Except for a sharpincrease in 1992, the combined total annual disposal for alllandfill types remained fairly stable from 1991 through1994, the document added.     Despite the closing of several landfills, the totalremaining capacity at MSWLs has stayed fairly stable since1991 because of landfill expansions, according to thereport. Indiana should have another decade of adequatedisposal at current facilities, OSHW predicted.     Long-haul imports of trash, primarily from New York,New Jersey and Pennsylvania, have declined since 1991, thesummary explained. However, OSHW said, total waste importsfrom the bordering states of Illinois, Michigan, Ohio andKentucky have remained fairly steady, and exceed long-haulimports. Waste shipments from Illinois comprise 75 percentof Indiana's total waste imports. By 1994, 97 percent of thewaste imported to Indiana came from bordering states, thestate document also explained.Recycling     Indiana's laws require reducing materials going intolandfills through waste diversion, source reduction, reuse,recycling and composting.     The laws also require Indiana to reach an overall recy-cling goal of 35 percent of the waste stream by Jan. 1,1996, and they establish a goal of 50 percent due beforeJan. 1, 2001.     OSHW's Dinwiddie said figures from 1995 are notavailable on whether Indiana has met its recycling goal of35 percent. By 1994's end, the state reached a 19 percentwaste reduction rate, he said.     Copies of the report may be obtained from IDEM's Officeof Solid Waste Management, P.O. Box 6015, Indianapolis, IN46206-6015, (317) 233-5156, or (317) 232-8885.Profiles in Solid Waste Management, Volume III, acompilation of all 50 state profiles - that provides acomprehensive report on the most pressing problems faced andmost innovative programs developed in 1995 - can bepurchased by subscribers for only $77. You'll save $21 offthe regular Price Of $98. Let Swr Do The Job. Save ValuableTime While Staying Up-to-date On Other States' Solid WasteManagement PraCtices. Order Your Copy Today! Call (800) 274-6737.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996HYDRAPULPING CLAIMED TO INCREASERECYCLING OF ASEPTIC PACKAGING     Recycling aseptic packaging, or those "drink boxes," isincreasing as the paper recycling process of hydrapulpinggrows in use, according to reports from the AsepticPackaging Council (APC) (SWR, Dec. 14, p. 383).     Since a pilot drink box recycling program began in1990, the number of U.S. households recycling thosecontainers through curbside programs has grown to 5 million,according to APC. Drink boxes are collected along with otherpolyethylene-coated (laminated) paper products such as milkcartons. Those products are then recycled using thehydrapulping process.     Hydrapulping separates the paper, which makes up 70percent of the packaging, from the plastic and the aluminum.The hydrapulper operates much like a large householdblender, says APC. The machinery is filled with water,aseptic packages and milk and juice cartons, and large rotorblades stir the water. The motion beats the paper fibersaway from the layers of polyethylene and aluminum foil.Contact: APC, (703) 351-5062.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOLID WASTE REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 4, 1996SPORTS COMPANY USES RECYCLABLESTO MAKE BASKETBALL BACKBOARDS     Huffy Sports (HS), manufacturer of home basketballsystems, is the first backboard producer to include post-consumer materials in its products, according to thecompany.     Composite Technologies Corporation (CTC) of Dayton,Ohio, produces the Polymer Fiber Matrix - a compression-molded thermoplastics recycled resin - used in the boards.CTC also manufacturers highway signs and walls for soundbarriers from Polymer Fiber Matrix.     Recycled products used in the Polymer Fiber Matrixinclude: PET soda bottles, milk jugs and industrialplastics. HS plans to produce the majority of its backboardsfrom recycled materials by the end of 1996. Contact: WendeePuccetti, Celtic Advertising, (414) 789-7630.* * *     CALIFORNIA - The Alameda County Waste ManagementAuthority (ACMA) has approved about $400,000 in grants toseven local cities and a waste district for waste reduction,recycling and public education programs. Allocationsinclude: $50,000 for a Garden Patch Greening Resource Centerin Berkeley; $12,500 for an enhanced green waste publicationcampaign in Dublin; $80,770 for a yard-waste publiceducation program in Oakland; and $63,633 for thedevelopment of a multi-material recovery facility in UnionCity. Contact: Bruce Goddard, ACWMA, (510) 614-1699.     NEW JERSEY - Environmental Resources Management (ERM)recently completed its first full-scale installation of asystem based on its patented Advanced Fluidized Composting(AFC) technology at a remediation site in Trenton, N.J. AFCis a process technology used to treat high-strength organicor biodegradable inorganic waste streams, or sludges. Thetechnology combines autothermal biological treatment ofhigh-strength organic waste streams with a proprietaryoxidation step. The result is a highly efficient rate oforganic destruction with little or no generation of wastesludges commonly associated with most biological processes,the company also explained. Contact: ERM, (800) 544-3117.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-14IA059-000325-B019-276http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev22.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002236 text/html 50914HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:20:47 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:27 GMTContent-length: 50725Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev22.html Sample Issue Copyright SUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNet JANUARY 19, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PRPs to bid Waste Inc. dump cap (236 words) Bids near for CryoChem g.w. fix (163 words) C&D Recycling pre-design starts (191 words) AT&SF source removal eyed (194 words) California Gulch capping eyed (187 words) More studies near at Valleycrest (201 words) Bloomington cleanup plans near (213 words) North Bronson to get summer ROD (205 words) A.I.W. Frank g.w. talks delayed (198 words) Nature to clean up Chevron g.w. (188 words) Bids near for $34M Vineland pump-treat (519 words) Ottati & Goss g.w. bids eyed for summer (428 words) Buckeye cap, wetlands talks under way (350 words) Raymark cap construction subs needed (366 words) American Creosote design underway (249 words) Lexington cap to get summer bid (192 words) EPA to bid Arrowhead soil removal (173 words) NL Industries cap, g.w. design due in spring (488 words) Escambia Wood resident relocation eyed (344 words) Bill would give Corps all fund-lead work (359 words) EPA proposes Spokane stabilization, cap (344 words) Correction (68 words) Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor to get near-shore fill (405 words) Senate mulls liability deal (207 words) N.J. reps: restore CERCLA funding (164 words) CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996PRPs to bid Waste Inc. dump cap      PRPs are expected to solicit bids this spring or summer for the construction of an $11.3 million capping and leachate collection project at the Waste Inc. NPL site in Michigan City, Ind.     A group of 16 PRPs known as the Waste Inc. Remedial Action Organization Group (WIROG) agreed last week to comply with an EPA unilateral order to design and build the remedy.      The 1994 ROD calls for capping most of the 32-acre landfill with two to four feet of compacted clay and one foot of topsoil. The cap will be graded and vegetated.      A leachate collection trench also will be needed at the southwest end of the landfill. Groundwater, which has polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and PCBs, will be monitored.     Also, an on-site well will need to be abandoned, an underground fuel storage tank removed and a sewer system rerouted.     Capital costs were estimated at $11.3 million under the ROD, with another $290,000 needed for annual operation and maintenance.     Montgomery Watson's Addison, Ill., office is managing the site for the PRPs and will do the design. A design work plan is due Feb. 5. The consultant also is expected to handle the construction bid solicitations.     The design is expected to be completed this spring or summer. Pre-construction work could begin as early as April.     Contact: Dion Novak, EPA project manager, 312-886-4737; Maureen Grimmer, PRP Steering Committee attorney, 219-931-0560; Joe Adams, Montgomery Watson project manager, 303-938-8818.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bids near for CryoChem g.w. fix     EPA is expected to solicit bids this spring for the construction of a groundwater treatment plant at the CryoChem Inc. NPL site in Worman, Pa.     CH2M Hill Inc.'s Reston, Va., office is managing the fund-lead site as the agency's Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor. The design is at the 30% phase and is scheduled for completion in the spring. Construction is slated to begin this summer.     Groundwater at the site will be extracted and treated with air stripping. Extraction and monitoring wells were installed last fall, and bids will be solicited for the construction of the on-site treatment building only.      Groundwater will be extracted at a maximum rate of 100 gallons per minute and discharged to an on-site creek.     Groundwater samples taken between 1981 and 1985 at the 19-acre metal fabricating plant site revealed on-site and off-site contamination. The primary contaminants are TCA, DCA, TCE, DCE and PCE.      Contact: Joe McDowell, EPA project manger, 215-597-8240; Sunil Pereira, CH2M Hill project manager, 703-471-1441.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996C&D Recycling pre-design starts     PRPs have begun sampling as part of pre-design work for a $12 million soil and sediment cleanup at the C&D Recycling NPL site in Foster Township, Pa.     ERM Northeast will design the remedy for AT&T, which is paying for the work under a unilateral administrative order. Other PRPs were identified by EPA but AT&T is the only one that complied with the order.     Under the September 1992 ROD, about 30,000 cubic yards of soil and sediment will be excavated, stabilized and hauled off-site for disposal.     The prime contaminants are heavy metals, primarily lead and copper.     Design work is scheduled for completion in July 1997.     The 45-acre site operated as metals reclamation plant from the 1960s until the early 1980s. Lead- and plastic-cased telephone cables were burned in pits to melt off the lead and reclaim the remaining copper wire. Plastic coverings were mechanically stripped prior to the burning and stored in piles at the site.     The state found high concentrations of lead and copper in ash piles, the burn pit and drainage pathways.      Contact: Joe McDowell, EPA project manager, 215-597-8240; Joe Chikowski, AT&T, 908-204-8249; Jim Perazzo, ERM Northeast project manager, 516-921-4300.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996AT&SF source removal eyed       EPA received a draft engineering evaluation/cost analysis (EE/CA) report Jan. 16 from PRPs at the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad Co. (AT&SF) NPL site in Albuquerque, N.M., where a source soil and sludge removal likely is needed.     The EE/CA is part of an RI/FS by Radian Corp. of Houston. Radian is doing the work for AT&SF, the only PRP identified by EPA.     Possible removal options include excavation with off-site treatment of sludge and excavation, storage and on-site treatment of sludge with the rest of the site's contaminated soil. Contaminated soil extends to depths of about 40 feet, and the contamination has reached the bedrock aquifer.     Sludge extends to depths of 1.5 feet to two feet. Earlier studies estimated about 1,000 cubic yards of sludge had to be addressed.     The New Mexico Environment Dept. has the oversight lead at the site, which is an abandoned wood-preserving plant in the South Valley area of Albuquerque. Except for a waste water impoundment and sump, the plant was dismantled in 1972.      Contact: Mary Ann Menetrey, state project manager, 505-827-2944; David Clark, AT&SF project manger, 913-435-2210; Monica Smith, EPA project manager, 214-665-6780; Riaz Ahmad, Radian project manager, 713-556-1888.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996California Gulch capping eyed     As expected, Asarco Inc. last week submitted a feasibility study for the Apache tailings operable unit at the California Gulch NPL site in Leadville, Colo., where about 600,000 cubic yards of tailings likely will need to be capped.     The tailings could be capped with either soil or an impermeable clay layer at an estimated cost of between $1 million and $2 million, depending on which material is selected. The nature of the cap will be delineated during design.     Asarco has not decided whether it will keep on Golder Associates Ltd., which did the RI/FS, to do the design or bid out the work. A decision is expected once the ROD is signed this spring. Asarco hopes to complete the work this summer.     Community protection measures, such as blood lead screening, are expected for the residential soils operable unit. An FS for the unit is expected by the end of next month.     Other operable units at the site are being addressed by Resurrection Mining Co. and Denver and Rio Grande Railroad (Superfund Week 1/12).     Contact: Rebecca Thomas, EPA project manager, 303-312-6229; Margaret "Poppy" Staub, Asarco project manager, 303-296-5104.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996More studies near at Valleycrest     PRPs have completed sampling under the first phase of an RI at the North Sanitary Landfill NPL site (also called the Valleycrest Landfill) in Dayton, Ohio. The results are due next month.     Phase two RI work will begin soon thereafter. During the first phase of the RI, about 10 groundwater monitoring wells were installed, along with 18 soil gas probes. Landfill gas and geophysical surveys also were taken.      The geophysical surveys detected off-site burial areas, and much of second round of studies will focus on delineating those areas.     The prime contaminants are volatile organic compounds, metals and semi-volatiles.     TreaTek-Conestoga Rovers & Associates is doing the RI for a group of PRPs that agreed to an RI/FS last spring (Superfund Week 4/14/95). Parties agreeing to the investigations include General Motors Corp., AT&T Global Information Solutions, Cargill Inc., Duriron Co., Standard Register, Dayton Walther Co. and Peerless Transportation Co. Another 38 PRPs have been identified but have so far refused to step forward.     de maximis inc. of Livonia, Mich., is managing the cleanup for the PRPs.     Contact: Kurt Kollar, state site coordinator, 513-285-6052; Ramon Torres, EPA project manager, 312-886-3010; Roy Dane, de maximis project manager, 313-261-0280; Mark Klimin, Conestoga Rovers project manager, 513-326-7600.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bloomington cleanup plans near     EPA, the Indiana Dept. of Environmental Management and PRP Westinghouse Electric Corp. are expected to give a U.S. District Court a schedule next month for the cleanup of up to five PCB sites in Bloomington, Ind.     Alternatives to incineration, which was selected for the sites in a 1985 ROD, are expected to be proposed  at at least two of the five sites this year.     The five sites are: Lemon Lane Landfill, Neal's Landfill, Neal's Dump, Bennett's Stone Quarry Dump and the Winston Thomas site. The Lemon Lane Landfill and Winston Thomas sites should be addressed in 1996. A review of each site's history, new studies and a draft cleanup schedule are due Feb. 13.     The studies are being done in compliance with a state law requiring them before an on-site incineration permit can be issued. Westinghouse is about mid-way through the collection the data, which will supplement earlier RI/FS reports.     The state hired PRC Environmental Management Co. to study solvent extraction, chemical dechlorination, biological remediation, quick lime treatment, low temperature thermal desorption, desorption with vaporization extraction and plasma torch technology.     Contact: Dan Hopkins, EPA project manager, 312-886-5994; Resa Ramsey, state project manager, 317-233-0645; Jim Patrick, Westinghouse Waste Technologies Service Div. site manager, 812-334-0030; Michael Johnson and Robert Foster, PRC Environmental, 312-856-8796.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996North Bronson to get summer ROD     EPA expects to sign a ROD in June for a soil and groundwater cleanup at the North Bronson Industrial Area NPL site in Bronson, Mich., where a less stringent cleanup than originally anticipated might be allowed because of changes in state cleanup level requirements.     The state is reevaluating Montgomery Watson's fund-lead FS because the studies were conducted before changes in the state law with regard to cancer risks. Last summer the state changed its cancer risk level from 10 -6 to 10 -5.     A ROD originally was scheduled for last summer. Another factor in the delay is that an industrial sewer system, which  connected two wastewater lagoons, was not evaluated as part of the RI/FS. Additional investigations might be required to further delineate the definition of the site. If more investigations are needed, the state likely will use Montgomery Watson of Novine, Mich.     Two former industrial waste lagoon areas constructed by the City of Bronson around 1940 need to be cleaned up, along with groundwater contaminated by the lagoons and at least one other source area (Superfund Week 9/1/95).      Contact: Bill Harmon, state project manager, 517-373-4951; Rosita Clarke-Moreno, EPA project manager, 312-886-7251; David O'Rouke, Bronson city manager, 517-369-7334; Donna Courington, Montgomery Watson project manager, 810-344-0205.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996A.I.W. Frank g.w. talks delayed     EPA is expected to begin negotiations this month for the design and construction of a portion of a $10.9 million soil and groundwater cleanup at the A.I.W. Frank/Mid-County Mustang NPL site in Exton, Pa. The talks were delayed by the recent federal furlough.     Under the ROD signed in September, a groundwater pump-and-treatment system with air stripping will be needed to treated solvents-contaminated groundwater.      About a half-dozen wells will extract contaminated groundwater from a fractured bedrock aquifer. Treatment will continue for about 30 years.     The only apparent discharge point for treated groundwater is a nearby river, but since the river is a trout stream EPA has left flexibility in the plan and is evaluating other options.     Also, about 230 cubic yards of contaminated source soil needs to be excavated and disposed off-site. The soil is located at a former waste solvent tank storage area.     A building demolition project and a small drum removal also is required.     The entire cleanup will cost about $10.9 million, most of which (about $6 million) will be required for the groundwater cleanup. Design work is expected to begin in 1997.     Contact: Charles Root, EPA project manager, 215-597-8240; David Garrison, PRP attorney, 610-293-4975.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Nature to clean up Chevron g.w.     EPA proposed natural attenuation and monitoring for pesticide-contaminated groundwater at the Chevron Chemical Co. site in Orlando, Fla., where a ROD should be signed this spring.     The plan contains a contingency for a barrier wall and air sparging if contamination levels do not decrease quickly enough. Samples will be taken quarterly to see if levels of xylene and alpha-BHC are dropping by 10% to 15%.     If levels do not decrease, a permeable filter wall will be used with limited air sparging or a hydraulic containment system. Monitoring is expected to last eight to ten years.     The proposed plan is expected to cost $247,700 if natural attenuation works. The contingency will cost about $1.3 million.     Chevron completed two removal actions to address soil contamination at the site. In 1991, the company removed 18,000 tons of pesticide-contaminated soil at the plant property, and in 1994 230 tons of soil were removed from an adjacent trailer park.     A pesticide formation plant operated at the site between 1950 and 1976. The contaminants of concern were chlordane, DDT, parathion and petroleum hydrocarbons.       Contact: Randy Bryant, EPA project manager, 404-347-3555, ext. 6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bids near for $34M Vineland pump-treat     EPA is expected to solicit bids this spring or summer for the construction of a groundwater pump-and-treatment system at the Vineland Chemical Co. Inc. NPL site in Vineland, N.J.     Under the September 1989 ROD, about a dozen wells will be needed to extract contaminated groundwater at a rate of about two million gallons per day. Metals precipitation will be the primary treatment, and treated groundwater will be reinjected back into the aquifer as much as possible and/or discharged to a nearby river.       The cleanup is estimated at $34 million, including operation and maintenance costs.     Arsenic is the primary contaminant of concern.     The Army Corps of Engineers' Kansas City Dist. is handling the design for EPA and will solicit the construction bids. After a contract award, management of the cleanup will be deferred to the Corps' Philadelphia Dist.      Malcolm Pirnie Inc.'s White Plains, N.Y., office is designing the remedy under contract with the Corps. The design now stands at about 65% complete. Construction bids are scheduled to go out in May or June and will be advertised in the Commerce Business Daily, EPA said.Soil cleanup takes back burner     The cleanup of about 126,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil will be addressed after the groundwater cleanup, which EPA decided to make a priority to halt the off-site migration of arsenic.     The ROD called for the ex-situ soil flushing of about 126,000 cubic yards of arsenic-contaminated soil. But last spring design work for a soil washing cleanup was put on hold at about the 65% stage so other potentially more cost-effective technologies could be evaluated (Superfund Week 4/7/95).     EPA treatability studies showed ex-situ soil washing will be more effective than soil flushing. Malcolm Pirnie did bench-scale column leaching tests on soil flushing and determined that due to chemical properties in the soil, flushing will not achieve the agency's surface cleanup goal of 20 parts per million (ppm) for arsenic in the top two feet of soil. The subsurface cleanup goal is 120 ppm.      Therefore the plan was to excavate the soil and run it through a portable soil washing agitator, or hydroclone, to break the weak ferrous oxide bond of arsenic on soil particles and have the arsenic come off in the rinse water. But this would require much more money than the agency expected when the ROD was signed. The ROD estimated the soil and groundwater cleanups at $66 million.     EPA will make a soil cleanup decision after the groundwater is addressed.     The ROD also calls for the soil washing of contaminated river sediments. That cleanup also will take place after the groundwater is remediated.     Arsenic salts were stored in open piles and in chicken coops at the 20-acre herbicide plant site at 1611 W. Wheat Rd. in Cumberland County. Untreated process wastes were discharged into lagoons. About 38 miles of watershed was contaminated with arsenic. The site made the NPL in September 1984.     Contact: Matthew Westgate, EPA project manager, 212-637-4422; John Bartholomeo, Corps project manager, Philadelphia Dist., 215-656-6927; Peter Latimer, New Jersey Dept. of Environmental Protection, 609-984-2990; Tom Simmons, Corps project manager, Kansas City Dist., 816-426-2296.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Ottati & Goss g.w. bids eyed for summer     EPA is expected to solicit bids this summer for the construction of a groundwater pump-and-treatment system at the Ottati & Goss/Great Lakes Container Corp. NPL site in Kingston, N.H., pending resolution of the Superfund budget.     Another issue to be resolved before any bids are solicited is whether to pump-and-treat groundwater below a wetlands area at the site.     Arthur D. Little Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., is designing the cleanup as EPA's Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor. The 90% design was reached in October 1995 but has since been stalled due to the budget and wetlands issues.     The January 1987 ROD called for the installation of extraction wells in the wetlands area, but EPA's hopes a planned source soil cleanup will allow for the natural attenuation of groundwater there.     Additional soil and sediment sampling was completed last month, and the agency expects to make a determination on the wetlands issue by mid-February. Contaminated wetlands sediments also need to be addressed, and EPA indicated it wants to synchronize a sediment cleanup with any installation of groundwater extraction wells to avoid having to disturb the wetlands more than once.     In any case, wells will be needed in the plant site area. Design of the cleanup is scheduled to be completed late this spring. The ROD estimates the remedy at between $4 million and $6 million.     The overburden aquifer is contaminated with volatile organic compounds and metals. The plume starts about 30 feet below the surface and stretches some 800 feet, flowing west to east. Although the plume has migrated off-site, contamination has diluted and the migration of contaminants has leveled off.     After treatment, groundwater will be reinjected into the overburden aquifer via recharge trenching. A leach field similar to that of a septic system will be used.Innovative soil technology still needed     Between 10,000 and 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil need to be addressed. The ROD originally called for the incineration of all contaminated soil and sediment, but the burn was shelved last spring due to community opposition (Superfund Week 4/21/95).      At about that time EPA indicated it was open to any technology that treats PCBs and volatile organics in soil. No technology has been selected, however, and the agency said it is still open to proposals. Depending on the technology eventually chosen, treatability tests might be needed.     EPA repeatedly has pulled back on incineration plans at Superfund sites around the nation, but generally appears willing to go with thermal desorption.     Contact: Richard Goehlert, EPA project manager, 617-573-5742; Dave Langseth, Arthur D. Little project manager, 617-498-5878.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Buckeye cap, wetlands talks under way     EPA has begun preliminary negotiations with PRPs for a cap, constructed wetlands and french drain cleanup at the Buckeye Reclamation NPL site in St. Clairsville, Ohio, where the PRPs want to make some changes to the design.     Neither EPA or a PRP representative would elaborate on the potential changes.      Under the $48.6 million August 1991 ROD, a solid waste cap is needed to cover a 66-acre waste disposal area. The cap will need to have a permeability of no less than 10 -7 centimeters/second and will consist of topsoil, a drainage layer, two feet of clay and a grading layer. No liner will be needed.     The wetlands will have curves to slow the flow of water through them. Cattails will be planted on a compost carpet and an underlying plastic liner to keep contaminated water from seeping below ground.     Environmental Strategies Corp. of Pittsburgh and Baker & Associates of Corapolis, Pa., designed the remedy for about 15 PRPs on the Buckeye Steering Committee. The steering committee is headed by Consol Inc., a Pittsburgh-based coal mining company. Most of the PRPs were hazardous waste generators, including a number of steel makers.     Volatile organic compounds and heavy metals are the prime contaminants of concern.     The design estimates the cleanup at only about $21 million, but EPA said the design did not address some aspects of the cleanup, such as groundwater monitoring.     Construction of the remedy was scheduled to begin this spring or summer but EPA indicated the work is not likely to get under way this construction season.     The site was used for the disposal of coal mine spoils. In 1971 the Ohio Dept. of Health licensed the site as a sanitary landfill. Between 1976 and 1979, the site also received industrial wastes including sludges and liquids. Industrial and asbestos wastes were dumped in the waste disposal area, where high levels of volatiles and heavy metals have been detected. The site made the NPL in September 1983.     Contact: Debbie Siebers, EPA project manager, 312-353-9299; George Gleich, PRP coordinator and Consol Inc.'s director of environmental services, 412-831-4528; Mike Berman, EPA attorney, 312-886-6837.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Raymark cap construction subs needed     Design is under way for a cap, gas collection and non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL) cleanup at the Raymark Industries Inc. NPL site in Stratford, Conn., where subcontractors will be needed as construction of the remedy nears this spring.     Foster Wheeler Environmental Corp. is doing the design under a Total Environmental Restoration Contract (TERC) with the Army Corps of Engineers. The Corps is managing the $60 million cleanup for EPA.     Foster Wheeler will construct the cap under the TERC, but subcontractors will be needed to install NAPL extraction wells and to provide capping materials and site stabilization.     The cap will cover 33 acres at a capital cost of about $25 million. The cover will consist of a one-foot sand layer with perforated piping to vent gas, a geosynthetic clay liner, a flexible membrane liner, a geonet drainage layer and some select fill. Gas will be treated on-site in two treatment buildings. Cap construction should be complete by September.     Bids for six- to eight-inch extraction wells screened at various depths likely will be solicited in March. The NAPL will be collected in tanks and taken off-site for treatment. The number of NAPL extraction wells needed has yet to be determined.     Also still to be determined is the stabilization technology for the landfill. The Corps is considering pilings, surcharging peat and deep dynamic compaction and is expected to make a determination by the end of this month. Stabilization work could cost up to $5 million.      The cleanup was outlined in a July 1995 ROD.           The cleanup of 37 residential properties was completed in September, and the wastes were stored on-site. About 100,000 cubic yards of contaminated material from the residential cleanup needs to be treated to reduce moisture before it is placed under the cap (Superfund Week 7/21/95).      Foster Wheeler is about one-third done with the demolition of buildings at the 15-acre site. That work is scheduled for completion in March.     Raymark Industries Inc. manufactured asbestos-based products at the site and used PCB- and heavy metals-laden waste as yard fill throughout the town.     Contact: Michael Hill, EPA project manager, 617-573-9653; Robert Hunt, Corps project manager, 617-647-8893; Mike Jasinski, EPA on-scene coordinator, 617-573-5786; Rick Gleason, Foster Wheeler project manager, 617-457-8200.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996American Creosote design underway     EPA has begun design of a dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) recovery system at the American Creosote Works (Pensacola Pit) NPL site in Pensacola, Fla.      The 1994 ROD called for enhanced DNAPL recovery via water injection, but preliminary groundwater design studies determined direct pumping was the most effective treatment. About 2 million gallons of DNAPL need to be addressed. The ROD estimated the remedy at $5.8 million.           The ROD also called for groundwater treatment via in-situ and ex-situ biological treatment, but EPA is expected to amend the ROD to allow scrapping biological treatment if the discharged groundwater meets alternative concentration limits. Groundwater will be surface discharged and monitored.      Bechtel Environmental is working on the fund-lead design, which is due late this spring. EPA does not yet have funds to do the work.     For the source control operable unit, EPA is developing an amendment to a 1989 ROD, which selected biological treatment for 100,000 cubic yards of surface soil and sediment.     Treatability studies indicated biological treatment was not effective on PAHs, and EPA likely will propose thermal desorption as an alternative. Along with PAHs, the soil and sediment also have PCP and dioxin.     A creosote plant operated at the 18-acre site from 1902 to 1981. Process wastewater was discharged into two unlined, on-surface impoundments. Under an emergency cleanup in 1983, EPA dewatered the two ponds, treated the water with coagulation and filtration and discharged treated water to the city sewer system.     Contact: Mark Fite, EPA project manager, 404-347-2543, ext. 6263.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Lexington cap to get summer bid     Design is complete for a landfill cap at the Lexington County Landfill Area NPL site in Cayce, S.C., and the county is expected to solicit bids for construction of the remedy this summer.     Lexington County agreed to pay for the cleanup, which is estimated at $3.5 million in capital costs. Bids will go out once the county completes its fiscal year 1997 (which begins in July) budget.     The 20- to 30-acre cap will consist of 18 inches of cover material -- six inches of shredded tires and 12 inches of soil. Also, one portion of the landfill needs to be relocated and some garbage removal services will be needed.     An existing gas recovery system not now in use might be converted to a passive methane gas collection system.     The design was completed by G.N. Richardson of Raleigh, N.C.     Two groundwater extraction wells have been installed at the site and will be used to treat about 25,000 gallons of water per day. Groundwater will be shipped to either a publicly owned treatment plant or used for irrigation.      Contact: John Fechtel, Lexington County director of public works, 803-359-8201; Terry Tanner, EPA project manager, 404-347-7791.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996EPA to bid Arrowhead soil removal     CH2M Hill's Milwaukee office is expected to solicit bids next month from a pool of 16 pre-qualified contractors for the removal of lead-contaminated soil at the Arrowhead Refinery NPL site near Duluth, Minn.      About 27,000 cubic yards of visually-contaminated soil,  sediment and buried refuse will be excavated and taken off-site for disposal.     EPA had expected to bid out the work last year, but the project was stalled because of budget cuts (Superfund Week 8/25/95).     In November 1995, EPA approved $3 million in fund money to clean up the site. Another $2.39 million left over from previous site cleanup work will be used for the project.      A contract will be awarded in April and the work should be completed this summer. The work originally was estimated at between $4 million and $8 million.     The Arrowhead Remedial Action Group has nearly completed the cleanup of a sludge lagoon area. Demobilization is scheduled for February or March.     Contact: Ted Smith, EPA project manager, 312-353-6571; Beth Aschinger, state project manager, 612-282-2383; Bill Hubbard, CH2M Hill, 414-272-1052.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996NL Industries cap, g.w. design due in spring     EPA has gone ahead with the design of a capping and groundwater containment cleanup at the NL Industries/Taracorp NPL site in Granite City, Ill., as PRP negotiations continue.     Woodward Clyde Consultants is designing the remedy for EPA. Design work should be completed this spring.     The cleanup will include the installation of a series of on-site extraction wells to contain metals-contaminated groundwater. Groundwater will be treated, if necessary, and discharged to a local sewer system.      Additional monitoring wells would be installed downgradient from the existing wells, where high lead or cadmium levels have been found. Additional monitoring wells would be installed in the remote fill areas, also.     The groundwater fix will cost about $3 million and take between two and four months to implement.     EPA also considered installing a slurry wall on the perimeter of the main industrial area to prevent off-site groundwater migration, but that would cost more than $18 million.     Groundwater monitoring to detect any off-site migration will also be required, along with long-term air monitoring.     No groundwater contamination had been identified when the ROD was signed (Superfund Week 10/21/94). But additional sampling in late 1992 confirmed site groundwater to be contaminated with lead.     The 1990 ROD also requires the excavation of a slag pile and combining it with the main Taracorp pile. Soil from the main industrial area with lead concentrations above 1,000 parts per million and any soil containing hard rubber battery casings will be excavated and added to the new lined section of the main Taracorp pile.      The slag will then be covered with a multi-layer cap. A three-foot layer of compacted clay would be used as a liner for the cap. The excavated area will be backfilled and topped with sod or asphalt.     The source removal will cost about $4.8 million and take nine to 15 months to conduct.     Under criticism from town residents and officials for proposing to dispose of contaminated materials on an existing slag pile near City Hall, EPA changed the ROD in 1993 and 1994.     The agency also considered excavating the slag and sending it to an off-site hazardous waste treatment, storage and disposal facility, but that would have cost more than $64 million. Also considered was building a landfill on-site to dispose of the slag, but that option would have cost about $29 million.     Meanwhile, cleanups at remote fill residential areas have nearly been completed. Fill containing hard rubber battery casings is being excavated and segregated into hazardous and non-hazardous groups. Hazardous materials are being stabilized and disposed at an off-site landfill. Non-hazardous materials are being taken directly to an off-site landfill. The excavated areas will be backfilled with soil or clean fill and capped. Contaminated fill in driveways or alleys is being capped with asphalt.      That work will end up costing between $1.3 and $1.4 million.     Contact: Brad Bradley, EPA project manager, 312-886-4742; Dennis Reis, PRP attorney at Sidley & Austin in Chicago, 312-853-7000.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Escambia Wood resident relocation eyed      A second round of RI sampling is set to begin this month at the Escambia Wood Treating Co. NPL site in Pensacola, Fla., where EPA is considering permanently relocating nearby residents as part of an interim action.     EPA is evaluating relocation options for 300 households with contaminated soil. The agency might propose a relocation plan this spring. Four areas are being targeted as part of a fast track relocation investigation. Permanent relocation of all the residents has been estimated at $23 million.     However, EPA does not have funding for the relocation or any additional remedial action, so any cleanup work might be put on hold until fiscal year 1997.     Meanwhile, a site-wide RI/FS, which began in November, is continuing to determine the nature and extent of soil and groundwater contamination. Thermal treatment and off-site disposal options will be considered.Alternatives to soil burn needed     Contaminants of concern include PCP, creosote, PAHs, dioxin and arsenic.      Also, a pile of 250,000 cubic yards of dioxin-contaminated soil, which was stockpiled during a removal in the early 1990s, needs to be investigated. The stockpile has the worst kind of dioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD) at levels as high as 12,000 parts per million. Creosote has been detected in the thousands of parts per million range.      The soil was excavated to stop leaching to groundwater, but no additional action was taken after residents objected to incineration of the stockpile in 1992 (Superfund Week 10/2/92). EPA estimated the cost of incineration at $40 million in 1994.     Dense non-aqueous phase liquid (DNAPL) contamination is suspected in a quarter-mile plume that runs from the site to the downgradient Agrico NPL site.     The RI/FS should be complete by February 1997. CDM Federal Programs Corp. is doing the studies as an EPA Region 4 Alternative Remedial Contracts Strategy (ARCS) contractor (Superfund Week 1/27/95).     The 26-acre site is located on the north edge of the Pensacola city limits and is the target of an environmental  justice initiative because a minority neighborhood is on the north side.     Contact: Mark Fite, EPA project manager, 404-347-3555, ext. 6263.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Bill would give Corps all fund-lead work     Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-N.J., entered a bill in the House last month to give the Army Corps of Engineers contract oversight of all fund-financed Superfund cleanups.     A staffer for Frelinghuysen said the bill has been referred to the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, which is expected to take up the bill shortly after Congress returns on Jan. 22. Frelinghuysen is a member of the Appropriations energy and water development subcommittee, which has heavy oversight of the Corps. He is also a member of the VA-HUD and independent agencies subcommittee, under which CERCLA is funded.     Once EPA selects a remedy at an NPL site, it tasks the Corps to manage the cleanup about 35% of the time. Frelinghuysen wants that percentage upped to 100%, saying giving the Corps management responsibility will "speed cleanups, reduce overhead, and provide better management of Superfund cleanups."Focus is on Corps, EPA strengths     "My bill would mandate that all contracting oversight of site cleanups under the Superfund program be managed by [the Corps]," Frelinghuysen said. He added it will "simply let EPA do what it does best, which is scientific analysis and site characterization. Once a remedy is selected, it then brings in [the Corps] to do what they do best, which is to manage large, complex construction projects."     The House freshman, who served 13 years in the state legislature, represents New Jersey's 11th district, which has 13 Superfund sites -- more than any other congressional district in the nation.     H.R. 2801, the Site Clean-up Improvement and Acceleration Act of 1995, amends Section 104 of CERCLA.     The bill says: "Except in the case of remedial actions carried out by a state or political subdivision ..., contract administration of awarded contracts for design and construction associated with fund-lead remedial actions commenced ... after the date of enactment ... shall be performed by [the Corps.]"     However, any such changes to the program have to make it through the House environment subcommittee, which has jurisdiction over Superfund. Rep. Mike Oxley, R-Ohio, who chairs the subcommittee, previously has said he wants to minimize fund-lead cleanup projects and the Corps' role in Superfund (Superfund Week 3/31/95).Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996EPA proposes Spokane stabilization, cap     EPA proposed a $1.7 million to $2.3 million soil stabilization and capping project as part of a removal action at the Spokane Junkyard/Associated Properties NPL site in Spokane, Wash.     Under the recommended alternative, all soil above residential cleanup levels (400 parts per million for lead, 1 ppm for PCBs) will be excavated and consolidated on the Spokane Metals property.      Soil above 5,000 ppm lead will be treated with chemical stabilization. The stabilized soil will be consolidated with soil with contamination levels between 400 and 5,000 ppm, which will not be treated, and capped with a geomembrane and soil cover.     The 5,000 ppm standard will require that only about half as much material be stabilized as would be using the industrial lead level of 1,000 ppm.     Other options EPA is considering include excavation and off-site disposal of all contaminated soil; off-site disposal of soil above industrial levels and capping of soil above residential levels; and capping of all soil above residential levels. The most expensive option, at between $6.8 million and $8.1 million, is off-site disposal of all soil above residential cleanup levels.     Lead is found in surface soil on most of the site and PCBs are found sporadically in surface soil. The site has been zoned for residential use with the exception of the former Spokane Metals property. Between 8,000 and 15,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil will need to be addressed.     EPA will make a decision on cleanup options after the comment period closes Feb. 16.     The PRPs agreed to design the removal but another settlement will be needed for construction of the project.     The PRPs at the site, Kaiser Aluminum, Washington Water Power, and Inland Power and Light submitted an EE/CA for the removal in December 1995 (Superfund Week 12/8/95). Alta Geosciences of Battelle, Wash., did the EE/CA.     The 16-acre site is located in a light commercial and residential area. Asbestos and drums of hazardous wastes were removed and taken to an approved hazardous waste facility in 1987.     Contact: Kevin Rochlin, EPA project manager, 206-553-2106; Charles (Bud) Preston, Kaiser Aluminum, 509-468-5402.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Correction     A brief on the Boerke site in Wisconsin in the Jan. 12 edition of Superfund Week incorrectly stated when the site's dye manufacturing plant closed. The plant closed in 1938.     Also, a story in the Dec. 22 issue incorrectly stated who is doing a cleanup design at the Cleveland Mill site in New Mexico. Adrian Brown Consultants' Salt Lake City office is handling all of the design work.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor to get near-shore fill     EPA has signed a ROD amendment that calls for construction of a near-shore fill and solidification of soil and sediments at the Wyckoff/Eagle Harbor NPL site in Bainbridge Island, Wash.     Under the amendment, hot spot sediments will be placed in a confined disposal facility (CDF) and capped with clean material and asphalt. The one-acre fill will be built adjacent to the former shipyard. EPA proposed the change in September (Superfund Week 9/29/95).     Under the 1992 ROD, heavy metal hot spot soil and sediments were to be disposed in a hazardous waste or municipal landfill.      The amendment came largely in response to community concerns that a private boatyard would be forced to leave the harbor under the original cleanup plan. The fill will create nearly one acre of additional land that the Washington State Dept. of Transportation  (WSDOT) has committed to lease for private water operations.      A drainage system will be needed to prevent surface and groundwater from leaching into the harbor.      Also, a habitat migration plan will be needed. The outer walls of the CDF will be enhanced with gravel to provided a favorable habitat for barnacles and mussels.     The primary contaminants at the site are PAHs and mercury.     Design efforts begun by PRPs PACCAR Inc. and WSDOT will resume now that EPA has agreed to the near-shore fill. Hart-Crowser Inc. is designing the cleanup for the PRPs and has submitted the 35% design. A final design should be complete early this summer, at which time EPA will begin negotiations with the PRPs for construction of the cleanup. In addition to PACCAR and WSDOT, the Washington Dept. of Natural Resources and the U.S. Dept. of Defense are potentially liable parties. The cleanup will cost about $4 million.     Also at the Wyckoff site, building demolition is expected to be completed early in the spring. EPA recently replaced the wells in a groundwater pump-and-treatment system that has been operating since 1990. The system uses physical separation of oil from the water, biological treatment and carbon adsorption to treat about 100 gallons per minute.     CH2M Hill is doing an RI/FS at the facility, which should be completed sometime this year.       The design of an interim groundwater barrier wall to prevent water from reaching the harbor, prescribed in a 1994 ROD, is awaiting funding in addition to the RI results.     Contact: Elly Hale, EPA project manager, 206-553-1215; Larry Sims, PACCAR Inc. project manager, 206-453-4901; Rick Singer, WSDOT, 360-705-7402.Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996Senate mulls liability deal     Senate Republicans soon could take up a reauthorization proposal freeing PRPs at multi-party sites from the Superfund liability net.     Sources say GOP staff members have recommended the measure as the one for which the most broad-based support could be garnered. The move comes light of the disastrous response to other recently proposed liability exemptions such as the retroactive liability discount (RLD) and tax credits for PRPs. Sources said neither of those provisions are likely to be in a reauthorization bill.   Included in a House proposal issued last fall was a provision for liability shielding at municipal landfill NPL sites (Superfund Week 9/29/95), an idea that has drawn less fiery criticism and is viewed by many as the best compromise.      The move reportedly eliminates about 250 sites from the Superfund liability scheme.     However, even if an agreement can be reached on the multi-party liability exemption, issues such as clearly defining "multi-party sites" and setting a cut-off date for the repeal will remain to be worked out. Sources said the Senate plan most likely will include municipal landfills and other sites at which there are dozens or hundreds of small contributors and have 1981 as the cut-off date.     House leaders are batting around similar liability exemptions (Superfund Week 1/5).Back to Headline List CopyrightSUPERFUND WEEK via NewsNetJANUARY 19, 1996N.J. reps: restore CERCLA funding     All thirteen New Jersey representatives have signed a letter asking House Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Livingston, R-La., to include Superfund in a targeted appropriations bill and restore Superfund to full 1995 funding.     Under the continuing resolution, EPA is operating at 75% of its 1995 budget, a level the letter calls "unacceptable." New Jersey has 114 Superfund sites, more than any other state.     The delegation calls for Superfund to be included in targeted appropriations bills that will fund selected programs for fiscal 1996 in the absence of a budget agreement.     "The disarray that the Superfund program has been put through in recent weeks, as a direct result of the EPA's appropriations not having been enacted yet, threatens the program's underlying integrity and credibility," the letter stated.     Rep. Marge Roukema, R-N.J., leading the New Jersey move said: "The 104th Congress must take prompt action to remedy the situation by approving legislation that President Clinton will sign into law that provides the EPA with the needed funds."Back to Headline List WT03-B37-15IA059-000325-B019-332http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev42.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002324 text/html 77261HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:21:13 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:36 GMTContent-length: 77072Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev42.html Sample Issue Copyright UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT (51 words) CANTOR FITZGERALD EBS SO2 ALLOWANCE PRICES (162 words) U.S. APPEALS COURT AFFIRMS RULING THAT INDIANA COAL LAW IS UNCONSTITUTIONAL (673 words) CALIF. PUC TO STUDY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF RESTRUCTURING ORDER (1091 words) EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAIN CANCER (660 words) ELECTRIC VEHICLES CALIFORNIA RETREATS, BUT MASS. GOV. WELD HOLDS FIRM, ON EV MANDATES (834 words) EMISSIONS TRADING THE CLOSE OF 1995 SIGNALS BEARISH SENTIMENT IN MARKET IS CONTINUING (612 words) NO (SUBSCRIPT) X CONTROL KEY TEXAS REP. SIDES WITH GAS INDUSTRY, CALLS FOR FUEL-NEUTRAL NSPS FOR NOX (472 words) SO2 ALLOWANCE OUTLOOK SIERRA CLUB SEEKS INJUNCTION TO ORDER PS COLORADO TO CUT HAYDEN EMISSIONS (191 words) B&W ACQUIRES JOY ENVIRONMENTAL TO BOOST POLLUTION CONTROL WORK (149 words) STATE REGULATION CALIF. AIR DISTRICTS APPROVE PG&E NOX PLANS FOR DROPPING SCR REQUIREMENTS (450 words) PA. UTILITIES APPLAUD DEP MOVE TO MAKE STATE'S RULES NO STRICTER THAN EPA'S (633 words) ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS CALIF. COURT THROWS OUT SUIT CLAIMING SOCAL ED EQUIPMENT EMFS CAUSED CANCER (471 words) RENEWABLES ISSUES TVA'S FINAL IRP INCREASES COMMITMENT TO RENEWABLES, ENERGY CONSERVATION (401 words) RENEWABLE ISSUES MISSOURI IOUS, STATE UNIVERSITY CREATE ENERGY COLLABORATIVE FOR RENEWABLES (226 words) IP&L EYEING LANDFILL METHANE-FIRED PROJECT IN INDIANAPOLIS THIS YEAR (253 words) HYDROPOWER STATE ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS BACK ELEMENTS OF NHA RELICENSING PROPOSAL (564 words) LEGISLATION WIS. UTILITIES OPPOSING BILL REQUIRING FREE SPARK GAS ISOLATORS FOR FARMERS (390 words) GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE TUCSON ELECTRIC, NEW WORLD POWER JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS CHOSEN (446 words) INTERNATIONAL CANADA DECIDES TO CONTINUE VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS PROGRAM UNTIL NOV. '96 (810 words) BRIEFS TVA PCB WASTE EXCHANGE (177 words) N.Y. CHANGES OFFSET RULES (143 words) PSE&G BERGEN REPOWERING (189 words) VA. SCC COMPETITION PROBE (117 words) EX-KAN. MUNI OFFICIAL SENTENCED (140 words) CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   UTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORTUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORTSO2 Allowance Market Prices*Phase One - $105 - 107/tonPhase Two - $100 - 102/ton* Spot sales prices effective since the week of Dec. 18, 1995. Prices basedon occasional phone surveys with allowance traders, brokers and industryexperts.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CANTOR FITZGERALD EBS SO2 ALLOWANCE PRICES      Cantor Fitzgerald EBS SO2 Allowance Prices                 (dollars/ton)                                        MonthlyMonth of        Bids    Offers  Trades  Price IndexDecember        104.00  111.50  111.12  108.87November        108.33  119.50  122.85  116.89October         121.85  126.33  122.25  123.48September       124.00  127.00  126.50  125.83August          126.00  133.10  129.50  129.53July            128.00  132.38  130.11  130.16June            129.00  133.58  131.75  131.44May             129.83  135.50  129.25  131.53April           128.75  137.92  129.53  132.07March           130.15  135.33  134.13  133.21February        133.00  137.00  134.30  134.77January         135.07  140.33  137.27  137.56Bids and offers are weighted averages of the highest and lowest spotprices, respectively, for 1,500 allowances. Trades are weighted average ofactual trade prices determined from consummated trades and settling withinsix months. Larger trades weighted on a maximum of 1,500 allowances;smaller trades weighted normally. Monthly Price Index is average of bids,offers and trades. All values based on trading period beginning with 25thday of previous month and ending with 24th day of month MPI is published.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   U.S. APPEALS COURT AFFIRMS RULING THAT INDIANA COAL LAW ISUNCONSTITUTIONAL   The 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals has affirmed a lower court rulingthat struck down portions of an Indiana law that encourages the state'selectric utilities to find ways to burn high-sulfur coal and still complywith the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments.   In a Dec. 22 ruling (Case No. 95-2065), the appeals court said parts ofthe 1991 law, passed in response to the Clean Air Act and stronglysupported by an Indiana high-sulfur coal industry that feared an influx oflow-sulfur Western coal, violate the Interstate Commerce Clause of theConstitution and therefore are unconstitutional.   Under the Indiana Environmental Compliance Plan Act (ECPA), the stateUtility Regulatory Commission can pre-approve a utility's Clean Air Actcompliance plan, but only if several criteria are met. One of the keyprovisions is whether the utility will continue or increase its use ofIndiana high-sulfur coal.   In challenging the legality of the law, the Alliance for Clean Coal(ACC), a coalition of Western coal producers and railroads, has argued thatsuch a provision amounts to illegal protectionism and violates theConstitution.   Last March, U.S. District Judge John Tinder found that portions of theIndiana law violate the Interstate Commerce Clause and should beinvalidated (UER, 14 April '95, 3).   The appeals court concurred, saying a utility compliance plan that has anegative impact on Indiana coal is ``subject to continuing annualsurveillance'' by the URC under the Indiana law.   As a result, those portions of the ECPA ``discriminate againstinterstate commerce based solely upon geographic origin...the clear intentof the statute is to benefit Indiana coal at the expense of Western coal,''the appeals court said.   The fact that the Indiana law ``merely encourages'' utilities to usehigh-sulfur coal does not make it ``any less discriminatory,'' the appealscourt said. The result, the court added, is ``discriminatory state actionthat is forbidden by the Commerce Clause.''   Concluded the court: ``Despite the fact that low-sulfur Western coal maybe a more efficient compliance option, the ECPA clearly attempts to preventIndiana electrical utilities from switching to low-sulfur coal. Thisamounts to discriminatory state action that is forbidden by the CommerceClause. The defendants have not discharged their burden of demonstratingthat the statute serves a legitimate and compelling interest unrelated toeconomic protectionism.''   A spokesman for the Indiana Coal Council, a major supporter of theIndiana law, said he was not surprised by the ruling. Indiana is notexpected to appeal the ruling to the U.S. Supreme Court.   Terry O'Connor, vice president of government relations for ARCO Coal, anACC member, said the group expects to win a similar lawsuit it filed latelast year in Ohio (UER, 29 Sept '95, 1).   Asked what the ACC hopes to gain by the Indiana victory, O'Connor saidthe rewards would not be immediate. ``We recognize that utilities in thevarious Midwestern states have already made their Phase-One [compliance]decisions'' under the acid rain rules, he said.   However, ``to the extent that those decisions may have been skewed bythe Indiana protectionist law, we're hopeful that those utilities will nowfeel free to revisit those fuel decisions and look westward to inexpensive,low-sulfur coal.''   In the long run, the ACC hopes to pick up additional business whenMidwest utilities finalize Phase-Two compliance plans. ``With this decisionnow hopefully behind us, we are optimistic that as Illinois, Indiana andOhio utilities prepare Phase-Two compliance plans for submission [toregulatory agencies] in the next year or so, they will look favorably onWestern coal as a viable option,'' O'Connor said.   A spokeswoman for PSI Energy, which is building a Phase-One scrubber atits 3,149-MW Gibson plant near Princeton, Ind., doubted the appeals courtruling would have much impact on her company.   ``Since we didn't rely on the [ECPA] for Phase One, the ruling probablywon't have a great effect on PSI for Phase-Two plans,'' she said. ``But itmight eliminate some steps in the future that we might have had to gothrough.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIF. PUC TO STUDY ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF RESTRUCTURING ORDER   The California Public Utilities Commission has decided to conduct anenvironmental impact report to assess potential environmental damage fromthe move to a competitive electric power industry.   In issuing its final electric restructuring order last month, the PUCagreed to conduct an EIR under the California Environmental Quality Act.``The magnitude of our proposed electric policy favors reviewing thepossible environmental impacts of a new industry structure,'' the PUCstated.   The PUC responded to a motion filed by the Natural Resources DefenseCouncil in June 1994 for determining whether CEQA applied to thecommission's electric restructuring proceeding. The PUC noted that partiesdisagreed whether electric restructuring fit within the CEQA definition ofa project and thus triggered the CEQA requirements for an EIR.   While the California Supreme Court has interpreted CEQA's definition ofa project as not requiring a finding of a direct physical effect on theenvironment, the courts have not clarified whether policy actions withoutdirect environmental effects are CEQA projects. ``We cannot make a findingat this time about whether electric restructuring constitutes a CEQAproject,'' the PUC conceded. ``However, we can anticipate that there is noharm, and abundant good, in moving forth with analysis under CEQA at thistime.'' The commission cautioned that delaying the preparation of an EIRcould severely hamper restructuring efforts, which it deemed vital to thestate's economy.   In its restructuring order, the PUC adopted president Daniel Fessler'sproposal to create simultaneously an independent system operator to controltransmission, a wholesale power exchange and direct access phased-in overfive years beginning Jan. 1, 1998.   The PUC established a five-year transition period to a competitiveindustry, with a non-bypassable competitive transition charge, or CTC, onall retail customers to ensure utilities full recovery of their strandedinvestments by 2005.   The PUC determined that preparation of an EIR rather than a negativedeclaration was necessary because electric restructuring may potentiallyimpact the environment in several ways. The PUC cited NRDC's concern thatelectric restructuring may reduce energy efficiency incentives and restorethe linkage between utilities' profits and sales volumes, which have beendecoupled by the Electric Revenue Adjustment Mechanism.   The PUC also cited Pacific Gas and Electric's observation that electricrestructuring may result in shifts in energy production, resulting in adifferent mix of energy resources with a potential for creatingenvironmental impacts.   The PUC directed its commission advisory compliance division within 100days to issue a notice of preparation of an EIR and retain the services ofan environmental consultant to be approved by the commission. Theconsultant will work with the commission to prepare an EIR that willanalyze the environmental impacts of electric restructuring, compareenvironmental effects of alternative policies and identify mitigationmeasures for potential significant impacts.   Given the broad restructuring policy, the EIR will contain a moregeneral discussion of impacts, alternatives and migitations than atraditional site-specific environmental assessment, the PUC noted. Hence,it will attempt to anticipate future scenarios that may develop under thecommission's restructuring policy.   Moreover, the EIR may incorporate or refer to the environmental impactstatement the the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is preparing underthe National Environmental Policy Act for its mega-notice of proposedrulemaking on open access, the PUC said.   The PUC also committed itself to maintaining the state's resourcediversity and developing policies that promote development of new renewableenergy resources in a restructured electric services industry. ``Wecontinue to believe that a minimum renewables purchase requirement is thebest approach to meet our resource diversity goals,'' the PUC said.   However, the commission acknowledged that it had not determined whetherthe renewables requirement should be imposed on retail suppliers orgenerators. Accordingly, the PUC delayed consideration of this questionuntil its implementation phase and called upon its working group to providefurther guidance.   The PUC stated its preference for setting the renewables purchaserequirement at the same level for all electric utilities statewide, but itacknowledged that a transitional strategy may be appropriate given theutilities' current resource portfolios.   To provide flexibility in meeting the renewables requirement, renewables``credits'' would be tradable similar to pollution credits under thefederal Clean Air Act Amendments and the South Coast Air Quality ManagementDistrict's Regional Clean Air Incentives Market.   The PUC set a target date of January 1998 for establishing minimumrenewables levels continuing through 2000, at which time the commissionwould review the requirement for possible modification. As with the CleanAir Act and state air quality permit programs, the PUC plans to establish a``meaningful penalty'' for noncompliance.   This market-based approach would eliminate the need for a surcharge tofund renewables development by allowing buyers and sellers to secure thebest bargains on renewables and include the costs in their prices, the PUCsaid.   By contrast, establishing a surcharge to fund renewables developmentwould require the PUC to administer and disperse the funds to ensurecompliance. However, after its disastrous experience with the ill-fatedBiennial Resource Planning Update independent power auction, the commissionstressed that it was extremely reluctant to do so.   ``The minimum renewables requirement approach will allow the market toprovide the most cost-effective renewable resources, without ourintervention,'' the PUC predicted. Moreover, allowing providers to traderenewables requirements could serve to minimize stranded costs fromqualifying facility contracts by providing new markets for QFs' power, thePUC said.   This approach would also likely stimulate research and development ofrenewables as existing renewables are replaced by new resources to meet theincreased demand for electricity, the commission predicted.   The PUC's renewables standard is being welcomed by officials at theAmerican Wind Energy Association, who with the Union of ConcernedScientists and others, helped sell the PUC on the idea.   ``There had been an expectation of a tax on generation, with therevenues used to support the renewables industry,'' AWEA executive directorRandall Swisher said. ``That is one way to go, but from our perspective astandard is less bureaucratic and more market oriented.''   Swisher said the minimum renewable capacity requirement should be placedon sellers, not generators, so that the state--not FERC--would haveoversight authority. The standard should be set at around 11.5% of totalcapacity, the current share of the California market provided byrenewables, Swisher said.   Sellers with no renewable capacity could purchase credits from anothercompany that owned renewables capacity or that had excess renewable energycredits, he said.   With a portfolio standard, ``you just set the minimum standard and sitback and let the market do the rest,'' Swisher said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   EPRI ANALYSIS SAYS ELECTRICAL WORKERS HAVE 10-20% MORE RISK OF BRAINCANCER   A new Electric Power Research Institute study that assessed research onworkplace electromagnetic fields has found that electrical workers areabout 10% to 20% more likely to develop brain cancer than other workers.   But because no clear relationship can be found between the amount ofexposure to EMFs and the level of risk, researchers cannot conclude thatEMFs cause brain cancer, the analysis said. The study found that ``theapparent lack of a clear pattern of exposure and risk substantiallydetracts from the hypothesis that measured magnetic fields in the workenvironment are responsible for the observed excess of risk.''   In other words, according to coauthor Dr. Patricia Buffler, who is deanof the University of California at Berkeley, School of Public Health,``there is something about employment in [the studied] occupations'' thatmay or may not have anything to do with EMFs. She argued that the observedassociation between work in electrical occupations, a broad category thatincludes electricians and power plant operators, and elevated cancer risklikely has more to do with limitations in the studies than any kind of tieto EMF exposure.   The study, published in the December issue of the Journal ofOccupational and Environmental Medicine, reexamined more than 50 previousstudies and pools the results of 29 of them for a new statistical analysis.The pooled data showed a slightly elevated risk of brain tumors (10-20%)for workers in the electrical occupations category, a result withsufficient statistical strength to be considered reliable. Higher riskswere seen for some more specific job categories and for one subtype ofbrain cancer, gliomas.   The authors, who in addition to Buffler included Dr. Leeka Kheifets ofEPRI, and Dr. Abdelmonem Afifi and Zhong Zhang of the University ofCalifornia at Los Angeles, School of Public Health, assessed their findingsagainst three possible hypotheses on EMFs and cancer.   First, they concluded that the analysis ``provides some evidence againstthe hypothesis of no association between occupational exposure to EMF andthe risk of cancer.'' On the second possibility--a small but pervasivecancer risk--they found ``some evidence to support the hypothesis.''The third possibility is that ``the true EMF effect is large'' but onlyimpacts individuals who are in some way predisposed to develop cancer orwho are exposed simultaneously to another factor. On this count, theresearchers concede that their study ``provides no clues that could help toidentify a circumstance or condition'' to explain such a risk.   Overall, the researchers found ``it is not possible to conclude that EMFis causally associated with the observed excess of brain cancer in workersemployed in electrical occupations.''   About one-third of the studies reviewed in the EPRI report wereconducted in the United States, another one-third in Scandinavia and theremainder in Canada, Australia, Great Britain, Germany and other countries.The earliest study was published in 1983, while the largest number ofstudies, six, appeared in 1991.   About half of the studies included follow-up before 1984 and werepublished before 1990. Study designs used by the investigators includedproportional mortality, case control analysis of death certificate data,case control and cohort studies.   The U.S. and other studies showed relative risk increases of 40% orhigher compared to those with no occupational exposures to EMFs. TheScandinavian studies, almost all of which were cohort studies based onincident risk, showed the lowest relative risks for brain cancer. Thereasons for the lower relative risk reported in the Scandinavian studies``are not exactly clear,'' the EPRI study said.   A 1994 study of Canadian and French electric utility workers showed adoubling of brain tumor risk by some measures, for example, but the resultwas not statistically significant (UER, 1 April '94, 1).   A large study of U.S. utility workers, funded by EPRI and completedearly last year, found a statistically significant increase in brain cancerrisk for those with the highest exposures (UER, 20 Jan '95, 1).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIFORNIA RETREATS, BUT MASS. GOV. WELD HOLDS FIRM, ON EV MANDATES   Massachusetts Gov. William Weld (R) reaffirmed his commitment to thestate's zero-emission vehicle program, which includes a 2% electric vehiclesales mandate beginning in 1998, despite recent action by the CaliforniaAir Resources Board to drop its own EV sales mandate that would have begunin the same year.   Bowing to pressure from the auto industry, CARB Dec. 21 said it willlift the state's landmark mandate requiring auto makers to sell about22,000 EVs in California beginning in 1998. CARB directed its staff tofinalize a plan by March 1996 to lift the mandate requiring that 2% ofvehicles sold in California have zero emissions by 1998 and 5% by 2001.   The air board decided not to impose the mandate until 2003, at whichtime 10% of vehicles sold in California will have to be exhaust-free inorder to achieve a statewide reduction of 14 tons/day of nitrous oxide andhydrocarbons.   In the interim, auto makers must aim to sell up to 3,700 EVs in thesmog-laden Los Angeles and Sacramento basins during the first three yearsof the program--750 in 1998, 1,500 in 1999 and 1,500 in 2000. Based on automakers' reports, CARB estimated a statewide annual production of 5,000 EVsin 1996 and 1997 and 14,000 in 1998.   Massachusetts' EV plan is modeled closely on the California plan, andthat state has also faced tremendous pressure from automakers to drop itsminimum EV sales requirement.   But Weld said Dec. 22 he thought CARB made the wrong decision to weakenits program and noted ``that decision does not bind Massachusetts.''Edison Electric Institute director of electric transportation Rick Tempchincalled the CARB decision ``a significant mistake,'' adding that EVtechnology, consumer readiness and infrastructure are on track to launch EVsales in California in 1998.   ``What is missing is the political will to stand up to automakers, oilcompanies and others who insist that token EV rollouts will ensure thesuccess of this technology,'' Tempchin said.   CARB officials stressed that under the new plan, car makers must stillmeet air pollution reduction goals through production of cleaner cars withreduced exhaust, evaporative and refueling emissions.   The air board adopted the zero-emission vehicle rule in 1990 to reduceair pollution from passenger cars and light trucks. The mandate currentlyapplies to the seven largest auto manufacturers, with sales of more than35,000 vehicles a year in California. By 2003, all auto makers that sellmore than 3,000 vehicles a year in the state will have to comply with themandate.   The air board plans to hold a public hearing and vote on the revisedplan in March. However, CARB chairman John Dunlap said the air board hadreached consensus on lifting the mandate.   CARB directed its staff in November to devise an alternative proposalafter the Battery Technology Assessment Panel reported auto makers'conclusions that existing lead acid battery-powered EVs would have toolimited a sales demand to meet state pollution reduction goals (UER, 24 Nov'95, 1).   The air board received more than 200 comments to three staff proposals:1) a market-based approach; 2) changing the zero-emission vehicle mandatefor early years but maintaining the rules intact for later years; and 3)keeping the same basic format but reducing the 2% mandate for 1998.   CARB agreed with auto makers that advanced lithium and nickel-basedbattery technology for EVs--currently the only zero-emission vehicle--willnot be commercially viable until 2001. The auto industry contends thatexisting lead-acid batteries have limited range and are too costly, makingthem unattractive to consumers.   Forcing manufacturers to introduce unaffordable vehicles that aretechnologically unreliable would poison the fledgling EV market, CARB said.``If you see them sitting in storerooms and no one buys them it sends anegative message,'' said a CARB spokesman. ``No one wants to poison themarket.''   In the interim, automakers will be allowed to build only the number ofzero-emission vehicles they think they can sell, which manufacturersestimate at 2,000 to 3,000 in 1996 and 1997 and 14,000 a year after that,Martin said. The 2% mandate would have amounted to about 22,000 EVs.   Auto makers will be required to sign a memorandum of agreementcommitting to a ``Cal/Big 7 Technology Development Partnership,'' tocontinue research and development of advanced batteries and EVs.Manufacturers would be given a market incentive for early production ofexhaust-free and longer-range vehicles through 2003. The state ofCalifornia would purchase some EVs each year.   The revised mandate will not relieve auto makers from meeting their airpollution reduction requirements based on their percentage of total vehiclesales in California. However, CARB gave each vehicle manufacturerflexibility to design their own individual plan for meeting their emissionreduction requirements.   CARB directed its staff to prepare a proposal by March for meetingstatewide pollution reduction goals in lieu of the zero-emission vehiclemandate. ``There will be absolutely no loss of pollution reduction,''Martin stressed. ``They will individually be held accountable for them.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   THE CLOSE OF 1995 SIGNALS BEARISH SENTIMENT IN MARKET IS CONTINUING   The sulfur dioxide emission allowance market ended the year with itssteepest monthly decline of the year, as prices nosedived in December,oddly enough, due to the presence of a buyer.   Bidding in a request for proposal from Illinois Power seeking 15,0001995 allowances for immediate delivery was ``very aggressive,'' said LyndaClemmons of Enron Capital and Trade Resources. IP passed up prices that``would have been leapt on'' three weeks earlier, said Carlton Bartels, adirector at Cantor Fitzgerald Environmental Brokerage Services. The winningbidder, which was named Dec. 18, 1995, was thought to have offered pricesin the range of $105-110/ton.   As a result, the Utility Environment Report SO2 Allowance Market Priceshave dropped to $105-$107/ton for Phase One and $100-102 for Phase Two (seebox, page 3). This is well below end-of-November prices of $119-121 forPhase One and $118-120 for Phase Two.   One observer noted that, with more than 3 million allowances out there,an enormous supply was ``chasing Illinois Power's demand for 15,000.''   Opinions varied, however, on the relative importance of an RFP the sizeof Illinois Power's. One player argued that trades of 15,000 are ``not allthat large'' anymore. Another countered that a straight-out purchase ofthat amount for the end of the year is still a ``pretty big deal.''   There were few factors that could explain the increased market activitythat has been seen in recent weeks. The end of the year was having, atmost, a psychological effect, some said. There was no indication thatutilities had decided that they needed additional allowances for 1995compliance.   The most common explanation was that buyers are being motivated byprices that are now ``just too good to pass up,'' and sellers may beworrying that prices will continue to fall. One player suggested thatsellers were already anticipating a negative impact on prices from theEPA's next auction in March.   Cantor Fitzgerald's market price index for Phase One allowances was$108.87 at the end of December 1995, down from $116.89 a month earlier.Similarly, Emissions Exchange of Denver moved its value for 1995 allowancesto $105 and for 2000 allowance to $100, also a sharp drop from November1995.   Attention now is focused on how much lower prices will go. The market is``pretty close to the bottom,'' Bartels argues. ``We are getting morefeedback from people who are saying that this is ridiculous, that they'renot going to sell at that price.''   While some pessimistic studies in the past have shown that allowanceswere worth less than they were trading for, Bartels noted that no reliablestudy has put their value below current prices.   Others see no evidence of the slide ending, however. ``Every seller whohas waited has done worse,'' said one player who declined to be named. The$100 mark is a weak psychological barrier that ``is not going to stop thedownward trend,'' he said, and the barrier will likely be breached wheneverthe next significant buyer comes along.   ``It is not clear what would provide support to the market at thispoint,'' said Bill Babcock, a consultant with Putnam, Hayes & Bartlett inCambridge, Mass. The marginal cost of producing these allowances is nearzero, he said, and demand for allowances for near-term use is almostnonexistent.   The partial government shutdown, meanwhile, was drawing complaints fromtraders. With the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency essentially closed,allowance transactions were not being processed. Contracts can still besigned, one trader noted, but deals cannot be completed. The greateruncertainty will come if the impasse drags on closer to the true-updeadline at the end of January.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   KEY TEXAS REP. SIDES WITH GAS INDUSTRY, CALLS FOR FUEL-NEUTRAL NSPS FORNOX   Rep. Joe Barton (R-Texas) lined up on the side of natural gas in thatindustry's escalating battle with the coal industry over a proposal by theU.S. Environmental Protection Agency to establish a fuel-neutral new sourceperformance standard (NSPS) for nitrogen oxide emissions.   EPA is pondering a 0.15 lb./million Btu standard for NOx, a standardthat gas-fired power plants could achieve with relative ease but that manycoal-fired units would be hard-pressed to meet.   The coal industry has argued for a standard based on fuel types, whichthe industry said would allow coal to be competitive with gas.   But in a Dec. 21, 1995 letter to his congressional colleagues, Bartoncalled EPA's proposed standard ``welcome news and sound and equitableapproach'' to preventing additional NOx pollution from new sources.   ``Single standards would treat all fuels and technologies equally,''said Barton, who chairs the House Commerce Committee's oversight andinvestigations subcommittee. ``It will focus future industrial and utilityoutput in an efficient and competitive manner while minimizing the impacton our nation's environment..''   Last year, Barton hosted a number of hearings on Clean Air Act issuesand is heading a group of House Republicans expected to introduceamendments to the air statute sometime this spring.   Barton said a fuel-neutral standard ``will enable all combinations offuel (coal, oil, and natural gas) and technologies to effectively competefor new markets. Although reliable technology exists today, thiscompetition will spur the development of more efficient domestictechnologies that will allow operators to meet this standard even more costeffectively in the future.''Barton stressed that EPA should make the new standard apply only to futureplants and not to existing facilities.   ``While we support the fuel-neutral standard, we strongly urge theagency to apply the standard prospectively only,'' he said. ``This `new'standard should not apply to existing equipment. The shift to competitivefuel-neutral standards should not penalize anyone, only invigoratecompetition among suppliers for new boiler markets.''   If a full fledged battle breaks out over the issue, Barton will findhimself pitted against coal industry allies in the Wyoming and WestVirginia delegations, to name a few, who will try to pressure EPA to basethe new NSPS standard for NOx on fuel types.   Barton urged EPA to consider only relevant information, and notpolitics, in determining the form of the new standard.   ``[W]e encourage the agency to determine an appropriate numericalstandard based on a thorough consideration of all available and relevantinformation,'' Barton said. ``The Clean Air Act amendments define theagency's responsibility on this matter, and we trust the agency topromulgate a standard that meets those requirements.''   The new standard, required under a court-ordered schedule, is notexpected to be issued in draft form before September. A final rule is dueby November 1997.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   SIERRA CLUB SEEKS INJUNCTION TO ORDER PS COLORADO TO CUT HAYDEN EMISSIONS   The Sierra Club has petitioned the U.S. District Court at Denver to movemore expeditiously in assessing penalties against three utilities foralleged air pollution standards violations at the 446-MW Hayden GeneratingStation in northwest Colorado (UER, 18 Aug '95, 4).   The group asked the court, pending determination of a final ruling, toissue an injunction against the companies to stop ``excessive and illegal''emissions at the plant operated by Public Service of Colorado. PacifiCorpand Salt River Project also own interests in the Hayden facility.   Judge Lewis Babcock found last August, in response to a Sierra Clubcomplaint, that the plant had exceeded Clean Air Act emission standardsmore than 19,000 times in the past five years. The utilities are liable fora total of $493-million in fines. However, the court asked the parties tonegotiate a settlement to correct the excessive emissions.   In its latest filing in the case (No. CV-93-1749), the Sierra Club saidnegotiations with PS Colorado have broken down, and it requested the courtto issue an injunction within 60 days ordering the company to takecorrective action at once.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   B&W ACQUIRES JOY ENVIRONMENTAL TO BOOST POLLUTION CONTROL WORK   Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation has acquired the assets of JoyEnvironmental Technologies (JET) from its parent company, HarnischfegerIndustries, for an undisclosed amount. B&W, based in Barberton, Ohio,expects the acquisition to expand its pollution control work in the powerindustry.   JET, with offices in Houston and Malvern, Pa., specializes inenvironmental technologies used in the utility industry. Product lines thatB&W Power Generation will acquire from JET include acid mist precipitators,electrostatic precipitators, dry flue-gas desulfurization systems andbaghouses. In addition, Diamond Power Specialty, another B&W subsidiary inLancaster, Ohio, will obtain JET's ash handling system business.   B&W, which is a unit of McDermott International, already marketsenvironmental controls, along with steam generation equipment andengineering/construction services. The company also has a 50% stake in fourindependent power projects that produce 160 MW and is building projects inChina and Pakistan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIF. AIR DISTRICTS APPROVE PG&E NOX PLANS FOR DROPPING SCR REQUIREMENTS   Pacific Gas and Electric expects to save $150-million after negotiatingnew rules with three California air quality districts that provide lowcost, short-term solutions for reducing nitrogen oxide emissions at sixpower plants.   The company said by combining its NOx retrofit program with PG&E'sregular maintenance outages, the final NOx rules provide a ``more workablecompliance schedule through 2004.''   At issue, PG&E said, were local and state rules that ``effectivelymandated the use of costly selective catalytic reduction (SCR) technologyto achieve NOx emissions of 10 parts per million. By using front-end,low-NOx combustion systems (LNCs) the company can reduce emissions,previously ranging from 150 ppm to 300 ppm, to as low as 20 ppm to 30 ppm,while future improvements in technology could lower the figure evenmore.''   The new rules apply to the Morro Bay plant in the San Luis Obispo AirPollution Control District; the Moss Landing plant in the Monterey BayUnified Air Pollution District; and the Contra Costa, Hunters Point,Pittsburg and Potrero plants in the Bay Area Air Quality ManagementDistrict.   Bev Alexander, an environmental attorney who serves as NOx strategyproject manager for PG&E, said, ``This was a win-win situation because PG&Ewas able to propose additional amendments that would use pollutionprevention technology to achieve strict air-quality standards with greaterbusiness flexibility and at a lower cost.''   PG&E's NOx team began working in 1994 with state regulators on rulesoriginally scheduled to require significant NOx reductions by 1997. Theywould have forced the company to either retrofit or retire most of itsfossil-fueled units by that year.   SCR is a back-end method that cleans up NOx after it has formed, using achemical reaction involving ammonia. Use of the system requirestransporting ammonia to power plants, storing it on-site and emitting someinto the atmosphere. The system also requires construction of costlyfacilities to house the heavy equipment involved.   LNC is a front-end pollution control that reduces NOx formation byprecise flame control within the boiler. Ammonia is not required. Thecompany said for one of PG&E's generating units in the Bay Area Air QualityManagement District, the cost of retrofitting the boiler would be$5-million to $12-million for LNC compared with $20-million for SCR.   The amendments adopted by the three air districts cover all of PG&E'spower plants except the Humboldt Bay plant, which is in a district thatalready meets air quality standards.   The successful installation of LNC at the Morro Bay plant was a majorreason why the local air districts approved of PG&E's proposal. Emissionfigures from the Morro Bay facility influenced the district boards in theirfavorable decisions, the company said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PA. UTILITIES APPLAUD DEP MOVE TO MAKE STATE'S RULES NO STRICTER THANEPA'S   Electric utilities in Pennsylvania are enthusiastically backing aneffort by the state Dept. of Environmental Protection (DEP) to streamlineregulations and ensure that they are no more stringent than federalstandards.   DEP began the ``Regulatory Basics'' initiative in August at thedirection of DEP secretary James Seif, who said he wanted to overhaulregulations that exceeded federal standards, as well as those that imposeddisproportionate economic costs, lacked clarity or were redundant or nolonger necessary.   The department asked for comments to be filed toward the end of 1995,and investor-owned utilities filed jointly through the PennsylvaniaElectric Association (PEA). The initiative is undocketed and no publichearings are planned, though hearings might be scheduled later, a DEPspokesman said.   In its comments, PEA applauded Seif for ``attempting to minimize costson the regulated community, encourage performance-based outcomes and tocreate a level playing field for Pennsylvania businesses.''   The utilities complained that DEP has relied on a ``belts andsuspenders'' approach to environmental regulation, or using multipleassumptions about environmental impacts. ``While this certainly ensuresthat the goal of environmental protection is met, the regulated communityhas incurred tremendous costs, often with little or no attendantenvironmental benefit,'' PEA said. Aside from affecting the utilities, thisapproach has helped drive out industrial firms and repelled new investmentin manufacturing.   Specifically, PEA criticized DEP's water quality-based effluentlimitations as being based on a ``steady state'' model that assumesworst-case scenarios and is far too restrictive. The group noted that eachcondition measured in the model has a low probability of occurrence, whilethe combination of conditions would rarely or never occur. PEA prefers``dynamic'' models, which account for variations of flow, effluent andenvironmental conditions, and which determine the actual probability that awater quality exceedance will occur.   PEA also complained that DEP applies human health criteria at the pointof discharge, instead of at the point of withdrawal for drinking watersupplies. This exceeds the requirements of the U.S. EnvironmentalProtection Agency, as well as Pennsylvania's own written regulations, itpointed out. PEA also contended that DEP applies aquatic life standardswhen there are no substantial populations in streams.   Regarding air pollution issues, PEA said that the state DEP uses abroader definition of pollutants than EPA for requiring Title 5 permitsunder the Clean Air Act. The state also does not follow federal standardsrelating to permit revisions and flexibility, and does not allow an``emergency defense'' for unforeseeable events. The utilities also thinkthe $37/ton permitting fee may be higher than necessary to fund DEPprograms, and they would eliminate the $14/ton fee for actual emissionsbecause it violates the federal Clean Air Act.   The department also forbids the use of emission reduction credits (ERCs)for compliance with nitrogen oxide ``Reasonably Available ControlTechnology'' (RACT) standards, despite EPA efforts to develop emissionstrading, the group said. They also fear that ERCs generated fromover-compliance will not be applicable to future reduction requirements forNOx.   While utilities agree heartily with the direction of the RegulatoryBasics proceeding, the Sierra Club condemned the move to roll back DEPstandards to the federal level. Jeff Schmidt, government liaison in theHarrisburg, Pa. office, told Utility Environment Report, ``The minimumfederal standards are just that--minimums. They are meant to provide asafety net, but states should be able to design more protective standardsbased on specific regional and climactic conditions. Federal standards area floor below which you should not go, but the administration seems to wantto make them a ceiling.''   Schmidt also criticized Seif for developing many of the changes amonghis staff, without allowing public access to records. He estimated that thechanges could take 18 months, and ``the cumbersome regulatory processusually rewards economic interests.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CALIF. COURT THROWS OUT SUIT CLAIMING SOCAL ED EQUIPMENT EMFS CAUSEDCANCER   A California Superior Court judge has dismissed a lawsuit againstSouthern California Edison brought by three people with cancer who claimthat strong electromagnetic fields from the utility's equipment causedtheir diseases.   In an order last month, Judge Warren Siegel wrote that summary judgmentmust be granted in favor of the defendants because the plaintiffs ``cannotshow causation by any generally accepted scientific principle in themedical community.''   The only witnesses that the plaintiffs offered to address the questionof what caused the cancers, according to the order, were experts onstatistical studies of EMFs and cancer. The judge found that they were notqualified to address the medical issue of whether the particularindividuals' cancers were caused by EMFs.   The judge wrote that the plaintiffs were, therefore, ``relying onstatistical analysis to express a medical opinion that EMF may causecertain types of cancer.'' This, he ruled, was insufficient to allow thecase to go to trial.   The plaintiffs intend to file a motion with Siegel requesting a newtrial, according to their attorney, Annee Della Donna of the Wylie A.Aitken law firm. The decision to dismiss was ``unbelievably erroneous,''Della Donna said. The judge ruled on the sufficiency of the causationwitnesses, Della Donna argued, when he was supposed to be ruling on theadmissibility of the witnesses under various evidentiary rules governingscientific testimony.   If the request for a new trial is rejected, she said, the plaintiffswill seek a writ from the appeals court. ``This is a clear violation of ourdue process rights'' she added, since the judge ruled on something withoutgiving proper notice that the issue was up for consideration.   John Tinker, senior counsel with SoCal Ed, countered that ``the judgehas recognized that there is no sound scientific evidence to bring thisbefore a jury.'' He added, ``The company and the industry are very pleasedwith this result.''   The three plaintiffs with cancer in this case all worked in a realestate office on the ground floor of a 14-story office building in OrangeCounty, Calif. The office had unusually strong EMFs because it is directlyabove a vault containing transformers, switching gear and distributioncircuits for the building. The building owners and the real estate companyare named as defendants in the case in addition to SoCal Ed (Johsz et al.vs Koll Company et al., Case No. 726765).   Two other individuals with cancer who also worked in the office have asimilar lawsuit pending against the same defendants. It is before adifferent judge and was not directly affected by the dismissal of thiscase.   Della Donna, who is handling the second case as well, has said that theexcess incidence of disease among workers in the real estate officeconstitutes a cancer cluster.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   TVA'S FINAL IRP INCREASES COMMITMENT TO RENEWABLES, ENERGY CONSERVATION   The Tennessee Valley Authority said it has increased its commitment torenewables and energy conservation in a final version of its integratedresource plan made public in late December.   TVA said the changes were made in part as a response to comments fromconservation and environmental groups, which had called on the federallyowned utility to adopt more aggressive policies in these areas.   Among the short-term actions in the final plan, TVA said it wouldintensify research into the use of wind energy and carry out at least onewind project in its service area during the next two years.   At the same time, TVA will begin tests this year of co-firing of biomasswaste products at its large coal-fired plants and then in 1997 move aheadwith the first commercial biomass co-firing project.   In a third effort, TVA will step up reviews of ways to increase use ofcoalbed methane and landfill methane to produce power in the region. TVAhopes to sponsor an initial test of a fuel cell-landfill methane system.   On energy efficiency programs, TVA said it is now committed to add 650MW of demand-side resources by 2002 and as much as 2,200 MW by 2010. Itsaid this was an increase of 750 MW over previous versions of the plan.   Also as part of the IRP, TVA detailed a longer term research plan forrenewables and conservation that will cover the use of photovoltaics forservice to remote areas and for cutting residential energy costs, electricvehicle infrastructure development and use of communication techniques forenergy load management.   Because TVA took an approach in its IRP that uses a portfolio ofoptions, the plan contained no set estimate of environmental impacts,especially over the long term. But TVA said the need to comply with federaland state regulations would create a ``safety net'' effect againstincreased environmental impacts as different options were implemented.   Outside groups will make one final round of comments on the TVA plan inmid-January, after which it will be approved in final form by the TVA boardin February.   TVA has moved ahead in the last two months to start up two nuclearreactors at its Watts Bar and Browns Ferry sites, over strong protests fromthe environmental community. It remains to be seen whether improvements inthe IRP will bridge the differences over nuclear policy.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   MISSOURI IOUS, STATE UNIVERSITY CREATE ENERGY COLLABORATIVE FOR RENEWABLES   Missouri's investor-owned utilities and the University ofMissouri-Columbia, College of Engineering have formed the Missouri ElectricUtility Renewables Group (MEURG), an organization dedicated to identifying,gathering information, researching and testing the feasibility of renewablegeneration opportunities in the state.   Participating utilities include Empire District Electric, Kansas CityPower & Light, St. Joseph Light & Power, Union Electric and UtiliCorpUnited.   The group will give member utilities a forum to discuss integration ofrenewable energy into the state's electric power generation mix.Technologies will include wind, clean biomass, photovoltaic, solar thermaland low-head hydroelectric.   MEURG will evaluate the potential benefits of renewable energy toutilities and their customers and communicate renewable energy informationto the public. The university may also coordinate workshops, symposia andseminars and seek federal and private funding for renewable energyresearch.   James Thompson, dean of the College of Engineering, said, ``We arepleased to participate in this important initiative to explore renewableenergy resources for the state of Missouri. This collaborative effort hasstrong potential to benefit the environment and conserve energy resourcesby providing an efficient means for exploring renewable energyresources.''   Gary Huber, UE's representative in the group, said the university'sinvolvement offers research advantages. ``It also offers a vehicle forleveraging research dollars and reducing costs associated with developingrenewable energy projects,'' he said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   IP&L EYEING LANDFILL METHANE-FIRED PROJECT IN INDIANAPOLIS THIS YEAR   Indianapolis Power & Light could give final approval this month for arenewable energy project in which an internal combustion engine fired withmethane gas from a landfill would generate 3.5 MW of electricity.   Dan Melvin, IP&L principal engineer in systems planning, said theproject is in the utility's budget for 1996. If final approval comes thismonth, the project is expected to be in operation later in the year. Melvintold Utility Environment Report., ``We looked at using used equipment. Weare now evaluating proposals from vendors.''   IP&L included the landfill gas project as part of its ``short-termaction plan'' in an integrated resource plan it recently filed with theIndiana Utility Regulatory Commission.   In the IRP, the utility said the purpose of the project is to ``utilizethe favorable economics and environmental benefits that are sometimesavailable with renewable energy systems.''   The project would be located at the Southside landfill in Indianapolis.The current landfill operator already burns some methane to heat agreenhouse on the site. Under Indiana law, all landfills that accept leavesand yard waste for disposal must be equipped with methane burners.   Melvin estimated there is enough methane at the Southside landfill tolast for 10 to 15 years.   The Southside landfill could set the stage for similar type projects byIP&L. Melvin said IP&L is negotiating with Allison Engines, one of itscustomers, to purchase an 11-MW gas turbine that could be installed at asite by the late 1990s.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   STATE ENVIRONMENTAL OFFICIALS BACK ELEMENTS OF NHA RELICENSING PROPOSAL   A national organization of state environmental officials said theysupport key elements of a proposal by the National Hydropower Associationto revamp the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's project relicensingprocedures, but said the NHA plan needs ``more explicit accommodations forsettlement provisions.''   The Environmental Council of the States (ECOS), a national, non-profitorganization composed of environmental officials from 50 of the 55 U.S.states, territories and the District of Columbia, praised the NHA proposal,filed with FERC in September 1995.   FERC in October called for comment on the proposal (Docket No. RM-16),indicating it planned to undertake a rulemaking on relicensing issues. NHAlast month said a formal negotiated rulemaking would allow for timelyreform of the commission's relicensing procedures.   ECOS praised the NHA proposal's emphasis on reducing the overall timefor reviewing FERC license applications, eliminating redundant reports andinvolving all stakeholders at the earliest time possible in theenvironmental review process.   Nevertheless, ECOS said FERC should include provisions to assist statesin settling disputes among stakeholders.   ``We strongly believe that more explicit accommodations for settlementinitiatives need to be provided by FERC beyond the encouragement given inthe NHA proposal,'' ECOS said, adding that many of its concerns likelycould be resolved by administrative reforms and would not necessarilyrequire additional rulemaking.   ``Specifically, there should be provisions to ensure that formalregulatory positions from involved agencies are not solicited by FERC ondraft [National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)] documents during ongoingsettlement negotiations,'' ECOS said. ``The outcome of negotiations cangreatly accelerate NEPA reviews. Conversely, the quest for reasonablesettlement terms could also be undermined by the continued pursuit offormal regulatory positions that might constrain the flexibility ofparticipants in modifying their positions to work toward agreements.''   FERC could include ``an escape clause'' that would allow the commissionto defer on regulatory steps during ongoing settlement negotiations, ECOSsaid.   ECOS agreed with NHA that the commission's ex parte rules on FERCcommunications with participants in the licensing process are another areain need of reform.   ``Staff interpretations of ex parte constraints can be extreme andresult in a stifling of communications and early resolution of issuesbetween FERC and other agencies and participants,'' ECOS said.   ``Other agencies of government, including our own, are sensitive to exparte concerns and yet are able to find ways to do business withoutincurring these problems. Any reform proposal for hydropower licensing mustdeal with this issue.''   ECOS questioned the NHA provision that strongly encourages FERC to enterinto a memorandum of understanding with other agencies to coordinate inputon relicensing proceedings, saying that NHA makes no clear statement on whysuch an MOU is necessary.   Alternatively, ECOS suggested that regulations could mandate theconsolidation of federal agency input into hydropower relicensing in acoordinated time frame.   In addition, ECOS said the proposal would benefit from ``specificprovisions that facilitate comprehensive river basin planning by providingfinancial and/or technical support.''   ``Such planning is critical to providing a clear and reasonable contextto any cumulative impact assessment in river basins,'' ECOS continued. ``Itis essential to provide a vision of what agencies and the public want in ariver basin and not just the more traditional regulatory view of what theydon't want. This should be extremely valuable to power producers seeking tosecure their future in a given basin.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   WIS. UTILITIES OPPOSING BILL REQUIRING FREE SPARK GAS ISOLATORS FORFARMERS   Wisconsin utilities are opposing a move by a state legislator to requireelectric companies to provide spark gap isolators for farm customers whoraise livestock and believe they are experiencing stray voltage problems.   Rep. Don Hasenohrl recently introduced Assembly Bill 725 that mandatesutilities to install spark gap isolators at no charge if a livestock farmerhires an electrician who certifies that the farm electric system is wiredso that installation will not create ``a significant safety hazard'' topersons, livestock or property at the site.   The bill further provides that if the farmer requests it, the electricutility must use spark gap isolators with a minimum breakdown voltage of1,000 volts. A customer may bring action in any court to compel compliancewith these provisions, the bill reads.   Isolation occurs when the physical connection is broken between theneutral conductor of the utility system and the neutral conductor of thefarm's electrical system. The National Electric Safety Code states that ifthis connection is broken, a device must be installed that reconnects theconductors at low resistance to enhance safety if a fault occurs orlightening strikes either the farm or utility system.   According to Chuck DeNardo, senior engineer at Wisconsin Electric,utilities oppose A.B. 725 on two major counts. First, it allows thecustomer to initiate the decision to break the neutral connection withoutevidence that the utility is contributing to the stray voltage problem andwithout an understanding of what isolation means.   Second, the bill eliminates use of lower-voltage reconnection devicesnow used by utilities and replaces them with higher-voltage spark gapisolators. DeNardo explains that the lower the reconnection voltage, thesafer the device. The ``electronic switching'' devices currently used byutilities have reconnection voltages of about 25 volts, while the bill canrequire spark gap isolators with minimum reconnection voltages of 1,000volts.   A spokeswoman for the Wisconsin Utilities Association said utilities inthe state have very serious concerns about the use of spark gap isolatorsand will be opposing the proposed legislation. A.B. 725 was originallyreferred to the Assembly Committee on Agriculture, but an effort is nowunder way to have it transferred to the Committee on Environment andUtilities, whose members are believed to have ``a greater appreciation forthe safety considerations involved,'' the association said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   TUCSON ELECTRIC, NEW WORLD POWER JOINT IMPLEMENTATION PROJECTS CHOSEN   Projects developed by Tucson Electric and New World Power to reducegreenhouse gas emissions in developing countries were among eight projectsselected to join the U.S. Initiative on Joint Implementation (USIJI), apilot program aimed at finding cost-effective ways to cut emissions andpromote sustainable development.   Joint implementation, in which companies from developed nations teamwith partners in developing countries to reduce emissions, is seen as a keyweapon in the Clinton administration's program for reducing U.S. emissions.While participating companies may not now claim credit against futurerequirements for emission reductions achieved overseas, U.S. treatynegotiators hope to include amendments that will allow credit for suchprojects.   The eight projects, announced Dec. 19, 1995 in Washington byundersecretary of state for global affairs Tim Wirth, represent privatesector investments that could top $200-million when the projects are fullyimplemented.   They were selected after a technical review and evaluation of how theyconformed with U.S. joint implementation guidelines by a panel of seniorofficials from the Dept. of Energy, U.S. Environmental Protection Agencyand six other federal agencies.   This is the second round of projects to be included in the USIJIprogram, which began in October 1993 as part of President Clinton's climatechange action plan. A first round of projects, representing more than$40-million in private investment, was selected in February 1995 (UER, 17Feb '95, 10).   New World Power and its two Costa Rican partners will build a 16-MWhydropower plant using the Puerto Viejo River and Quebradon Creek innorthern Costa Rica. The project will displace thermal units that burnhigh-sulfur diesel fuels, bunker fuels and other fossil fuels.   New World Power will participate in a second project, also in CostaRica, to develop a 20-MW wind power plant. The project will displacefossil-fuel fired generation, and power will be sold to the Costa RicanInstitute of Electricity.   Nations Energy, a subsidiary of Tucson Electric, will participate in aproject to develop a 10- to 15-MW biomass plant in Guaimaca, Honduras.Sawmill and logging residues, currently burned in an uncontrolled mannerand left to decompose on the forest floor, will serve as the fuel source,making the use of trees for fuel unnecessary and not cost-effective.   The International Utility Partnership, an industrywide initiative, alsowill participate in the Honduras project, whose power will be sold to theEmpresa Nacional de Energia Electrica, the Honduran national utility.   The other projects selected are a carbon sequestration project in CostaRica, a geothermal plant in Nicaragua, a second wind plant in Costa Rica, aforestry management project in Costa Rica, and a project to capturefugitive methane emissions in Russia.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   CANADA DECIDES TO CONTINUE VOLUNTARY GREENHOUSE GAS PROGRAM UNTIL NOV. '96   Canadian officials have decided to continue using a voluntary program toreduce greenhouse gas emissions, despite a recent plea from the federalDept. of the Environment for more aggressive measures to ensure that Canadastabilizes emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000.   Canada's greenhouse gas program, called the Climate Change VoluntaryChallenge and Registry (VCR),was launched in 1994 by the federal andprovincial governments and is operated by Natural Resources Canada.   Resistance to mandatory emission reduction measures is headed by theprovince of Alberta, the heart of Canada's fossil-fuel industry, whichemits 30% of Canada's greenhouse gases. The three major utilities inAlberta strongly favor voluntary approaches over traditional regulatoryplans.   At a meeting late last year of Canada's federal and provincialenvironment and energy ministers in Edmonton, Alberta, officials decided tocontinue Canada's reliance on the VCR until November 1996, when ministerswill reassess the greenhouse gas emission picture. This is even though thefederal National Action Program forecasts that emissions will increase 13%by year 2000 under the VCR.   At the meeting, federal environment minister Sheila Copps argued that``without a stronger plan from provinces like Alberta, we're not going tobe there. Alberta's plan is not going to work.''   But Ty Lund, Alberta's minister of environmental protection, argued thatAlberta was the first province to register a plan with the VCR, and thatfirms responsible for 70% of Alberta's greenhouse gases have either joinedthe VCR or declared their intent to enroll.   Alberta energy minister Anne McLellan added that the VCR is rapidlygaining industry support, including from the Canadian ElectricalAssociation and the trade associations of the petroleum, natural gas andcoal industries. Initial responses to the VCR have been ``veryencouraging,'' she said, noting that over 475 companies and institutionshave expressed a commitment to participate.   In the absence of any mandatory control program, Canada's greenhouse gasemissions have increased by 4.9% from 577 million metric tons in 1990 to605 million metric tons in 1994. The largest increases were in Saskatchewan(24%) and Alberta (15%).   The coal-fired plants of TransAlta Utilities, Alberta Power and EdmontonPower account for 35% of the provincial emission total. TransAlta, Canada'slargest investor-owned utility with 3,676 MW of coal-fired capacity,announced a plan last year to cut greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by 2000.The plan is considered the most advanced in Canada.   Gordon Lambert, TransAlta's director of sustainable development,acknowledged that achieving the stabilization goal will be challenging forTransAlta Corp., the owner of TransAlta and TransAlta Energy. This isbecause greenhouse gas emissions from TransAlta Corp.'s Canadianoperations, which include two natural gas-fired, combined-cyclecogeneration plants in Ontario, are forecasted to increase up to 15% over1990 levels by 2000 to meet growing customer demand.   TransAlta Corp. expects to achieve its stabilization target fromrenewable energy purchases (13%), customer efficiencies (16%), internalefficiencies (32%) and domestic and international offsets (41%).   But Robert Hornung, climate change director of the Alberta-based PembinaInstitute for Appropriate Development, claimed that TransAlta is buyingrenewable energy only because such purchases are required under Alberta'sSmall Power Research and Development Act. Customer demand-side managementprograms are behind schedule and are being scaled back. The agriculturaloffsets planned by TransAlta in Saskatchewan are ``not credible,'' addedHornung.   The utility's Saskatchewan Soil Enhancement Project involves asoil-tilling technique using ``low-disturbance direct seeding'' to increasethe carbon dioxide storage capacity of the soil. TransAlta claims theproject can offset up to 1.1 million metric tons of CO2.   However, Hornung argued that the same logic should apply to TransAlta'sextensive coal mining operations and wetland drainage, which releasegreenhouse gases to the atmosphere but are not included in the utility'sgreenhouse gas inventory. Moreover, no nation has yet quantified thechanges in soil carbon content arising from human activities.   TransAlta also is looking for a 13% contribution from internationaloffsets, which Canada cannot count toward meeting its commitment tostabilize greenhouse gases, Hornung said. International offsets before theyear 2000 are not credited under the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change.   In general, Hornung said the VCR is flawed because governments have notimplemented supportive regulatory and fiscal policies.   Nonetheless, Lambert said that by submitting an action plan, TransAltaCorp. is making a ``visible commitment to Canada's international obligationto address greenhouse gases.''   The Pembina Institute examined 189 VCR submissions by corporations andgovernments and reviewed 73 action plans. The review determined that 80% ofcompanies failed to provide the basic information needed to assess thecredibility of their plans; 37% did not provide a greenhouse gas inventory;and 72% did not project emission levels by 2000.   Saskatchewan Power, also a coal-based utility, emits 35% of theprovince's total greenhouse emissions. SaskPower's system has 1,997 MW ofcoal-fired capacity, but Saskatchewan has not yet developed a CO2stabilization plan.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   TVA PCB WASTE EXCHANGE   The Tennessee Valley Authority said it was able to save $20,000 indisposal fees for polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) wastes under an innovativeexchange agreement with the Dept. of Energy's Oak Ridge weapons plant.   Under the deal, TVA transferred 75,000 gallons of oil with slight PCBcontamination to Oak Ridge's K-25 plant site where it will be used to rinsethree 22,500 gallon tanks that had previously contained PCB wastes and arenow being decontaminated.   Since the PCB level in the TVA oil is much lower than what had been inthe tanks, flushing with the TVA oil will be a useful initial step in thedecontamination process.   According to Oak Ridge officials, without the oil from TVA they wouldhave had to spend up to $80,000 for new oil that would end up becomingcontaminated.   Oak Ridge has a toxic waste incinerator at the K-25 site that islicensed to destroy PCBs. It will eventually dispose of the TVA oil in thefacility at no extra cost to TVA or itself.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   N.Y. CHANGES OFFSET RULES   The New York Dept. of Environmental Conservation has changed two rulesaffecting the use of nitrogen oxide and volatile organic compound``offsets.''The first change, which amends Subpart 231-2 and Part 621 of New York'sTitle 6 regulations, requires applicants for permits to construct aircontamination sources, such as power plants, to identify the source of theNOx and VOC emission offsets prior to issuance of the final permit toconstruct. Previously, applicants had to supply the information at the timethe application was submitted to the department.   The DEC also has proposed extending the deadline for reportingreductions of NOx and VOCs. Reductions prior to Oct. 14, 1994 would have tobe reported by Oct. 14, 1996, instead of 1995, as originally planned.Reductions after Oct. 14, 1994 would have to be reported within two years.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   PSE&G BERGEN REPOWERING   Public Service Electric & Gas expects significant emission reductionsand water benefits at its 650-MW Bergen Generating Station, which went backinto service with more efficient equipment.   The station, built in 1959 to burn coal, was converted to oil and gas in1970. In the $360-million repowering project, four combustion turbines wereinstalled, along with a waste-heat recovery boiler that uses heat from theturbines to produce more power.   Although the station will produce an additional 40 MW, nitrogen oxideemissions will be reduced by 96%, or 10,000 tons/year, while carbonmonoxide will be cut by 63%, and carbon dioxide by 30%. PSE&G already ismarketing its NOx ``credits'' from this and other projects to businesses inNew Jersey and elsewhere in the region (UER, 9 June, 1).   Along with the air benefits, PSE&G will cut water use and eliminatethermal discharge at Bergen. The station will use treated waste water froma county sewage treatment plant instead of water from Overpeck Creek, andit will recycle the waste water back to the treatment plant instead ofdischarging it into the Hackensack River.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   VA. SCC COMPETITION PROBE   Virginia's State Corporation Commission said that as part of its formalinvestigation into electric power industry restructuring, it will examineits environmental policies ``to determine if they are compatible withdesirable competition'' (Case No. TUE950089).   The SCC said its probe, which could lead to a plan for expandingcompetition among utilities and other power suppliers, will include ``ananalysis of whether increased competition will impact a utility'swillingness to take appropriate steps to address environmental concerns.''Environmentalists in other states moving toward competition have expressedconcerns about the impact those changes would have on conservation efforts,the development of renewables and the use of dirtier coal-fired plants togenerate cheap power.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightUTILITY ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996   EX-KAN. MUNI OFFICIAL SENTENCED   The former superintendent of the Stafford Municipal utility in Kansashas been sentenced to six months of home confinement and fined $3,000 inconnection with the illegal dumping of nine capacitors filled withpolychlorinated biphenyls.   William Kirkpatrick originally was indicted on two counts by a federalgrand jury, one involving ordering the illegal disposal and a second offailure to report it (Criminal No. 94-10094-01) (UER, 2 Sept '94, 10). Theformer charge was dropped after he pleaded guilty to the latter, the U.S.Attorney's office in Wichita said.   The original charges carried a maximum penalty of four years in prisonand a $275,000 fine. The revised charges could have cost Kirkpatrick$250,000 and three years in prison.   A spokesman for the U.S. Attorney said Kirkpatrick will beelectronically monitored during his home confinement.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B37-16IA059-000325-B019-354http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev41.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002445 text/html 50290HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:22:16 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:36 GMTContent-length: 50101Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev41.html Sample Issue Copyright WASTE BUSINESS via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES USA, WESTERN SEEK TO MERGE; WOULD BE 3RD LARGEST SOLID WASTE FIRM (515 words) HOUSE GETS LEGISLATION TO CREATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENT (705 words) ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP. SAYS ACQUISITION IS PENDING. (119 words) MFRI ACQUIRES ASSETS OF SZE, GERMAN PIPELINE LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM FIRM (183 words) OHIO EPA ISSUES DRAFT SOLID WASTE PERMIT FOR AMERICAN LANDFILL EXPANSION (1156 words) BABCOCK & WILCOX POWER BUYS ASSETS OF JOY ENVIRO TECHNOLOGIES (262 words) EPA PICKS ECOLOGY & ENVIRO FOR UP TO $216 MILLION IN REGIONAL CONTRACTS (299 words) HI-RISE PURCHASING MAREN TO GAIN MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTION NETWORK (203 words) N.Y.C. PLANS TO SEEK BIDS IN JAN. FOR BUILDER OF FRESH KILLS SLURRY WALL (482 words) FERNALD VITRIFICATION PILOT DELAYED BY DESIGN, PROCUREMENT TROUBLES (441 words) HAZWASTE MONITOR HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR (221 words) SOLID WASTE MONITOR SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR (226 words) FINANCIAL PROJECTION PRINS RECYCLING CORP. EXPECTS RECORD LOSS IN FOURTH QUARTER. (214 words) INTERNATIONAL GERAGHTY & MILLER AND PARENT, HEIDEMIJ IN OVERSEAS `ACQUISITION MODE' (143 words) ACQUISITION RECYCLING INDUSTRIES DOUBLES BUSINESS WITH PURCHASE OF ANGLO METAL (347 words) RFP MONTGOMERY-OTSEGO-SCHOHARIE, N.Y., TO ISSUE RFP FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGER (418 words) RADWASTE DOE'S NIAGARA FALLS RADWASTE STORAGE SITE SEEN POSING LONG-TERM RISK (684 words) CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   USA, WESTERN SEEK TO MERGE; WOULD BE 3RD LARGEST SOLID WASTE FIRMBy:By Alexandra Rudenko   The boards of directors of USA Waste Services Inc. and Western WasteIndustries have approved the terms of a merger that would create the thirdlargest waste management firm in North America.   Shareholders will be voting this spring and, pending required approvals,a closing is planned by May 1, 1996.   Officials of the two firms have been ``long-term friends,'' and heldongoing discussions for the past 12 months. During ``due diligence'' overthe past 30 days, senior management from Dallas-based USA Waste has endedup sleeping at the house of Western Waste Chairman Kosti Shirvanian, oneofficial told analysts.   This means there are few surprises in store. The chances are slightthat something might jeopardize the negotiations as happened several yearsago when Browning Ferris Industries considered buying Western Waste andthen changed its mind, USA executives assured the investors.   Following the merger announcement USA Waste Chairman John E. Drury,Shirvanian and other senior management of the two firms attempted to fly toBoston to outline their deal to the investment community. However, awinter storm interfered and the group hurriedly rescheduled meetings fortwo days in New York City. Here again the bad weather caused a cancellationof the second day's activities as the executives rushed back home to moretemperate climates.   The merger agreement provides that the stockholders of Western Wastewill receive 1.5 shares of USA Waste common stock for each Western Wastecommon share. USA Waste has received an irrevocable proxy from Shirvanian,who is Western Waste's largest shareholder, to vote his shares in favor ofthe merger. These shares represent approximately 31% of Western Waste'sshares outstanding.   USA Waste already owns approximately 4.5% of the Western Wasteoutstanding shares, with such shares scheduled to be canceled at theeffective time of the merger.   Based upon Western Waste's approximately 16-million shares andequivalents outstanding and existing indebtedness, the merger would bevalued at about $525-million.   Drury will retain his position as chairman and CEO of USA Waste, andShirvanian will become a vice chairman of the board of USA Waste at thetime of the merger.   The combined companies have annualized revenues of over $800-million andtotal assets in excess of $1-billion.   After the merger, USA Waste will have 61 collection operations, 35landfills, 24 transfer stations and five recycling operations, serving over1-million customers in 23 states.   Drury said, ``We expect the merger to be additive to USA Waste'searnings per share because of cost savings and operational improvementsexpected to be realized by the combination.   ``Savings should come from combining operations and reducingadministrative and staffing cost. There is also potential to grow andexpand in and around Western Waste's existing markets in California, Texas,Florida and in other states,'' said Drury.   At Smith Barney, vice president Leone Young viewed the merger aspositive and upgraded the USA Waste from an ``outperform'' to a ``buy.''It's a good strategic move. They have a very experienced and sizablemanagement team. At worst it will be earnings neutral,'' she said.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   HOUSE GETS LEGISLATION TO CREATE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR ENVIRONMENTBy:KH   Rep. Jim Saxton (R-N.J.), chairman of the House Resources subcommitteeon Fisheries, Wildlife and Oceans has introduced into the House ofRepresentatives a bill that would create a National Institute for theEnvironment (NIE).   Similar legislation was introduced previously in 1994 in the 103rdCongress, said an official with the Committee for the NIE, an organizationof more than 9,000 scientists, business leaders and environmentalists thatis backing creation of the NIE in its quest to improve the scientific basisfor environmental decision making.   The institute would be an independent, non-regulatory federal entitydesigned to serve as a single source of scientific information and researchon the environment, said the committee official. Its proposed budget forits first year is $130 million, but proponents maintain that no additionalfederal money will be needed because of the elimination of ``duplicative,outdated federal programs'' that would be replaced by the NIE, the officialadded.   Although a definite timetable has not been set, Senate Minority LeaderTom Daschle (D-S.D.) is expected to introduce the Senate version of NIElegislation early this year, possibly in January. House hearings have alsobeen tentatively slated for this month before the Saxton subcommittee.   The committee official was candid in admitting she could not confidentlypredict the likelihood of passage for the NIE. However, she noted that theNIE's ``diverse supporters'' include House Speaker Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.),who had helped sponsor the legislation in its previous incarnation.   Saxton, meanwhile, said: ``The NIE proposal has been truly close to myheart for over five years. ``There have been changes in the politicalarena which make the atmosphere on Capitol Hill more conducive to a `smartgovernment' initiative such as the NIE. The NIE will make government workbetter, cheaper and more efficiently with smarter regulations and soundscience. It's time to move environmental policy out of the moody politicalspectrum where it is now, and get it back on science where it belongs,''Saxton said.   Dr. Stephen Hubbell, chair of the Committee for the NIE and a professorof ecology at Princeton University, along with Henry Howe of the Universityof Illinois, Chicago, have been credited with the creation of the NIEeffort, which began with a meeting of 50 scientists, environmentalists andpolicy experts in 1989.   ``We have environmental groups with their agendas, industry with theiragendas and regulatory agencies with their agendas, but we don't have acredible, independent science agency where people can go and say, `What dowe really know about this problem?' '' Hubbell said.   The House bill calls for the NIE to assess the state of knowledge onenvironmental issues and competitively award peer-reviewed research grantsat academic institutions, private companies, government laboratories andnon-profit organizations, said the committee official. The NIE willsupport education and training to help prepare future generations ofenvironmental scientists, she added. However, to maintain credible,politically neutral science, the NIE will have no regulatory role, nor willit operate laboratories, she stressed.   The NIE effort does appear to have a large and broad legion ofsupporters in addition to such influential legislators as Gingrich andDaschle. These backers include such leading environmental companies as WMXTechnologies, Browning-Ferris Industries, Safety-Kleen Corp., ENVIRON Corp.and Law Cos. Group; corporate giants such as AT&T, Apple Computer, MonsantoCo., ITT Corp., Amoco Corp. and Chase Manhattan Bank; and environmentalgroups such as the Environmental Defense Fund and the Sierra Club.   Following are some of the programs that have been suggested forinclusion in the NIE:   -- Environmental Protection Agency: Stratospheric Ozone DepletionResearch; Exploratory Grants and Centers; Science to Achieve Results (STAR)program; Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program (EMAP); EcologicalRisk and Assessment-Reducing Uncertainty in Ecological Risk Assessmentprogram; Education, Outreach and Information.   -- National Biological Service: Ecosystem Research; InformationTransfer.   -- Department of Energy: Bureau of Environmental Research; GlobalChange initiative.   -- National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration: Coastal OceanProgram (COP); National Sea Grant College Program; National UnderseaResearch Program; Global Learning and Observations to Benefit theEnvironment (GLOBE).   -- Redirection of money: Tennessee Valley Authority EnvironmentalResearch Center; Clean Coal Technology initiative; Federal ConstructionProjects, including the Bay City EPA facility and new EPA laboratories.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGIES CORP. SAYS ACQUISITION IS PENDING.By:KH   The Lakewood, N.J.-based company said late last week that it had reachedan agreement in principal to acquire an unnamed privately-held firm ``thatwould complement the existing operations'' of ETC.   As Waste Business was going to press, an ETC official would say onlythat the transaction was subject to a number of conditions, includingsatisfactory completion of due diligence, the preparation and execution ofdefinitive agreements and the approval of the stockholders of bothcompanies.   The unnamed acquisition target is projecting about $7 million inrevenues in 1995 and no significant indebtedness, said the ETC official. Its management will be incorporated into the management team ofEnvironmental Technologies, he added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   MFRI ACQUIRES ASSETS OF SZE, GERMAN PIPELINE LEAK DETECTION SYSTEM FIRM   MFRI has acquired for an undisclosed amount of cash the assets of Kiel,Germany-based SZE Spezial Electronik Hagenuk GmbH, a firm involved in thedevelopment, marketing and servicing of pipeline leak detection systems,said an MFRI spokesman.   SZE, a subsidiary of Hanover, Germany-based Preussag, AG, posts annualsales of about $3.6 million, he said.   Why did Niles, Ill.-based MFRI buy SZE? ``MFRI has been providingprivate label pipeline leak detection systems to the company for four yearsand we have developed an understanding and appreciation of the growthpotential of the European market it serves,'' explained David Unger, MFRIchairman, president and chief executive officer.   ``We will expand the MFRI product line available to European customersand aggressively seek to increase our market penetration. At the sametime, we will make the [SZE proprietary pipeline leak detection system]available to our U.S. customers,'' said Unger.   MFRI is a vertically integrated manufacturer and marketer of filter bagsunder the Midwesco Filter name and specialty piping systems and electronicleak detection and location systems marketed under the Perma-Pipe name.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   OHIO EPA ISSUES DRAFT SOLID WASTE PERMIT FOR AMERICAN LANDFILL EXPANSIONBy:AR   The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency has decided to issue a draftsolid waste permit to American Landfill for its plan to expand byapproximately 20-million cubic yards over 130 acres.   A public information session and hearing is scheduled for January 10. When the expansion permit is issued the landfill will be able to accept8,000 tons per day of waste, and have about 7.8-years of capacity,according to the agency.   The subsidiary of American Waste Systems began seeking permission forthis expansion in January 1991, and triggered a lengthy dispute with theagency over environmental compliance issues. This was resolved in anagreement announced in October 1995 covering all outstanding complianceissues at the facility.   According to the EPA official, the agency determined during a facilitycompliance review that the operators had exceeded the maximum depth, heightand lateral limit for solid waste disposal as authorized in the landfillpermit. These violations increased the capacity of the landfill by atleast 2,424,342 cubic yards.   Also it was observed that American was excavating and removing wastetires from a closed portion of the landfill. These tires were placed onother portions of the landfill and at the tire storage area for themonofill. American failed to obtain prior agency approval or follow therequired rules for such activity, he said.   In addition, American stored tires at the monofill and beganconstruction of the monofill prior to obtaining agency authorization. American Landfill was assessed a fine of $269,755 for environmentalviolations at the landfill and tire monofill facility, he said.   Under the permit granted by the agency to American in October 1995, thecompany agreed to install an explosive gas extraction system. This systemwas not required by the prior permit and will be an environmentallybeneficial project because it will extract potentially explosive gas fromthe existing landfill, said a company official.   As part of this environmental improvement, American was granted a1,639,57 cubic yard increase in waste disposal capacity on top of thenorthern portion of the facility. In addition, the permit allowed Americanto relocate 625,815 cubic yards of waste from the center of the facility tothe northern portion of the landfill, said the state EPA.   According to a statement issued by the Warren, Ohio-based firm, in orderto issue the expansion permit requested in 1991, the Ohio EPA was requiredto perform a review of ALI's operating compliance under its existingpermit issued in 1985. During this review of the original application forthe 1985 permit, the Ohio EPA alleged that ALI was not authorized toexcavate soils at the landfill to the extent it had done and was notrequired to install five feet of additional clay liner to the base of thefacility.   ALI noted that the excavation and liner installation had occurred withthe full knowledge of the Ohio EPA since the issuance of the 1985 permit. However, on November 21, 1994, ALI received a notice from the Ohio EPAalleging violations of its permit and related regulations. And the agencyasserted that ALI had significantly less remaining disposal capacity underits 1985 permit than previously calculated by the firm, and very limitedcapacity immediately available for waste disposal, explained thestatement.   Additionally, ALI received a letter from the Ohio EPA alleging that itsApril 1995 financial assurance deposit of $2.4-million was insufficient. Furthermore, the Ohio EPA said that the expansion permit could not beissued until, among other things, ALI was operating in compliance or was ona legally enforceable schedule that would result in compliance.   During ensuing months, ALI provided information to the Ohio EPA insupport of its position. The subsidiary pointed out that hundreds ofinspections and compliance reviews that had previously been performed didnot allege any violation or raise any concern regarding ALI's excavationactivities. Additionally, it provided an opinion from a third-partyconsultant who reviewed the 1985 permit, the application and other relevantinformation.   In mid-September, ALI recognized that the Ohio EPA would not be willingto change its position, said the statement. It believed that if anagreement with the Ohio EPA could not be reached, years of litigation wouldensue and at a minimum the expansion permit would not be issued until suchlitigation was resolved.   ``Although ALI continues to disagree with the Ohio EPA regardingexcavation depths and remaining capacity at the landfill, in light of thetime, costs and risks inherent in litigation and ALI's confidence in itsreceipt of the expansion permit, ALI proceeded to negotiate so that theexpansion permit could be issued in an expedited manner,'' said thestatement.   This resulted in the October agreement in which ALI agreed to complywith the agency's interpretation of the 1985 permit and therefore hasagreed to excavate to depths consistent with such interpretation. Theagreement also provides for a schedule of compliance with respect tofinancial assurance which ALI estimates to be approximately $10.9-million. The orders also address the management of scrap tires stored at andreceived by ALI at the landfill and its tire monofill, said the statement.   As a result of the agreement, ALI's total capacity is significantly lessthan the 14,900,000 cubic yards ALI believed existed at the facility as ofthe end of 1994, said the statement. Because of such reduced capacity, ALIincurred a charge of approximately $9.2-million during the third quarter toreflect the accrual of closure and post-closure monitoring costs based uponthe remaining capacity of the landfill.   According to AWS's third quarter statement. the company incurred a netloss of $5.6-million, or $0.19 per share, compared with net income of$998,000, or $0.03 per share in the third quarter of 1994. The $9.2million charge was recorded as $6.1-million net of tax or $0.20 per share.   For the first nine months of 1995, the company incurred a net loss of$5.4-million, or $0.18 per share, compared with net income of $1,049,000 or$0.04 per share for the first nine months of 1994.   In comparing the first nine months of 1995 with the first nine months of1994, net operating revenues of the technical environmental services groupsdecreased primarily due to a decrease in the level of environmentalengineering and remediation services performed.   The company's disposal operations, including disposal brokerage,recorded higher net operating revenues for the first nine months of 1995compared with the first nine months of the prior year primarily due to asignificant increase in the disposal brokerage operations, partially offsetby lower disposal revenues resulting from a reduction in average disposalrates and a decline in the volume of waste accepted by the company'slandfills.   AWS, traded on the New York Stock Exchange, provides integrated wastemanagement and environmental services, including disposal, transportationand transportation-related services, disposal brokerage and managementservices, environmental engineering, site assessment, analytical laboratoryand remediation services to industrial, commercial, municipal andgovernmental customers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   BABCOCK & WILCOX POWER BUYS ASSETS OF JOY ENVIRO TECHNOLOGIESBy:By Steven Lang   Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group has bought, for an undisclosedsum, the assets of air services firm Joy Environmental Technologies fromHarnischfeger Industries, a diversified international holding company, saida spokesman. Joy has offices in Houston, Texas and Malvern, Pa. as well asa warehouse facility in Honeybrook, Pa., he said.   The deal expands B&W's line of environmental equipment products,including acid mist precipitators, electrostatic precipitators and dryflue-gas desulfurization systems and baghouses, the spokesman explained. These products will be transferred to B&W's Power Generation Group, whichis based in Barberton, Ohio, he said.   The agreement also calls for responsibility for ash handling systems tobe transferred to Lancaster, Ohio-based Diamond Power Specialty Co., adivision of B&W that supplies boiler cleaning and diagnostic equipment andservices to the power generation industry.   ``This acquisition is excellent for B&W. It diversifies ourenvironmental product line and improves our ability to meet the full scopeof our customers demands,'' said Walt Boomer, B&W Power Generation Grouppresident. ``It is a particularly good fit for Diamond Power because Joy'sash handling business gives Diamond an additional product line. We expectthat this will expand Diamond's market potential quite dramatically.''   ``Merging the best of Joy's technology into ours will not only increaseour reach in the environmental equipment industry, it will also help us aswe continue to develop new environmental products for the future,'' hesaid.   The Babcock & Wilcox Power Generation Group is an operating unit ofenergy services company McDermott International.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   EPA PICKS ECOLOGY & ENVIRO FOR UP TO $216 MILLION IN REGIONAL CONTRACTS   Ecology and Environment, Inc. (EEI) has been awarded up to $216 millionin five multi-year regional contracts over five years to provide the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency with support for its oil and hazardouswaste spill response, removal and prevention programs, according to companyofficials.   Three of the contracts were awarded in late December and two in themiddle of last month. All five of the ``level-of-effort, cost-plus-fee''contracts, dubbed START for Superfund Technical Assessment and ResponseTeams, are effective Jan. 1, 1996 and will contribute the revenues andearnings of EEI's current fiscal year ending July 31, 1996, said a companyofficial.   In the latest announcement, EEI was selected to provide EPA with2,532,000 technical labor hours for Regions V, VI and VII. With alloptions, the combined contracts could total $158 million, said an EEIofficial.   The Chicago-based Region V contract calls for delivery of up to 1,128,00technical labor hours and totals $68 million with all options; theDallas-based Region VI deal calls for delivery of up to 887,000 technicallabor hours and could total as much as $60 million; and the KansasCity-based Region VII award could involve 517,000 hours and total $30million with all options, said an EEI official.   The other two regional EPA contracts that could be worth as much as $58million to the Buffalo area, N.Y.-based firm, and involve up to 981,000technical labor hours to support the agency's oil and hazwaste spillprograms in Regions IX and X, he said.   The San Francisco-based Region IX contract totals $34 million with alloptions, while the Seattle-based Region X contract totals $24 million withall options. Options amount to about half of the total hours and revenueover the five-year performance period, said the spokesman.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   HI-RISE PURCHASING MAREN TO GAIN MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTION NETWORK   Hi-Rise Recycling Systems, with close to 50 employees and $3.25 millionin annual sales, is acquiring Maren Engineering Corp., a company double itssize, according to Brad Hacker, Hi-Rise controller.   Chicago-based Maren--a manufacturer, servicer and distributor of balingand recycling equipment--posts $7.5 million in annual sales and employs 95,Hacker said.   Why did Miami-based Hi-Rise, which provides recycling systems formulti-story buildings, acquire Maren? ``It's a good buy for two reasons,''Hacker told Waste Business. ``It gives us a manufacturing facility for ourproduct--the hi-rise system. And it gives us a distribution network.''   In addition, Maren is now positioned to bring its product line furtherinto the recycling market with Hi-Rise's background, contacts andinternational distribution network, said Floyd Tuominen, Hi-Rise chiefoperating officer.   Maren's client lists includes Coca Cola-USA, Georgia Pacific, KimberlyClark, TRW Automotive and Dunlop Tire Corp.   Hi-Rise anticipates closing the Maren deal during the first quarter of1996.   Meanwhile, the firm is looking for one additional company to acquirethis year in its plans to develop a national presence, said Hacker. If allplanned acquisitions are completed, he expects the company will record 1996billings of about $20 million and have 135 employees.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   N.Y.C. PLANS TO SEEK BIDS IN JAN. FOR BUILDER OF FRESH KILLS SLURRY WALLBy:By Anne Magnuson   An $80 million contract to construct 13,000 linear feet of slurry wallat Fresh Kills Landfill, Staten Island, will be let out to bid in Januaryby the New York City Department of Sanitation, city officials said lastweek.   Contractors have been watching for the long-awaited request forproposals for the slurry wall contract, which will include the installationof leachate collection systems at the landfill's two active disposalmounds.   Meanwhile, a $45 million contract won by SCS Engineers, Nyack, N.Y., iscurrently utilizing six million square feet of geocomposite, 10 millionsquare feet of HDPE, and 2 million cubic yards of fill to close 237 acresat Fresh Kills.   As part of these colossal projects at what is believed to be the world'slargest landfill, a gas extraction system is under installation by SCSEngineers. Sixty-five gas wells are being imbedded on the landfill'sclosed 100-foot-high mound and 108 gas wells on the closed 140-foot-highmound, said Duane Seaman, the landfill's project manager and designer from1992 to 1995 when he was with SCS Engineers. Seaman is now senior projectmanager, Roy F. Weston of N.Y., Valhalla.   Closure of the two active mounds, together processing 14,000 t/d ofbarged N.Y.C. waste, is not expected until 2015. These mounds areeventually to stand at 200 feet and 460 feet, the highest point on StatenIsland.   The SCS Engineers closure project began last February and is slated forcompletion in June. The magnitude of the job staggers the imagination whenconsidering the amount of dirt for the cap that is being hauled from NewJersey and the city's five boroughs. Seaman said 700 trucks a day arrive,about one per minute, carrying soil costing $6/cubic yard to $20/cubic yarddepending on its application.   The caps, when completed, will contain smooth HDPE on the flat areas andtextured liner and geocomposite on the slopes, not to exceed 3:1. Atwo-foot barrier protective layer consisting of a variety of soils willoverlay the plastic, to be topped with six inches of top soil seeded laterwith cool seasonal grasses and 4 pounds/acre of wildflowers. ``Somewhereout there are 237 acres of top soil we will have to locate,'' Seaman said.   SCS Engineers has designed a nearly unique gas duct venting system forthe closure mounds that precludes the purchase of expensive sand. Insteadof methane migrating through a costly porous layer, the gas will travelalong interconnected trenches to gas wells and vents. ``Over 380,000 cubicyards of sand would be a lot of sand,'' Seaman noted.   The overall gas extraction system, eventually to collect methane fromthe two closure mounds and the two active mounds, will form networks toflow into one main for use in a manner not yet determined. Selecting aconcessionaire to complete this construction is under negotiation at DOS.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   FERNALD VITRIFICATION PILOT DELAYED BY DESIGN, PROCUREMENT TROUBLESBy:By Mary Powers   Design and procurement problems with the vitrification plant at theDepartment of Energy's former uranium enrichment facility at Fernald havedelayed its startup 17 months, but officials said it will not delay the10-year cleanup of the entire site.   The pressure of Superfund-imposed deadlines forced the fast-track designand construction of the $21 million vitrification pilot plant. Pieces ofthe project were designed in parallel that needed to be designed insequence, say DOE and FERMCO officials. ``As a result, we had to retrofitthe melter into the facility,'' said John Reising, DOE associate directorfor environmental restoration.   The decision to vitrify the radioactive materials in four cement siloswas signed last December, which started the CERCLA clock ticking. FERMCOhad 15 months to start remediation. The first glitch came when DOE hadtrouble getting bids for a melter with operating temperatures of up to 1450degrees C for the pilot plant. The RFP was revised down from a five ton/dayto a one ton/day furnace, said Nina Akgunduz, DOE's project manager. Themelter supplier is GTS Durateck Inc., Columbia, Md., with technical supportfrom the Vitreous State Laboratory at Catholic University in Washington,D.C.   The original operating schedule anticipated 100% efficiency from thepilot plant, which could have completed test burns in three months. But theschedule was revised after a team of specialists from Europe that operate asimilar facility there said a more realistic estimate would be 30%efficiency. ``That adds another nine months to the test burn,'' saysMichael Skriba, FERMCO's project manager for the pilot. The pilot isscheduled to begin operations in late February.   Data collected from the pilot will be used to design the $200 millionfull-scale vitrification plant, which will handle up to 30 tons of materiala day. Reising says one lesson learned so far is to include operations andconstruction people early on in the process. ``Design problems would havebeen caught earlier,'' he said.   The design and construction of that plant is also on a fast track, withthe first construction package to be awarded in March. The early design andconstruction will be limited to site preparation, water, power and otherstandard engineering pieces. Parsons is the design contractor for bothvitrification plants.   Complete vitrification of 9,700 tons of contaminated materials in thesilos will take three and a half years.   Meanwhile, a FERMCO spokesman said work on all contaminated areas atFernald have shifted out of the investigation stage.   ``It looks like 1996 will be the year for design. All key remediationdecisions were made in 1995.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   HAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITORHAZ WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR   Editor's Note:  As part of our new format, we are updating the hazwastebusiness monitor table. Note that the companies and the unweighted hazwasteaverage are presented just as before. However, for the hazwaste ``equaldollar'' index we are, in effect, ``starting over'' by initially weightingeach company with $1,000 in the index. This will allow easy investmentcomparison over time with the new solid waste business monitor.  Also, toobtain a more representative basis for comparison with the general equitymarkets, we have replaced the Dow Jones Industrial Average with the Russell2000, an index of smaller companies, and the S&P 500.                                         Stock Price                Stock                  Dec.12  Dec.26 Percent Change        1.      Allwaste                4.25    4.62      +8.7        2.      Clean Harbors           2.88    2.82      -2.2        3.      Groundwater Tech.       14.75   13.75     -6.8        4.      Gundle Enviro.          5.50    5.68      +3.3        5.      Int. Tech Corp.         2.38    2.75     +15.5        6.      Molten Metal Tech.      37.25   31.12    -16.4        7.      OHM Corp.               7.12    7.38      +3.7        8.      Rollins Enviro.         2.88    2.88         0        9.      Safety-Kleen            14.75   15.25     +3.4        10.     Smith Env. Tech.        3.62    3.62         0        11.     Versar                  3.57    3.62      +1.4        12.     Roy F. Weston           6.00    5.25     -12.5                Haz Waste                Unweighted Average      104.95  98.74     -5.9                S&P 500 Index           618.78  614.30    -0.7                Russell 2000 Index      311.56  312.83    +0.4                Hazwaste Equal-Dollar                 Index                  12,000  11,980    -0.2Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR                     SOLID WASTE BUSINESS MONITOR   Editor's Note:  As part of our expanded coverage, we are launching a newstock table to monitor the solid waste management industry. Our goal is toprovide a basis for investment comparison with the hazwaste industry andother, broader market averages. The companies have been  selected torepresent geographical diversity and a broad range of industry segments,including collection and disposal, recycling, waste-energy. The solid wasteunweighted average is a simple summation of the stock prices of all thecompanies. The ``equal dollar'' index represents the stock market value atany point in time from an initial investment of $1,000 in each of thetwelve companies.                                         Stock Price                Stock                  Dec. 12 Dec. 26 Percent Change        1.      Browning-Ferris Ind.    30.75   29.00   -5.7        2.      IMCO Recycling          22.75   22.50   -1.1        3.      Laidlaw Ind.            9.62    10.12   +5.2        4.      Mid-American Waste      3.75    3.38    -9.9        5.      Prins Recycling         8.00    7.75    -3.1        6.      Republic Industries     30.25   33.25   +9.9        7.      TransAmerican Waste     1.25    1.43    +14.4        8.      United Waste            39.12   36.50   -6.7        9.      USA Waste               20.00   17.62   -11.9        10.     WMX Technologies        30.75   29.00   -5.7        11.     Wellman Inc.            23.50   22.62   -3.7        12.     Western Waste           23.25   25.38   +9.2                Solid Waste                Unweighted Average      242.99  238.55  -1.8                S&P 500 Index           618.78  614.30  -0.7                Russell 2000 Index      311.56  312.83  +0.4                Solid Waste Equal-Dollar                Index                   12,000  11,912  -0.7Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   PRINS RECYCLING CORP. EXPECTS RECORD LOSS IN FOURTH QUARTER.By:KH   The Fort Lee, N.J. company, due to softness in the markets forwastepaper, is projecting a record loss for the three months ended Dec. 31,1995, said Chairman and CEO Fred Prins.   Prins stock, which is traded on Nasdaq, slipped slightly after theannouncement on Dec. 22 (see Solid Waste Business Monitor on page 5). However, the firm's troubles over the year have brought the stock pricedown into the $7-$8 per share range from a 52-week high of 19 3/4.   ``While we are encouraged with our expected results for the entire 1995fiscal year, we will sustain a loss in the fourth quarter due largely tothe precipitous decline in the markets for wastepaper during the third andinto the fourth quarter,'' said Prins. ``The fourth quarter loss cannot beprecisely quantified at this time, due in part to three evolving situationsconsisting of a municipal contract and the collection of two accountsreceivable. As the fourth quarter draws to a close, however, we are seeinga material increase in the sale price of old corrugated containers,''historically a leading indicator of pricing trends in wastepaper, Prinsnoted.   ``We have, in fact, seen an improvement in prices for our old newspapersrecently,'' he added.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   GERAGHTY & MILLER AND PARENT, HEIDEMIJ IN OVERSEAS `ACQUISITION MODE'By:By Steven Lang   Geraghty & Miller and parent company Heidemij are ``in an acquisitionmode,'' according to Dee Farrell, Geraghty & Miller marketing coordinator.   Heidemij has begun acquisition talks with Madrid-based Eptisa, ``one ofthe three largest engineering companies in Spain with sales ofapproximately $100 million from infrastructure, water, construction, energyand environmental projects,'' said the official.   In addition, Geraghty & Miller has acquired United Kingdom-basedEnvironmental Strategies, Ltd. The ``small firm'' employs six people andhas offices in Leeds and Chester, said Farrell.   ``Recent growth in both our U.K. and worldwide business sectors requiresmore consultants. By merging with Environmental Strategies, staff will beable to expand our auditing and due diligence work and have a strongpresence in the northwest region of the U.K.,'' said Brian Crook, G & MInternational manager.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   RECYCLING INDUSTRIES DOUBLES BUSINESS WITH PURCHASE OF ANGLO METALBy:SL   Recycling Industries has bought for about $4.3 million the business,land, buildings and equipment of San Juan, Tex.-based Anglo Metal, whichdoes business as Anglo Iron & Metal. That purchase price includes cash, anote, a non-compete agreement and 227,693 shares of Recycling Industriescommon stock valued at $925,000, said a spokesman.   The firm was acquired from Robert C. Rome and the Rome family and postedestimated 1995 revenues of about $15 million, said the spokesman. It isamong the largest ferrous and non-ferrous metals recyclers in the SouthTexas Rio Grande Valley with operations in San Juan, McAllen, Harlingen andBrownsville, all in Texas, he said.   ``With the Anglo acquisition, we have doubled the size of ourbusiness,'' said Thomas J. Wiens, Recycling Industries chairman and chiefexecutive officer.   In addition, the company plans to acquire more metals recyclingoperations in 1996, he said. Englewood, Colo.-based Recycling Industriesrecently acquired Las Vegas-based Nevada Recycling Industries and 20% ofThe Loef Co., based in Athens, Ga., said Wiens. With the Angloacquisition, Recycling Industries anticipates annual sales of more than $30million in 1996, he said.   ``The one-time and non-recurring expenses associated with this importantacquisition will negatively impact our earnings in our first quarter whichends December 31, 1995,'' said Wiens. ``We expect to begin recording thepositive impact of these revenues and earnings in the quarter beginningJanuary 1, 1996.''   ``The geographic location of the four plants in south Texas areimportant as they give us the ability to market, to purchase, and to sellin Mexico,'' said Mike Price, metals division president and chief operatingofficer. ``There is a tremendous amount of metals recycling businessoccurring between the U.S. and Mexico.   ``As the largest metals recycler on the South Texas/Mexico border, weplan to expand the operations of Anglo to take advantage of the existingbusiness opportunities and those we expect to see in the next few years asa result of the NAFTA agreement and the strong industrial growth in themarket,'' said Price.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   MONTGOMERY-OTSEGO-SCHOHARIE, N.Y., TO ISSUE RFP FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGERBy:AR   The Montgomery-Otsego-Schoharie Solid Waste Management Authority (MOSA)expects to issue a request for proposals for ``the operation and ortake-over of all or some'' of its functions within the next few months,according to an official at headquarters at Howes Cave, New York.   The authority was formed by the three counties in 1987 in response to astate mandate to seek a regional solution to waste management. Since then,however, it has become caught up in the national tumult over flow control,and private haulers have shunned its facilities, which they claim are moreexpensive than hauling trash to other facilities in or out of state.   The last nail in the coffin for MOSA was a decision by the New YorkState Department of Environmental Conservation in early December not torenew a permit for the landfill the authority has been using. Because ofthe uncertainty regarding the entire waste management situation, theauthority would not be able to get financing to build another landfill intime, said the authority official.   This leaves the authority with no place to dump trash by the end of nextyear, he said.   The central New York region is undergoing rapid changes as largenational firms including Resource Recovery Systems of Greenwich,Connecticut and Browning-Ferris Industries, Houston, have moved in, takingover smaller locally-run firms and aggressively competing for business(Integrated Waste Management, 6 Dec., 3). The authority has alreadyreceived a number of phone calls asking for details on its operations, saidthe spokesman.   The authority has $28-million in debt outstanding, continued theofficial.   Further details on what infrastructure is in place and the assets of theauthority will be contained in the request for proposals, he added. MOSAhas hired a bond counsel, general counsel and an engineering firm todevelop the RFP.   In 1994, the authority processed 104,000-tons of waste. In 1995 thisvolume was down to 75,000 to 80,000-tons due to loss of flow control, hesaid. When the authority was formed the tipping fee was $85 to $90 perton. I t is currently down to $45 to $50 per ton, he continued.   There are five transfer stations with the trash being landfilled at theEastern landfill northwest of Amsterdam, New York. While the state DEC hasnot yet officially denied the authority's request to continue to operatethe landfill, DEC officials told the authority the landfill must close atthe end of next year, said the official.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightWASTE BUSINESS via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996   DOE'S NIAGARA FALLS RADWASTE STORAGE SITE SEEN POSING LONG-TERM RISK   High-level radioactive residues currently stored at the DOE NiagaraFalls Storage Site (NFSS) pose a potential long-term risk to the public ifthey are left permanently, according to an new analysis by the NationalResearch Council.   The council prepared the report at the request of the Office ofEnvironmental Restoration of the U.S. Department of Energy. It examinedthe existing and proposed modifications of the waste containment structurein Lewiston, New York, which has been used since 1949 to store highlyradioactive residues separated during the processing of very rich uraniumores from Zaire.   The high-level residues remaining after the removal of uranium--used inthe Manhattan Project--along with other, less radioactive residues andwastes, are currently stored at NFSS, buried under an interim cap toprevent influx of moisture from precipitation and outflux of radon gas,said the report.   The report, ``Safety of the High-Level Uranium Ore Residues at theNiagara Falls Storage Site, Lewiston, New York,'' is based uponpresentations from DOE and its contractors, a review of documents, and avisit to the site. The residents of the area and others had theopportunity to express their views and concerns.   Based on available site sampling and monitoring information, there is noimmediate hazard to the off-site public from the residues in their currentconfiguration, said the report. However, DOE's proposed actions ofreplacing the interim cap with a ``permanent'' cap and of long-term sitemaintenance and monitoring do not address the potential risks to the publicfor the long periods of time commensurate with the duration of thatpotential risk, it concluded.   An important alternative, that of solidifying the high-level residues onsite and shipping the solidified residues to an off-site location, has notbeen considered. This alternative was chosen for managing essentiallyidentical residues of common origin currently stored in silos at theFernald Environmental Management Project site in Ohio, the study said.   If this alternative is considered, the occupational as well as publichealth safety aspects are important. Inputs from waste treatmenttechnology projects, such as the project for handling similar residuescurrently being implemented at the Fernald site, will provide importantinformation for making such assessments, said the report.   Furthermore, the present and potential future interactions between theNFSS and disposal sites adjacent to it, where non-radioactive toxicchemical and landfill wastes are currently disposed, have not beenaddressed adequately, either in the NFSS final environmental impactstatement or in subsequent studies and documentation, said the analysis.   The potential future health hazards posed by non-radiological, toxicmaterials such as lead and barium that are constituents of the buriedhigh-level residues at NFSS have not been adequately assessed, it said. Inaddition, there are substantial uncertainties in the estimates of costs andassociated risks for managing the residues at the Niagara site that havenot been fully assessed, cautioned the study.   Current site monitoring activities are inadequate for the determinationof long-term site integrity and potential future risks to the public andthe environment from the movement off-site of radioactive andnon-radioactive wastes in the NFSS containment structure, as well as thepossible influx of waste materials from the disposal sites adjacent to theNFSS, it said.   The report made recommendations for future action by DOE to provideprotection to the health and safety of the public and the environment, bothin the short and long terms. DOE should complete studies of related orsimilar treatment technologies such as the vitrification demonstration atthe Fernald site (see story on page 10) and related cost-risk-benefitstudies, it advised.   Further, a program should be developed by DOE for removal, treatment,and disposal off-site of the NFSS high-level residues. Because there is noimmediate hazard to the off-site public from the residues in their presentconfiguration, such studies will help ensure proper handling of theresidues when they are removed for disposal, as well as to provide anexample for future remediation of other sites containing radioactiveresidues. After removal of the high-level residues, remaining wastesshould be buried under a suitable protective cap, counseled the report.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B37-17IA059-000325-B020-42http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev26.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002510 text/html 72644HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:23:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:30 GMTContent-length: 72455Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev26.html Sample Issue Copyright WASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SUPERCRITICAL FLUIDS Eco Waste License Goes to Sweden (490 words) Catalysts Used to Promote Oxidation (345 words) CHEMICAL TREATMENTS Discarded Medical Materials Disinfected (713 words) Hydrothermal Oxidation of Chemical Weapons (190 words) Iron Curtain Holds Back Contamination (532 words) Waste Stays Behind Wall of Iron Filings (505 words) ADVANCED CONTAINMENT Creative Techniques Help Landfill Problem (482 words) INDUSTRY NEWS Million Dollar Challenge Extended (188 words) Nytest to Acquire GTI Subsidiary (233 words) Decrying Cement Kiln Absolution (587 words) BFI Plans on One-Time Charge (178 words) VECTRA Delays Its EnviroGlass Startup (219 words) Briefly Noted: (299 words) GOVERNMENT Committee Approves EPA's Use of TEFs (106 words) DOI Incurs Rath of EPA (110 words) Lessor Responsible for Sham Operation (203 words) EPA Discovers Something Fishy (376 words) Briefly Noted: (102 words) MICROBIAL TREATMENTS GAC Improves Biofilter Effect (395 words) Essex Team Treats Landfill Leachate (403 words) NUCLEAR/HAZARDOUS Molten Metal, SEG Will Process Resins (187 words) Oak Ridge Technology License Is Available (187 words) PARTICULATE REDUCTION Barrier Coatings Lower Pollution (148 words) Ceramic, Metal Bond for Hot Gas Filters (230 words) NITROGEN OXIDES REDUCTION New and Retrofit Coal Combustor (227 words) Turbine Emissions Are Reduced (145 words) RECYCLING & MINIMIZATION Plastics Council Focuses on Reuse (350 words) Memphis May Achieve Goal (365 words) TESTING BioChem Offers Online Monitor (123 words) Device Will Sample Waterborne Residues (412 words) PUBLICATIONS (74 words) CALENDAR (180 words) CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Eco Waste LicenseGoes to SwedenEco Waste Technologies (EWT, 2305 Donley Dr., Suite 108, Austin, TX78758-4535; Tel: 512/837-9961; Fax: 512/837-9430) has licensedChematur Engineering AB of Karlskoga, Sweden to build a majordemonstration supercritical water oxidation facility with acapacity of 1 gpm. Dick Lyon of Eco Waste says that thedemonstration plant will use the EWT technology that has been inoperation since 1994 at Huntsman Corp. in Austin, Texas.Lyon reports that EWT has completed an advanced version of itsHuntsman plant for the University of Texas at Austin. Thisexperimental facility will replace the original pilot plant andexperiment with the treatment of more complex chemicals and sludgeswith 20-30% solids from wastewater treatment plants. Its capacityis 0.5 to 1 gpm.R.N. McBrayer and J.W. Griffith of EWT disclose that the Huntsmanfacility is treating 5 gpm of wastes from experimental chemicalprocesses and washdowns at Huntsman's Austin Research Labs. Thewaste contains about 70% washwater and a mixture from three primarywaste streams of long-chain alcohols, glycols, and amines. Themixture has a total organic carbon concentration of more than50,000 mg/l and 6,908 mg/l ammonia. Effluent is required to meetthe pretreatment standards of the city of Austin which means amonthly average below 100 mg/l organic carbon and less than 20 mg/lammonia.A positive displacement pump pressures the feed to over 24.8 mPaand passes it through a heat exchanger. The addition of oxygen inthe reactor raises reactor temperatures to 538-650C. Effluentconsisting of water saturated with carbon dioxide passes throughthe heat exchanger, a heat recovery boiler, and an effluent coolerbefore depressurization to atmospheric pressure in a liquid/gasseparator. Excess oxygen level measurements in the liquid/gasseparator are used to control the oxygen injection rate in thereactor.Liquid effluent is held for sampling before discharge. Incontinuous operation, the effluent has less than 50 mg/l TOCconsisting of acetic acid or other simple organic acids, and thechemical oxygen demand is less than 16 mg/l. Ammonia concentrationsare 2.7 to less than 1 mg/l, and nitrate levels are withinacceptable limits at 6.4 mg/l. Dissolved solids consist mostly ofsulfate, chloride, potassium, and sodium salts. Total bicarbonateat 13,900 mg/l is high because the effluent is saturated withcarbon dioxide from the oxidation of organic matter.EWT has determined that the alloy used in the Huntsman facility hasresisted corrosion caused by chlorides in feedwater. The unit isdesigned for operation 24 h/d and 320 d/yr. It is scheduled fordescaling every 3 weeks using a nitric acid solution to removecarbonate scale from the heat exchanger. Some pump seals andpackings have been replaced, but McBrayer and Griffith report nosafety-related incidents or problems with reactor operation andsystem control in the first year of operations. They conclude thatit has demonstrated the ability to routinely treat the basic C-H-O-N compounds in chemical process waters.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Catalysts Used toPromote OxidationThe University of Tulsa (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Tulsa, OK74104) has demonstrated an effective method of destroying organiccompounds contained within an aqueous waste stream.  Catalyticsupercritical water oxidation (SCWO) is effective in thedestruction of the original organic compound. Incomplete conversionto low molecular weight partial oxidation products may be achieved.For years, wet oxidation has been successfully used as adestructive treatment for many organic species.  Increaseddestruction efficiency has been obtained by increasing the reactiontemperature to that above the critical temperature of water orthrough the addition of a catalyst.  During SCWO, advantage isgained in that the organic components and the oxygen are allpresent in a single, dense, fluid phase, minimizing mass transferresistance and providing relatively rapid reaction rates.The oxidation of phenol is of practical interest since it is acommon pollutant in industrial waste streams and is also believedto be an intermediate product in the oxidation pathway of highermolecular weight aromatic hydrocarbons.  Catalytic wet oxidation ofphenol over a CuO catalyst has been previously investigated.  Thereaction kinetics were determined and were thought to proceedthrough a homogeneous-heterogeneous mechanism.  The homogeneousreaction pathway caused an induction period during which freeradicals were accumulated in the aqueous phase.  Numerous reactionintermediates, including benzoquinones, acetic acid, and other lowmolecular weight organic acids, have been identified.Some of the products identified from supercritical water oxidationof phenol represent compounds that are more hazardous than thestarting organic component.  In order to minimize the formation ofthese partial oxidation products and to promote completeconversion, it is feasible to either increase the reactiontemperature or add a catalyst.The University of Tulsa study, published in Environmental Science& Technology [29, 2748-2753, 1995], gives a more detailed analysisof the use of a heterogeneous catalyst to promote the oxidation ofphenol.  Several partial oxidation products have been identified,and a reaction model involving a sequence of parallel and seriesreaction pathways has been developed.  The performance of severalheterogeneous catalysts has been compared.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Discarded MedicalMaterials DisinfectedEngineers at the Southwest Research Institute (SwRI, 6220 CulebraRd., P.O. Drawer 28510, San Antonio, TX 78228-0510; Tel: 210/684-5111) are testing the efficiency of a new medical waste treatmentsystem manufactured by Med Compliance Services (MCS, El Paso Dr.,El Paso, TX 79905; Tel: 915/772-2288).  The Encore-2100 systemfirst shreds the material, reducing its volume, then disinfects thewaste by exposure to a chlorine dioxide solution.  The chemicaltreatment system is an alternative to incineration processes whichhave traditionally been used to dispose of medical waste but havebeen threatened by the scheduled implementation of federalregulations.The EPA estimates that 3.4 million tons of waste are producedannually by U.S. health care facilities.  Hospitals are the singlelargest generator of that waste, contributing some 70% of the totalin the form of contaminated dressings, biopsy specimens, laboratorywastes, needles and syringes, and blood and blood products.  About3,000 hospitals now use incinerators as their primary means ofmedical waste disposal.The problem is that, as required by the Clean Air Act Amendments of1990, the EPA has issued a proposed rule, to be finalized by April15, 1996, that would impose stringent pollution controlrequirements on medical waste incinerator operators to reduce toxicwaste emissions such as dioxins and metals.  Implementation of thecontrol measure is expected to significantly increase equipment andoperating costs, making on-site incineration economicallyimpractical for many hospitals.  Some waste treatment industrysources estimate that the rule could force the closure of 80-90% ofexisting medical waste incinerators.James Scott, senior research engineer, has led the SwRI effort todesign test protocols for and perform third party, independenttesting of the Encore-2100 system to assess its compliance withstandards established by the EPA and the State and TerritorialAssociation of Alternate Treatment Technologies (STAATT), aconsortium of state medical waste regulators.  The Encore-2100,with a maximum production rate of 2,000 lbs./hr., is designed toeffectively and safely treat infectious waste so the processedmaterials can be disposed of in a conventional solid wastelandfill, says Scott.  Two specially configured industrialshredders in series reduce waste volume significantly and enhancecontact between al the waste components and the chlorine dioxidesolution, which is introduced during and after shredding.Chlorine dioxide, the key component in the chemical disinfectingsolution, is commonly used to treat drinking water and wastewater.It can be generated through a reaction involving sodiumhypochlorite, hydrochloric acid, and sodium chlorite solutions, orby mixing gaseous chlorine and sodium chlorite solutions.  Themethod used in the Encore-2100 technology involves a reaction ofthe chemicals under vacuum to create gaseous chlorine dioxide.The key feature of the gas generation system, manufactured by RioLinda Chemical Co. (North 10th St., Sacramento, CA 95814; Tel:916/443-4939), is its single ejector, which creates a vacuum,bringing the premeasured chemicals together to form gaseouschlorine dioxide, and introduces the gas into an aqueous solution.The disinfecting solution is removed from the waste using ahelipress and then recirculated and returned to the desiredconcentration prior to reuse in the treatment process.  Release ofairborne contaminants is controlled by a high efficiencyparticulate air (HEPA) filter and scrubber units.Scott explains the SwRI designated two protocols to measure theeffectiveness of the Encore-2100 system.  One protocol tests thesystem relative to EP requirements for sanitizing inanimate,nonfood contact surfaces.  This part of the study is beingconducted in accordance with EPA Good Laboratory Practices.  Thesecond protocol subjects the Encore-2100 to national standardsdeveloped by STAATT.  To satisfy these standards, the system mustdemonstrate a 99.9999% reduction in selected microorganism speciesrepresenting vegetative bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, andtubercle mycobacteria.  In addition, the process must demonstratea 99.99% reduction in bacterial spores, including highly resistantforms of Bacillus.SwRI incorporated stringent quality assurance controls to encompassall aspects of the study, including sources and culturing of themicroorganisms, processing of waste through the Encore-2100 system,and microbiological analyses of the samples.  Quality assurancedocuments generated during the study validate the sample resultsand allow the complete reproduction of the experimental results.SwRI has collected about 150 samples from the Encore-2100 process. The first commercial unit will be installed at an existing MCSfacility in Albuquerque, NM.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Hydrothermal Oxidationof Chemical WeaponsThe Dept. of Defense (DOD) and General Atomics (3550 GeneralAtomics Ct., San Diego, CA 92121; Tel: 619/455-3000, Fax: 619/455-2263) demonstrated that a hydrothermal oxidation (HTO) technologycan safely destroy chemical weapons and solid rocket propellantswithout incineration. HTO uses water heated to 500F  andpressurized to 4000 psi to mix oxygen or air with organiccontaminants, forming carbon dioxide, water, and sometimes, mineralsalts or acids.  No harmful emissions are produced and all endproducts can be safely disposed of, recycled, or released.According to Jeff Broido of General Atomics, the unit destroys thenerve agents VX, GB and mustard gas beyond the limits of detection.Research is looking into how to deal with the heavy amounts ofchlorine generated, and the corrosion it brings, when destroyingsuch weapons.While water usually repels such materials, the pressure and heatallow it to mix and oxidize.  Broido says that the trick is thatthe water's behavior is reversed.  It behaves like a non-polarsolvent. The bench-scale HTO unit General Atomics operates in SanDiego is being used to test a variety of hazardous materials forcommercial use.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Iron Curtain HoldsBack ContaminationHydrogeologist Robert Gillham of the University of Waterloo Centrefor Groundwater Research (Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) continuesresearch on a permeable subsurface treatment wall containing ironfilings and sand to purify contaminated groundwater. Last fallarticles first began appearing in the scientific literature on theuse of iron filing walls to keep out toxic wastes. Since then, thisnew technology has been rapidly attracting attention as aneconomically competitive tool for groundwater remediation andtreatment.Gillham's wall, located at a test site in Waterloo, separates twowater bodieson one side is contaminated groundwateron the other,water almost clean enough to drink.  Goundwater contaminated withvolatile organic compounds flows through the wall naturally, and achemical reaction purifies the water.  The process could be used atthousands of hazardous waste sites needing remediation, accordingto Gillham.Gillham started to develop the method when he noticedirregularities in water samples taken from plastic-lined wells.The plastic absorbed contaminants and biased water qualitymeasurement.  Samples taken from wells with metal casings showedeven lower contaminant levels without absorption into the metal.The reason for this phenomenon was corrosion.  The contaminantreacts with iron, forming harmless byproducts, including chloride,ethene, and ethane.  The reaction leaves no waste material tocontain, transport, and dispose.  With a high enough iron content,contaminated groundwater can be treated to meet drinking waterstandards.Gillham has used a 20% iron concentration for more than four yearsat the test site to treat groundwater contaminated with 250 mg/L oftrichloroethylene (TCE) and 45 mg/L of tetrachloroethylene (PCE)with no detectable deterioration of the medium.  Although thetreated water does not meet drinking water standards, Gillham saysthis could be possible if a higher concentration of iron were used.To use the corrosive reaction for groundwater cleanup, thedirection and depth of the contaminated flow must be known, atrench dug, and the reactive formulation placed in the hole.  Theiron and sand wall has a higher permeability than the surroundingsoil, allowing the contaminated groundwater to flow freely throughthe reactive material.  Residence times, depending on theconcentration of the contaminant, are about two days.During the reaction, pH increases and minerals precipitate out ofthe water to form calcium carbonate, which could clog the media andcause the groundwater to flow around the wall.  To restorepermeability, the iron filings can be stirred to increase porosity.Inorganic mineral precipitates cause 2-15% losses in porosity peryear.  Spent iron can be replaced.  No stirring or mediareplacement is expected to be needed for at least 10 years at thetest site.Capital costs for installing the treatment wall system arecomparable to pump and treat methods.  The only operation andmaintenance costs, other than periodic groundwater sampling, couldinvolve stirring up the media, according to John Vogan, manager ofEnviroMetal Technologies (42 Arrow Rd., Guelph, Ontario N1K 1S6Canada; Tel: 519/824-0432), a company set up by Gillham to marketthe patented technology.  A 180 meter long by 9 meter deep (600' x30') funnel and gate system to treat 50-60 mg/L TCE and 10 mg/L PCEin a high velocity aquifer would cost about $1.5 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Waste Stays BehindWall of Iron FilingsA proposed wall of iron filings to protect four Massachusetts townsfrom contaminated water coming from the former MassachusettsMilitary Reservation was first described in an article in Science[269, 473, 1995]. Unlike slurry walls and similar physicalbarriers, the iron filings will form a permeable but reactivebarrier to break down trichlorethylene, tetrachloroethylene, andother chlorinated contaminants.This proposed iron (Fe) barrier is a product of continuing researchinto methods to treat groundwater contaminants in place without theusual pump-and-treat operations. Engineers in Oklahoma haveconducted lab tests which explain how iron filings can reduceCr(VI) in groundwater to Cr(III).  Robert M. Powell (ManTechEnvironmental Research Services Corp., P.O. Box 1198, Ada, OK74821-1198), Robert W. Puls, Sharon K. Hightower, and David A.Sabatini conducted stirred batch reactor experiments in darkened500 ml reactors with simulated aquifer water, scrap iron filings,and alluvial aquifer material.The competitive desorption of CrO4-2 from surface absorption sitesby excess PO4-3 resulted in nearly full recovery of chromium fromexperiments without iron filings. In experiments with iron filings,chromium was reduced from 109 mg/l to below 0.3 mg/l and there wasno subsequent CrO4-2 recovery by PO4-3 desorption, confirmingreduction by iron. Powell's group found that different forms ofmetallic iron have greatly different abilities to reduce chromate.Impure and partially oxidized iron is the most effective.Powell's observations of changes support the theory that anelectrochemical corrosion cell on the surface of an iron filingcauses the thermodynamic instability that drives oxidation-reduction reactions without external energy input. Iron in thezero-valence state is an electron donor, and chromate ions serve asoxidants in such cells. Powell wrote in Environmental Science &Technology [29-8, 1913-1921, 1995] that the corrosion cell is astable domain with clearly defined anodic and cathodic regions.Differences in the surface potential of impure iron filings due tocomposition or grain structure and orientation result in unstableregions and electron movement. Previously rusted surfaces are sitesof dissolution where potentially unfilled electron shells existnext to filled electron shells, and reaction rates are high. Ananodic region develops where there is an electron deficiency, andit has a positive charge and Fe++ ions at the surface. They are freeto enter the solution.Powell suggests that the positively charged zone electrostaticallyattracts chromate and sulfate ions, promoting formation of theFe2SO4 complex and redox coupling of chromate ions. The negativelycharged cathodic region of the surface is dominated by cations andnon reducible sodium and calcium ions. Aluminosilicates in aquifersare able to provide electron acceptors to maintain the dissolutionof iron surfaces.In the case of the Massachusetts project, Fe++ ions in corrosioncells on iron filings would strip chlorine ions from chlorinatedhydrocarbons in moving groundwater and turn them into harmlessethene and ethane. Summary report EPA542-S-95-001 from the SolidWaste Office of the Environmental Protection Agency states thatfour demonstration projects are using metal-enhanced dehalogenationunder a patent held by the University of Waterloo.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Creative TechniquesHelp Landfill ProblemTrial and error has been the "engineering" method used to developsome of the most effective landfill management techniques.  Thishas also been the case at Florida's Citrus County Landfill, whereerosion control has been aggravating operators since the facilityopened in January 1990.  The landfill is located in west-centralFlorida, approximately 15 miles east of the Gulf of Mexico.The current plan, a 17-acre plastic-lined cell, is the first of sixphases designed to last 30 years.  With a surface elevation of 120ft. above sea level and a depth of 80 ft., the landfill is uniquein Florida, where shallow water tables can limit excavation depths.Side slopes, three of which are lined, are a steep 2:1 (horizontalto vertical) ratio.  The unlined side contains an entrance roadextending down into the cell.Although ditches were used on the unlined slope to control erosion,maintenance was a continuous nightmare.  Attempts to hydroseedmulch were ruined by rainstorms that washed away the seed before ittook root.  The rain also formed gullies which deepened with eachstorm.  The landfill was kept open only by periodicallyreconstructing the slopes using bulldozers to excavate eroded soilsfrom the stormwater pond.After a catastrophic 11 inch rainfall laid waste to slopes that hadbeen restored only months before, stapled sod was installed overburlap cloth on all unlined slopes.  The solution has required onlyminor maintenance since installation two years agohelping to makethe costly $4/sq. yd. installation price palatable.When the price of sod can't be justified, operators use seed andseaweed mulch on slopes that are angled at 4:1 or flatter.  CitrusCounty used hydrilla and water hyacinth removed from nearby canalsto enrich the soil and facilitate seed germination by retainingmoisture.The liners required by law have also contributed to the landfill'serosion problems.  Erosion tends to occur at the edge of liners,since the synthetic liner sheds nearly 100% of contactedstormwater.  Sheet flow concentrates at the bottom of the line anderosion occurs where flows become concentrated on steep slopes.When the soil layer next to the liner is eroded away, solid wastecan become exposed and contaminate the stormwater.  Fortunately,erosion can be controlled at the liner edge by constructing a ditchlined with plastic sheeting.  Costs for manpower and equipment areabout $4.60/linear foot of ditch.Officials at Citrus County landfill prefer a lined ditch to sod orstaked sod with burlap because it will stand up to most any flowvelocity.  Lined ditches also provide a barrier to leachate and donot have to be watered or mowed.  LDPE sheets work well whenapplied in 60 foot sections or longer.  A woven, coated, 3-plygeomembrane of LDPE with carbon black for ultraviolet lightresistance is available for about $1.17/sq. yd. for 16 mils and$1.80/sq. yd. for 20 mils.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Million DollarChallenge ExtendedThe results from Monsanto's (800 N. Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO63141; Tel: 314/694-1000) first One Million Dollar Challenge wereso encouraging, the company is bringing the program out for anencore.  Another one million dollars will be awarded to theindividual or team that develops the most cost-effective andcommercially practical technology for producing a clean sodiumchloride stream while recovering high purity amino acids and bothphosphoric and phosphorous acids from a complex wastewater stream.The initiative supplements Monsanto's ongoing internal program toeliminate waste and strengthen environmental performance.  Anindependent group of experts from the Center for Waste Reductiontechnologies (part of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers)will evaluate the proposals submitted in response to the secondchallenge.From proposals submitted, technology which most effectively meetsthe criteria will be funded with $500,000 for one year ofdevelopment.  A second $500,000 payment will be made followingsuccessful demonstration of this technology in a continuouslaboratory unit.  All proposals must be submitted by March 31. Toobtain more information and an application, call 800/366-0339 orsend a fax request to 314/426-6935 (email: MonChalng@aol.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Nytest to AcquireGTI SubsidiaryNytest Environmental Inc. (60 Seaview Blvd., Port Washington, NY11050-4618; Tel: 516/625-550) has acquired the operatinglaboratories of GTEL Environmental Labs, Inc., previously a wholly-owned subsidiary of Groundwater Technology, Inc. (GWTI, 100 RiverRidge Dr., Norwood, MA 02062; Tel: 800/635-0053 or 617/769-7600,Fax: 617/769-7992).  The transaction took effect December 31, 1995.Nytest acquired the GTEL laboratories in Milford, NH, Wichita, KSand Tampa, FL which employ about 150 people.  This transactionsubstantially increases the assets of Nytest and the companyfurther anticipates that the acquisition will substantiallyincrease the company's revenues and cash flow in the future.John Gaspari, president and CEO of Nytest, said his company isexcited about this acquisition.  In 1995, the GTEL laboratoriesgenerated revenue of more than $11 million.  Gaspari added thatGTEL has a quality reputation and an excellent management and staffof experienced chemists and technicians.  The addition of the GTELstaff and laboratories will enhance Nytest capabilities and expandits facilities' presence to new geographic regions.  The combinedcompanies will offer a broader range of analytical testing andservices than either company individually while servingcomplementary market segments.  The GTEL staff and management willcontinue under the direction of Guy Sylvester.Nytest is a leading provider of specialized analytical services forthe analysis of hazardous waste.  Groundwater Technology, Inc. isone of the world's leading environmental consulting, engineeringand remediation firms.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Decrying CementKiln AbsolutionOne month after the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission(TNRCC) released a study that absolved Midlothian's cement andsteel plants of producing hazardous emissions, activists haveexpressed skepticism over the study results.Sue Pope, leader of the environmental group Downwinders at Risk,was one of about 300 residents who attended the TNRCC's meeting inMidlothian.  State officials at the meeting reviewed results oftheir soil-and-air samples study, which has been conducted in theMidlothian area since 1991.The report summarized the results of over a thousand samplescollected which indicated that exposure to the monitored levels arenot likely to result in adverse health effects. Where relevantcomparison data were available, air and soil concentrationsmeasured in Midlothian were found to be similar to those measuredin other Texas communities.But Pope said her family's deteriorating health is proof enoughthat the emissions from Midlothian's steel and cement industriesare harmful.  Pope said the family had some very unexplainedillnesses that began in 1986.  Pope's own health problems since1986 have included malignant tumors, endometriosis, respiratoryproblems, chronic fatigue and autoimmune disorders.  She said herfamily's livestock has developed mysterious problems as well,including cancer, tumors and high numbers of multiple births.  TheMidlothian area also has a higher-than-normal occurrence ofchildren born with Down's syndrome and adults with cancer andtumors, Pope said.The TNRCC's study detailed how 176 soil samples were conducted at160 sites in and around Midlothian, Center, Carthage, Cleburne,Terrell and Quitman for polychlorinated dibenzodioxin andpolychlorinated dibenzofuran concentrations.  They found nosignificant emissions or high levels of toxins.  Additionally, thestate agency conducted a screening risk analysis for Midlothian'sTexas Industries Inc. (TXI) plant and concluded that based on theestimated emissions and the assumptions made during this analysis,the excess lifetime carcinogenic risks and non-cancer hazards thatresult for exposure to contaminants potentially emitted from theTexas Industries Inc. facility are considered to be within anacceptable range.But Pope and other residents do not believe the TNRCC's study wentfar enough in trying to determine potential health risks fromemissions.  She questioned why a screening analysis, rather than ahealth-risk assessment, was conducted about TXI's emissions.  Popeand others believe that the study's results were released at thistime to hush up the subject and may have been due to politicalpressure from the Republican-led state legislature and governor'soffice.  Downwinders at Risk has asked the EPA to investigateemission levels from Midlothian's industries, and expectpreliminary results of the study within a few weeks.Waste Treatment Stock Watch(At Close, January 2, 1995)                                          Current      Last      Company                 Symbol        Price     Month     ChangeAllwaste Inc.                    ALW        5.125     4.375    +0.750Browning-Ferris                  BFI       29.500    30.500    -1.000Catalytica Inc.                 CTAL        4.375     4.500    -0.125Celgene                         CELG       13.000    10.125    +2.875Dow Chemical Co.                 DOW       71.125    71.375    -0.500Environmental Elements Corp.     EEC        2.000     1.750    +0.250EnviroTest Systems Corp.        ENVI        3.000     2.750    +0.250Groundwater Technology          GWTI       13.750    18.250    -4.500IMCO Recycling                   IMR       23.625    22.875    +0.750Met-Pro Corp.                    MPR       14.250    13.750    +0.500Molten Metal Technology         MLTN       32.750    36.250    -3.500North American Technologies     NATK        0.531     0.781    -0.250Noxso Corp.                     NOXO        5.500     5.875    -0.375Republic Waste                  RWIN       34.000    27.625    +6.375Rohm & Haas Co.                  ROH       64.625    61.250    +3.375Rollins Environmental            REN        2.875     3.125    -0.250Sybron                          SYCM       10.750    12.375    -1.625USA Waste Services Inc.           UW       18.750    21.000    -2.250U.S. Filter                        USF        26.625       22.500      +4.125Vectra Technologies               VCTR         2.000        2.750      -0.750WMX Technologies, Inc.             WMX       30.000        29.875      -0.125Source:  BCC, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BFI Plans onOne-Time ChargeBrowning-Ferris Industries Inc. (BFI, 757 N. Eldridge Pkwy.,Houston, TX 77079; Tel: 713/870-8100 ) announced plans to record aone-time charge of $0.05/share in its second quarter, ending March31, from the redemption of $745 million in debt.   The company saidit called its $400 million of 6-3/4% convertible subordinateddebentures due 2005 and its $345 million of 6-1/4% convertiblesubordinated debentures due 2012 for redemption on February 2,1996.BFI said it believes the redemption will enhance shareholder valuebecause the debentures would have been convertible for about 16million shares of the company's common stock.  The redemption alsoallows the company to refinance the debt at more favorable rates,the company said.The 6-1/4% debentures will be redeemed for 101.25% of face valueplus accrued interest, with a conversion price of $41 per share.The 6-3/4% debentures will be redeemed for 101.00% of face valueplus accrued interest, with a conversion price of $52.50/share.The announcement comes two weeks after Browning-Ferris filed ashelf registration for $1 billion in debt and equity securities.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996VECTRA Delays ItsEnviroGlass StartupVECTRA Technologies Inc. (1010 S. 336th St., No. 220, Federal Way,WA 98003; Tel: 206/874-2235, Fax: 206/874-2401) said Thursday it istemporarily suspending all construction and startup activitiesassociated with its EnviroGlass vitrification program.VECTRA, which supplies technology and services to the powerindustry, said suspending the vitrification program will have anear-term positive effect on cash flow since the company expectedto spend a considerable amount of money to complete and transportthe unit.The company said that it is too soon to tell if the suspension willhave any serious long-term effects.  VECTRA said suspending thevitrification program was necessary because delays in placing itstransportable vitrification unit at its lead client's site made itimpossible to meet the client's schedule to dispose of the low-level waste.  VECTRA is now negotiating to remove and process thewaste on a subcontract basis.   However, if it is not successful inthese negotiations, VECTRA may be forced to accept contractcancellation.The company said it will be actively pursuing new contracts for thevitrification technology and if VECTRA wins another project, theprogram will be reactivated.   VECTRA also said it continues itspreviously announced program to sell assets or raise additionalcapital in an effort to eliminate long-term bank debt by the firstquarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:WMX Technologies Inc. (3003 Butterfield Rd., Oak Brook, IL 60521;Tel: 708/572-8800) will exchange its 28% minority interest inServiceMaster Consumer Services for 18.1 million unregisteredServiceMaster (75th & Lemont Rd., Downers Grove, IL 60516; Tel:708/759-1003) shares.  This represents about 19% of the outstandingshares.Molten Metal Technology, Inc. (51 Sawyer Rd., Waltham, MA 02154;Tel: 617/621-1315) announced a letter of intent for a strategicalliance with Uhde GmbH (D-44128 Dortmund, Germany), one of theworld's largest engineering and construction companies.  Thecompanies have agreed to work together to market Molten Metal'sproprietary Catalytic Extraction Processing (CEP) technology toUhde's worldwide customers.Envirotest Systems Corp. (ENVI, 2525 E. Camelback Rd., No. 720,Phoenix, AZ 84016; Tel: 602/912-1110) has reported results for thecompany's fiscal year-end.  Revenues for the year were $104.8million, up from $96.4 million recorded in the fiscal 1994.Reflecting extraordinary factors, including costs associated withits contract dispute with Pennsylvania, charges related to thestart up of its programs in Connecticut and Colorado and a $5.4million valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax asset,Envirotest had a net loss for the year of $14.9 million, or $0.93per share.IMCO Recycling Inc. (5215 N. O'Connor Blvd., Irving, TX 75039;Tel: 214/869-6575) and Alchem Aluminum Inc. (425 Jay St.,Coldwater, MI 49036; Tel: 517/279-9596) have announced a jointventure to build a new aluminum recycling plant.  IMCO will own 75%of the project and Alchem will own 25%.  A site has not beenselected as of yet, but the companies are looking at Michigan, Ohioand Indiana.  Bill Warshauer of Alchem Aluminum said that the twocompanies hope to begin construction next year.  The planned plantwill have an annual capacity of 150 million pounds and will costabout $10 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Committee ApprovesEPA's Use of TEFsThe Environmental Protection Agencys (EPA) Science Advisory Boardhas supported the agency's use of "toxic equivalency factors"(TEFs) in a draft review of dioxin risk reassessment.  TEFs arecalculations that equate dioxin with several other dioxin-likechemicals (polychlorinated biphenyls, for example) to assess humanhealth risks.Although individual board members questioned the use of TEFs, thecommittee supported the calculations as the best available tool forrisk assessment.  A peer review of TEF that would focus oninteractions between chemicals that affect toxicity was suggestedby the committee, however. The agency is revising the dioxinreassessment and expects to report to the board next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DOI IncursRath of EPAThe Dept. of the Interior (DOI) has incurred the wrath of theEnvironmental Protection Agency (EPA) by operating a hazardouswaste facility without a permit at an Indian reservation.  The DOIstored over 2000 gal. of ignitable hazardous waste containingchromium and lead at its Fort Defiance Navajo Agency facility (FortDefiance, AZ), some of it for more than 10 years.The EPA is recommending a $269,019 fine for this violation of theResource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and demanded DOI movethe waste to a treatment, storage or disposal facility within 30days.  The EPA recently cited DOI for a similar violation inanother part of Arizona.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Lessor Responsiblefor Sham OperationIn the late 1980s, Asphalt Recovery Systems (Chicago, IL) beganpiling asphalt debris on a seven-acre site in Chicago leased fromD. Raymond Shane.  The company claimed to be stockpiling thematerial to recycle for road patching work.  In 1989, the city suedAsphalt Recovery for operating a landfill on a site without apermit and won a $4.8 million judgment for cleanup costs.After Asphalt Recovery went out of business in 1993 leaving nousable assets, the city sued Shane, contending that he had a dutyto check up on his tenant.  Having failed to do so, Shane was, inthe city's eyes, responsible for any environmental damage.  Thecity code contains a provision in place that assigns financialresponsibility for environmental cleanups to landlords.A Cook County circuit court judge ruled that, under the city code,Shane was responsible for cleaning up the 300,000 tons of debris onhis property.  Henry Henderson, Chicago's environmentalcommissioner, said that the decision sends a clear message tounscrupulous operators masquerading as recyclers that they areoperating under a false assumption if they believe they can dumptheir trash in Chicago and let taxpayers clean it up. Shane'sattorney has promised an appeal.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EPA DiscoversSomething FishyA 20% increase in the number of fish consumption advisories werereported by state health agencies during fiscal 1994, according toa survey compiled by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).The agency reported that 46 states have issued advisories, andseven have statewide noticesFlorida, Maine, Massachusetts,Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, and New York.  Since the survey wascompiled, New Hampshire and Vermont have also issued statewideadvisories.Fourteen percent of US lakes, 4% of U.S. rivers, all of the GreatLakes, and most coastline are currently under advisories.  Morethan 60% of the advisories are for mercury, primarily from coal-burning power plants, incinerators, and industrial sites.  Othercontaminants triggering advisories include polychlorinatedbiphenyls (PCBs), the pesticide chlordane, DDT, dioxin, and othertoxic substances that can accumulate in fish tissue.The increase in advisories does not necessarily mean that lakes andrivers are more pollutedit could signal an expansion of statemonitoring and assessment efforts.  Minnesota, for example, listed565 advisories, more than double that of any other state.And simply because a state has more waterbodies under advisory doesnot mean that these states have the worst fish contaminantproblems.  According to Jeff Bigler of the EPA's Office of Water,the high number of advisories more likely characterize both thelevel of effort put into identifying waterbodies of concern and theassessment methods used by the state for developing fishconsumption advisories.Bigler says that the criteria for issuing an advisory often variesfrom one state to another, with different thresholds used as thebasis for issuing advisories.  EPA Administrator Carol Brownerannounced the release of a new EPA database, the National Listingof Fish Consumption Advisories, during a speech at the AmericanFisheries Society in Tampa, FL.  The database includes informationon the types of advisories, the species of fish affected, thechemicals included in the advisory, locations, dates of issue, andcontact names and telephone numbers.  Maps allow users to selectbetween regions, states, chemicals, species, and a number of otherparameters for narrowing an advisory search.The National Listing of Fish Consumption Advisories is available tothe public on five computer disks and will be upgraded annually.The listing also is available on the Internet athttp://www.epa.gov/water.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:The European Union will ratify a treaty that protects lakes andwater sources that cross international borders.  The treaty, aimedat establishing pollution prevention and control standards inmember nations, hopes to protect human health, promote prudent useof natural resources, and address regional environmental problems.Carol Browner, EPA administrator, announced a package thatincludes Superfund reforms designed to make cleanups more cost-effective, reduce litigation, and help communities and statesbecome more involved. The EPA reforms will establish a NationalRemedy Review Board to control costs, establish reasonable nationalassessment criteria, and provide stakeholders a role in riskassessment design.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GAC ImprovesBiofilter EffectA team of researchers from the National Tsing Hua University (HsinChu, Taiwan, ROC) and Union Chemical Labs (ITRI, Hsin Chu, Taiwan,ROC) have joined together to systematically investigate thetransient behavior of biofilters during shut down, restartoperations and shock loading.  Toluene was used as the gaspollutant in the study.Biodegradation processes have been validated as a promisingalternative to other conventional air pollution controltechnologies.  Toluene is a toxic air pollutant and a commonconstituent emitted from many industrial processes, such aschemical manufacturing, painting, and petroleum refining.  Aneconomically feasible control method would be advantageous in lightof increasingly stringent regulation for air emissions of volatileorganic compounds (VOCs).With the easily biodegradable nature of toluene, biofiltration ofair emissions containing this pollutant is considered a preferablealternative to other traditional physical and chemical airpollution control methods, including scrubbing, incineration, andactivated carbon adsorption.  Advantages of this process includelow investment and operating costs, high removal efficiency andreliable operational stability.  Furthermore, high destructionefficiency of the pollutant in the biofilter causes no secondarypollution.Biofiltration can be described as a process that utilizes microbialactivity for the aerobic degradation of pollutants.  A biofiltercontains filter materials (mainly compost or peat) on whichmicroorganisms are immobilized to form a biolayer.  When wastegases pass through the reactor, target pollutants diffuse into thebiofilm with subsequent aerobic biodegradation.  In general,natural filter materials provide sufficient inorganic nutrients formicroorganisms, thus the addition of inorganic nutrients is notrequired.In the Taiwan study, experiments were conducted in threelaboratory-scale biofilters with mixtures of chaff/compost,diatomaceous earth (DE)/compost, and granular activated carbon(GAC)/compost, respectively, as the filter materials.  The responseof each biofilter to shock loading was studied by abruptly changingthe concentration or flow rate of the inlet gas.  For eachtransient operation, toluene concentration was continuouslymeasured until a new steady state was achieved.According to their report, published in Hazardous Waste & HazardousMaterials [12, 3, 1995], the researchers found that the biofiltersresponded effectively to the shut down and restart operation andshock loading of toluene concentration or gas flow rate.  Inaddition, the highly adsorptive GAC could improve the biofilterperformance, especially for the treatment of less water solublecompounds.  The GAC/compost biofilter had the highest maximumelimination capacity of 97 (g hr-1m-3).Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Essex Team TreatsLandfill LeachateHigh concentrations of sulfate in wastewater streams subjected toanaerobic digestion have been considered undesirable because of theproduction of sulfide during digestion, which can inhibitmethanogenesis.  It has been reported that a >76% removal oforganic COD is possible when high sulfate wastewater (from anedible fat manufacturer) was anaerobically digested, although only21-45% overall COD was removed because of sulfide remaining in theeffluent.Appreciable sulfate may be present normally in effluents, andanaerobic digestion results in low biogas formation and highconcentrations of sulfide in the effluent.  Anaerobic digestion hasalso been successful in removing high sulfate concentrations frommine waters and contaminated groundwater.Scientists at the University of Essex (Dept. of Biology, ColchesterCO4 3SQ, England) have finished a study in which landfill leachatewas treated in upflow hybrid (sludge-bed/fixed-bed) anaerobicreactors by both methanogenic digestion and by sulfate-reducingdigestion (Water Resources; 30, 1, 1996).The University of Essex study achieved steady state removalefficiencies of COD under methanogenic digestion of 81-97%,depending upon organic loading rate; and effective treatmentoccurred up to a volumetric COD loading rate of 3.75 kg COD m-3 d-1.In sulfate-reducing digesters SO24- was converted stoichiometricallyto dissolve H2S, driving organic matter mineralization.  Sulfateconcentrations of 35, 105 and 175 mM in the feed resulted in SO24-removal efficiencies of 92, 52 and 35%, respectively.Steady state removal efficiencies of organic COD in the sulfate-reducing digesters averaged 62% at 35mM, 80% at 105 mM, and 84% at175 mM feed SO24- concentrations.  The ratio of COD:SO24- (g/g)utilized was dependent upon the concentration of SO24- present, andat 35 M SO24- was 0.67.At an organic loading rate <1 kg COD m-3 d-1 the sulfate reducingdigesters offered organic removal efficiencies comparable tomethanogenic digesters, but were less effective at higher loadingrates.  Propionate accounted for the majority of the residual CODin the effluents from the methanogenic digesters, but acetate inthe effluent from the sulfate-reducing digesters.Removal of sulfide from the reactors was achieved by addition ofiron and by off gassing sulfides, but there was no increase in CODremoval after sulfide removal which indicated that sulfide toxicitywas not significant.  Both methanogenic and sulfate-reducingreactors completely removed up to 100 ppm Cu, Mn, Ni and Zn addedin the feed, indicating that even methanogenic reactors producesufficient sulfide to precipitate these metals completely.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Molten Metal, SEGWill Process ResinsScientific Ecology Group, Inc., (SEG, 1560 Bear Creek Rd., OakRidge, TN 37830; Tel: 423/481-0222, Fax: 423/481-0827), asubsidiary of Westinghouse Electric Corp. (11 Stanwix St.,Pittsburgh, PA 15222-1384; Tel: 412/244-2000) and the world'slargest processor of low-level radioactive waste, has teamed withMolten Metal Technology, Inc. (51 Sawyer Rd., Waltham, MA 02154;Tel: 617/621-1315) to build a Quantum-CEP (Catalytic ExtractionProcessing) facility for processing ion exchange resins.  Thefacility is capable of processing 650 High Integrity Containers or130,000 cu. ft. of ion exchange resins per year, representing 65%of the U.S. market for low level radioactive ion exchange resin.The facility has all required regulatory permits, is mechanicallycomplete, and has been turned over to operations.  Major systemshave been tested and the instrumentation and controls have beencalibrated.  Bud Arrowsmith, SEG president, said he is happy thatthe facility is available on schedulethe facility has alreadyreceived spent ion exchange resins from customers.  William M.Haney, III, president and CEO of Molten Metal, added that thefacility is the largest and most sophisticated system in the worldfor handling this difficult radioactive material.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Oak Ridge TechnologyLicense Is AvailableA method for the destruction of chlorinated volatile organiccompounds (CVOCs), especially trichloroethylene (TCE) andchloroform, using vapor phase off-gas treatment is available forlicensing from the Dept. of Energys (DOE) Oak Ridge National Lab,Earth and Atmospheric Environmental Sciences Division.The process can be used for both groundwater and soil remediation.A basic bench scale proof of principle apparatus has beenconstructed and tested.  The principal advantages of the processare expected to be high efficiency, cost effectiveness, and minimalproduction of secondary waste.  In addition, production systemsbased on this technology are expected to be very compact for arather large capacity of CVOCs, should not be subject to fouling,and are expected to require very minimal maintenance.Commercial firms interested in procuring a license for thistechnology may obtain more detailed technical information about theinvention by requesting and executing a Proprietary InformationAgreement (PIA).  To request a PIA, please contact James R. Palmer,licensing executive at Lockheed Martin Energy Systems, Inc. (Officeof Technology Transfer, Building 701SCA, M/S 8242, P.O. Box 2009,Oak Ridge, TN 37831; Tel: 615/574-7472, Fax: 615/576-8543).Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Barrier CoatingsLower PollutionNanostructured thermal barrier coatings for use on high efficiency,low emission, natural gas-fired turbines are the subject of aresearch project at Nanomaterials Research Corp. (NRC, 10960 N.Stallard Place, Tucson, AZ 85737; Tel: 602/575-1354).  The readyavailability of clean natural gas at low prices accelerating theuse of gas turbines.  Over the next 10 years, NRC scientist TapeshYadav projects advanced gas turbines and combined cycles willaccount for about 45% of additions to global power generationcapacity.  In order to operate at minimum emission and highefficiency levels, such equipment will require materials than canwithstand the anticipated high inlet and operating temperatures andcontain the pollutant-laden exhaust.Nanostructured coatings, which are capable of withstanding theadditional heat, are based on powders with nanoscale dimensions inthe 10-7 - 10-9 meter range.  Such materials could be used in turbinecombustor, blades, vanes, and transition pieces.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Ceramic, Metal Bondfor Hot Gas FiltersIntumescent materials for joining ceramics to metals at hightemperatures in hot gas filtration systems have been formulated byscientists at CeraMem Corp. (12 Clematis Ave., Waltham, MA 02154-7035; Tel: 617/899-0467).  Other potential applications for thematerials include heat exchangers, high temperature vehicleemissions control systems, and heat protection and control systemsfor new jet engines.The cost effective sealing of ceramic components such asparticulate filters to high temperature metal alloys in advancedcoal-based power systems operating at temperatures of up to 1000Cis extremely difficult, reports Robert J. Higgins.  The problemstems from the large disparity in thermal expansion coefficients ofthese two types of materials.This requirement to seal large gaps between ceramic and metalliccomponents, coupled with the need to maintain appropriate stresslevels on the ceramic components at all temperatures, placesextreme demands on the properties of the material used to seal theceramic-metal gap.  Similar systems operating at lower temperaturesutilize vermiculite-based intumescent mats for this purpose, butsuch materials have limited lifetimes when used at temperatures inexcess of 500C and degrade at temperatures above 800C.CeraMem scientists are investigating the use of multilayer,biceramic composites that can reversibly expand and contractbetween room temperature and 1000C.  These composites will includevarious combinations of high temperature oxides fabricated by thesurface modification treatment of thin, tape cast ceramic sheets.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996New and RetrofitCoal CombustorA new, ultralow nitrogen oxides (NOx) pulverized coal combustor isunder development by engineers at Busek Co., Inc. (19 Kearney Rd.,Needham, MA 02194-2505; Tel: 508/655-5565). The concept, reportsVladimir Hruby, is applicable to both new and retrofit wall- andtangentially-fired utility and industrial boiler systems.The process focuses on a new method of controlling thestoichiometry, kinetics, and fuelbound nitrogen evolution in thefuel devolatilization and initial combustion stages.  An extremelyfuel-rich reaction zone is sustained by the low temperature, highlyoxidizing plasma environment.  The plasma contains highly reactiveoxygen radicals and permits fuel devolatilization atstoichiometries where fuelbound nitrogen conversion to compoundsother than oxides are favored.The power consumption required to create the plasma is less than0.5% of the thermal input of the combustor.  Thermal managementtechniques for primary zone combustion limit the formation ofthermal NOx, which results in NOx emissions several times lowerthan those in commercially available low NOx burners.  The firstpart of the Busek project will involve the expansion of earlierexperience with the plasma ignition and rapid devolatilization ofcoal, followed by the demonstration of the new concept.Experiments will be performed to measure NOx emissions and powerconsumption as a basis for the design of a 6 million Btu/hr.combustor.  Later, the combustor will be built and tested in acommercial boiler.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Turbine EmissionsAre ReducedAn advanced technology catalytic combustor (ATCC) for applicationon ground-base, natural gas-powered turbine engines is underconstruction at Precision Combustion, Inc. (PCI, 25 Science Park,New Haven, CT 06511-1968; Tel: 203/786-5215).William C. Pfefferle reports that the ATCC will represent anultrahigh efficiency, environmentally superior, cost competitivetechnology.  He predicts that design innovations will overcome thelimits of earlier catalytic combustion designs and result ultralowemissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and carbon monoxide (CO) of oneand five parts per million (ppm), respectively.PCI will first build at least one laboratory prototypes fordemonstration at atmospheric pressure and will then explore designvariations.  Subsequently, a full scale combustor will be built fordemonstration at full pressure in preparation for testing on anengine. High combustion stability, operability without a preburner,high turndown, and durability are said to be other advantages ofthe ATCC.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Plastics CouncilFocuses on ReuseThere are several challenges unique to the recycling of plastics,including the difficulties associated with identification andseparation, high contamination levels, and costly equipment.  In aneffort to reduce the effect of these problems and boost recoveryrates, the American Plastics Council (APC, 1275 K St., NW,Washington, DC 20005; Tel: 800/243-5790) is investing in innovativetechnologies.In 1994, the APC opened the Multi-Products Recycling Facility(MPRF) in Boston, MAthe first large-scale U.S. research anddevelopment facility for plastics recycling.  The facilitytransforms plastic contaminated with materials such as metals andfabric into clean, reusable plastics.  To date, the facility hasprocessed more than 100,000 lbs. of used plastics from automobiles,computers, business equipment, and appliances.Last spring, a new project, operated by MBA Polymers Inc. (829Heinz Ave., Berkeley, CA; Tel: 510/704-7585) and sponsored by theAPC, was started in Berkeley, CAthe Advanced Plastics RecyclingPilot Line Facility.  This 10,000 sq. ft. plant aims to develop anddemonstrate advanced mechanical recycling technologies forplastics.  Specific goals include improving recycling economics byincreasing throughput and reducing capital costs; cleaner post-processed plastics; and investigation of new separation processes.The pilot recycling line is reported to process all types ofplastic materials including those containing foreign materials suchas ferrous and nonferrous metals, labels, foam, and wiring.  Hightemperature, high pressure water is used to remove paints andcoatings.Another goal of the APC is to improve identification methods forused plastics.  For example, the P/ID 28, a near-infraredinstrument developed by Bruker Instruments Inc. (15 Fortune Dr.,Billerica, MA; Tel: 508/667-9580), under APC sponsorship, isreported to classify at least 23 different types of plastic,including black plastics, which are generally difficult toidentify.  The P/ID 28 uses the unique make-up of differentplastics, primarily the long chains of specific chemical specieswhich determine plastic type, as well as its mechanical, chemicaland physical properties.  When infrared light impinges on thevarious chemical species along a polymer chain, they vibrate atdifferent frequencies, absorbing energy at wave lengths that arecharacteristic of specific types of plastic.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Memphis MayAchieve GoalRecycling appears to be a Memphis, TN growth industry.  With threenew initiatives under way, the local recycling business seems to beon the verge of a boom.  Construction of the city's $3 millionrecycling center has just begun, while the community's curbsiderecycling recently spread to another 40,000 homes in the Midtownarea.  Champion Recycling Corp. (4939 Gasmer Dr., Houston, TX77035; Tel: 713/723-6397, Fax: 713/723-3648) has launched a city-wide recycling program in Memphis businesses as well as public andprivate schools, churches and community centers.All this activity is expected to help Memphis achieve and comeclose to the state of Tennessee's mandate to reduce its wastestreamvolume by 25%.  Benny Lendermon, the city's division director ofPublic Works, said that Memphis may miss the end-of-the-yeardeadline, but the city is well ahead of most areas in Tennessee.According to the state's Solid Waste Act of 1992, Tennesseecommunities are required to show that they have reduced their wastestream by 25% by the end of the year.  If a community hasn't metthis mandate, it must explain why and what it plans to do toachieve this waste reduction.  The measure is up for re-authorization before the Tennessee General Assembly during thecoming session.  It appears most communities will have failed tomeet this requirement, so state lawmakers may discuss extending the25% reduction mandate.A contract has been signed between the city of Memphis and FCR Inc.(1373 E. Moorehead St., Charlotte, NC 28204; Tel: 704/347-0312) tobuild a nearly $3 million recycling center on a city-donated six-acre piece of property.  FCR already operates nine recyclingcenters along the Eastern Seaboard and other communities in theSouth.  As part of the 10-year contract with the city, Memphis willreceive $50 per ton for the recyclable materials which public workcrews will deliver to the facility as part of its soon-to-becitywide curbside recycling program.  FCR guarantees Memphis $1million in revenue a year for the estimated 20,000 tons of materialexpected to be generated annually.  The community will save about$400,000 a year in tipping fees by not taking this waste to thelocal landfill.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BioChem OffersOnline MonitorBioChem Technology Inc. (100 Ross Rd., King of Prussia, PA; Tel:610/768-9360) has a new biological technology for monitoringwastewater treatment processes.  BioGuide technology is a real-timeonline monitor of bacteria in activated sludge wastewater treatmentplants that allows more accurate control of the treatment process.Samples are taken and analyzed in the bioreactor and results arefed to a computer system that can control the pumps and valves ofthe treatment process. Jaw Lee, president of BioChem, explains thatthe company monitors the bacteria activity inside the processinstead of the conventional way of monitoring bacteria involvement.The process was developed, Lee says, because BioChem believed thatthe wastewater treatment process needs to be controlled just likeany other biochemistry process.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Device Will SampleWaterborne ResiduesScientists from the Dept. of the Interior (DOI, National BiologicalService, Midwest Science Center, 4200 New Haven Rd., Columbia, MO65201) and the Fish and Wildlife Service (Vicksburg Field Office,Vicksburg, MI 39180) used semipermeable membrane devices (SPMDs) topassively sample aqueous polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) in Bayou Meto, AR.  Thetwo sites were upstream and downstream from the confluence with atributary that delivers PCDDs and PCDFs to the Bayou.Bayou Meto is a turbid, low-gradient stream that originates in thehighlands of central Arkansas and empties into the Arkansas River290 km to the southeast.  Near Jacksonville, AR, about 40 kmdownstream from Bayou Meto's source, a tributary joins Bayou Metofrom the North.  This tributary, Rocky Branch Creek, is a pointsource of PCDDs and PCDFs, especially of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF) to Bayou Meto.In 1971, the Vertac Co. began manufacturing phenoxy acid herbicidesat a plant in Jacksonville.  Based on extensive contamination withPCDDs and PCDFs, the Vertac site is ranked 18th on the EPA's listof 1301 Superfund sites.Aquatic biota, including fish and amphibians, from Rocky BranchCreek and Bayou Meto have been found to contain elevatedconcentrations of PCDDs and PCDFs.  Wood duck eggs collected fromBayou Meto 9 km downstream from the confluence with Rocky BranchCreek contained concentrations of TCDD as high as 510 pg/g on a wetweight basis.  TCDD exhibits endocrine- and reproduction-disruptingeffects in fish and wildlife.  Laboratory studies indicate thatextremely low concentrations of TCDD can impair reproduction inthese animals.The semipermeable membrane device and its use as a sampler ofaqueous hydrophobic organic contaminants have been extensivelycharacterized.  The SPMDs used in the present work can be brieflydescribed as segments of layflat polyethylene tubing with thinfilms of triolein sealed inside.  The devices function as passive,in situ aquatic samplers that sequester dissolved hydrophobiccontaminants from water.Following dialysis, cleanup, and fractionation, four replicate 17-gSPMD samples from each site were analyzed by GC/MS, and four wereevaluated by H4IIE bioassay.  As reported in Environmental Science& Technology [29, 2886-2892, 1995], traces of only PCDD and PhCDDswere detected in samples from the upstream site. The TCDDequivalents obtained by bioassay of replicate SPMD samples agreedwell with results obtained by GC/MS.  The quantities sequestered bySPMDs at the downstream site were used to estimate the aqueousconcentrations for both compounds as 2 pg/L.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PUBLICATIONSLab DirectoryNow AvailableThe 1996 Directory of Environmental Testing Labs is available fromDynCorp (Directory Dept., 300 N. Lee St., Alexandria, VA 22314;Tel: 703/519-1000).  The directory is aimed at those who requirelaboratories that provide analyses for dioxins, radiochemistry,organics, metals, air, geochemistry, and microbiologicalparameters.Information on the analytical capabilities, instrumentation,certifications and special services performed by over 600environmental testing laboratories in the U.S. and Canada isavailable.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASTE TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARFebruary 25, 1996, Waste Management '96 will be held in Tucson, AZ.For more information, call 520/624-8573.February 28-March 1, 1996,  Emerging Solutions to VOC & Air ToxicsControl will be held in Clearwater, FL.  Contact: A&WMA Registrar,Tel: 412/232-3445, Fax: 412/232-3450.March 3-8, 1996, Pittcon '96 Conference on Analytical Chemistry &applied Spectroscopy, will be held in Chicago, IL.  Contact:Pittsburgh Conference, Tel: 412/687-1113.March 18-21, 1996, The American Defense Preparedness Assn. willhold its Environmental Symposium & Exhibition in Orlando, FL.  Call703/522-1820 for more information.March 19-23, 1996, ENTSORGA, the International Fair for Wastedisposal and Recycling, will be held in Cologne, Germany.  Contactthe conference for more information at (02 21) 821-2494/29 07 orfax (02 21) 821-10/28 26.May 21-23, 1996, The Fourth Annual International EnvironmentalVisualization Exposition (IEVE '96) will be held at ResearchTriangle Park, NC.  Contact: Registrar, Tel: 412/232-3445 or Fax:412/232-3450.June 23-28, 1996, The Air & Waste Management Association AnnualMeeting will be held in Nashville, TN.  Contact: Registrar, Tel:412/232-3445 or Fax: 412/232-3450.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-18IA059-000325-B020-70http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev59.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002534 text/html 68490HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:23:41 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:42 GMTContent-length: 68301Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev59.html Sample Issue Copyright WATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PHYSICAL TREATMENTS Moringa Seeds Remove Turbidity (446 words) Adsorption Power for Separations (218 words) Microfiltration Removes H2S (383 words) Multimedia Filters Remove Oocysts (201 words) Coated Fiber Optic Helps Degrade Phenol (494 words) BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS Anaerobic Breakdown of Some Toxic Organics (373 words) CHEMICAL TREATMENTS Growth Ahead for Treatment Chemicals (315 words) TESTING/MONITORING DNA Test for Live Crypto Oocysts (530 words) Differing Views on Compliance (693 words) Overtones in Budget Stalemate (116 words) Briefly Noted: (168 words) WASTEWATER Regeneration Won't Bog this Absorption (428 words) Champion Closes the Loop for Pulp Mills (261 words) ACTIVATED CARBON Tailoring to Meet Application Specs (293 words) ULTRAPURE WATER Membrane Reactor Purges Dissolved O2 (412 words) INDUSTRY NEWS U.S. Filter Is Dealing Again (237 words) DSI, Osmonics Nearly as One (131 words) European Bank Offers Loans (541 words) Wheelabrator, Betz in Strategic Alliance (171 words) Goodbye Water Meter Readers (113 words) Life Industries Wins Mexican Concession (196 words) French Do Adore the British Water (229 words) Philly Suburban Keeps Growing (128 words) Briefly Noted: (317 words) POTABLE WATER Bone Charcoal, Sand Clear the Water (419 words) Can Structured Water Be Good (284 words) REVERSE OSMOSIS Daicel Increases It's Production (218 words) Countertop System from Premier (212 words) Profit Margins Can Be Slim (362 words) CALENDAR (162 words) CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Moringa SeedsRemove TurbiditySuleyman A. Muyibi and Lilian Evison (Dept. of Civil Engineering,University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, U.K.) havecontinued their tests documenting the usefulness of seeds ofMoringa aptera, the horseradish tree, for water treatment,especially in tropical developing countries.Evison reports that the goals of the lab tests were to determinethe multiple effects of five physical factors: rapid and slowmixing rates, mixing time, dosage of coagulant, and initialturbidity on the coagulation of turbid water with Moringa seeds.The engineers wanted to find the best dosage rate and the optimalvalues for rapid mix velocity and time and slow mix velocity andtime for turbidities of 50-750 NTU.For their tests, the investigators used stock dilute kaolinsuspensions with 5 g kaolin, 500 ml distilled water, and 500 ml of50 mg/l sodium carbonate solution. They prepared samples ofdifferent turbidities by diluting the stock suspension. They grounddry Nigerian Moringa seeds to a powder and blended 5 g of powder in200 ml distilled water to extract the active ingredients. Theyfiltered the suspension and diluted it to make a stock solution of1,000 mg/l.To measure the degree of coagulation achieved, an opticaltachometer was used to measure changes in the speed of rotation ofa glass paddle in the test vessel, a 1 l glass beaker. They carriedout 32 randomized tests to determine the effects of operatingvariables. Each test used 500 ml of turbid water with a dose ofMoringa solution. After different times of slow and fast mixing,the mixtures were left to settle for two hours before measurementof supernatant turbidity.Evison writes in Water Research [29-12, 2689-2695, 1995] that theinitial turbidity and the strength of Moringa dosage were the mostsignificant factors in coagulating kaolin suspensions. Within adosage range of 50-300 mg/l, Muyibi and Evison found optimumdosages of 50 and 100 mg/l for initial turbidities of 50-150 NTUand 250-550 NTU, respectively. An increase in Moringa dosage leadsto a decrease in turbidity up to the optimum dosage, when flocrestabilization begins to increase the residual turbidity.At an initial turbidity of 50 NTU and an optimum dosage of 50 mg/l,the optimal velocity gradient for rapid mix is 432/s and 1 minuteat 50 NTU initial turbidity. At 225-750 NTU, the optimum rapid mixvelocity gradient and time were 443/s and 4 minutes. The residualturbidities at the optimum velocity gradient for rapid mix and timewere <10 NTU at both high and low initial turbidities. It was foundthat the higher the initial turbidity of a sample, the lower itsresidual turbidity.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Adsorption Powerfor SeparationsKent S. Knaebel (Adsorption Research Inc. (6185D Shamrock Ct.,Dublin, OH 43017: Tel: 614/798-9090) writing in ChemicalEngineering [102-11, 92-102, 1995] set out to review the principlesand capabilities of adsorption. Knaebel defines adsorption as aseparation process that selectively transports components of a gasor liquid phase to the surface of a solid adsorbent. Adsorption hasthe power to make separations beyond the limits of distillation,absorption, or membrane systems, and that advances in adsorptiontechnology are opening up new applications in environmentalapplications and industrial processes.Knaebel explains that most adsorption systems consist of a pair offixed beds in parallel so that one is regenerating while the secondis adsorbing. The common adsorbent media are silica gel, activatedalumina, activated carbon, zeolites, mordenites, and carbonmolecular sieves. Many other minerals, organic materials, andsynthetic substances are adsorbents. Their key properties arecapacity, selectivity, regenerability, kinetics, compatibility, andcost. Capacity is a function of surface area, pore sizedistribution, iodine number, and molasses number.Key factors to consider in choosing an adsorbent are adsorptionequilibrium, heat effects, and the dynamics of bed behavior.Equilibrium and heat effects limit adsorption capacity andselectivity, as Knaebel shows at length in a detailed discussion ofheat effects, adsorption isotherms, and adsorption dynamics inrelation to design.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MicrofiltrationRemoves H2SAir stripping by cascade aeration is the usual method of removinghydrogen sulfide from groundwater in central Florida. Air strippingmay be economical, but Mark A. Thompson, Uday G. Kelkar, and JamesC. Vickers (Malcolm Pirnie Inc., 11382 Rock Landing Dr., Suite 400,Newport News, VA 23606-4206; Tel: 804/873-8700, Fax: 804/873-8723)point out that it has many shortcomings. By precipitating elementalsulfur, air stripping raises turbidity and often creates a smellaround treatment plants. Aeration is not efficient over 6.5 pH, buta lower pH increases corrosion in the system. Aeration actuallyremoves about 20% of H2S, and chlorination oxidizes the remainderto S0.As an alternative to aeration, Thompson's group conductedfeasibility studies of microfiltration in combination with H2Schemistry manipulation at Oviedo, FL. Their procedure begins withreducing pH of alkaline groundwater to <6.5 in order to make H2Sthe dominant sulfur specie and make oxidation of H2S to So theprevailing chemical reaction. They did this by oxidation withchlorine.The authors filtered their groundwater supply and pumped itdirectly into a chlorination unit, bypassing aeration. Thisexpedient reduces dissolved oxygen levels. The investigators heldthe oxidation/reduction potential (ORP) of the feedwater near zeroby regulating the chlorine dosage and preventing it from turningpositive when So is oxidized to SO4-2.The goal was to keep the ORP as close to zero as possible in orderto obtain maximum So production. The best dosage was about 6 mg/lCl. Jar tests were made to determine the best chlorine dosage.After chlorination, the authors sent the feedwater through amicrofiltration test unit at a constant flow of 2 gpm or 0.5 g/m2of membrane area for 3 days. The test unit had a membrane area of4 m2 with 0.2 micron average pore size. The authors monitored rawand finished water with a particle counter to observe turbidity.Thompson reports in Desalination [102, 287-291, 1995] that the testunit reduced turbidity to <0.2 NTU without any trace of hydrogensulfide or any flux reduction. They reduced trihalomethane levelsby 40% from 80-90 micrograms/l by adding alum before chlorination.Thompson concludes that microfiltration is technically analternative to aeration. The product water is odorless and lesscorrosive, and the procedure is sensitive and flexible when wellmanaged.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Multimedia FiltersRemove OocystsBecause Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts and Giardia lamblia cystsresist disinfection, two Washington engineers have testedcontrolling the cysts by using multimedia filtration. The pilotstudy shows that multimedia filtration is potentially an importantalternative to disinfection.Jerry E. Ongerth and Julie Proctor Pecararo (Environmental HealthSC-34, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105) conducted thestudy with a system consisting of direct filtration with inlineflocculation, multimedia filtration, low turbidity and alkalinityraw water with optimum alum coagulation, and constant rateoperation at 1 gpm or 5 gpm/ft2 of filter. Their feedwater wasSeattle city water seeded with Giardia and Cryptosporidium. Themultimedia filter consisted of a flanged 15.2 cm diameter acrylictubing with 45.7 cm anthracite coal, 22 cm silica sand, 14.7 cmgarnet sand, and three grades of supporting gravel.Ongerth reports in AWAA Journal [87-12, 83-89, 1995] that the pilotmultimedia filter achieved nearly 3 logs (99.9%) removal ofCryptosporidium parvum oocysts and better than three logs removalof Giardia lamblia oocysts. In view of the 5 micron size ofCryptosporidium oocysts, Ongerth concludes that direct filtrationby multimedia is effective and that it can be a practicalalternative to disinfection under consistent, well-regulatedoperating conditions.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Coated Fiber OpticHelps Degrade PhenolWhile the effectiveness of titanium oxide in photocatalyzing thedegradation of organic and inorganic pollutants is well known, thedevelopment of a practical photodegradation reactor has not been soeasy because absorption and scattering have limited the efficiencyof light utilization in conventional fixed bed and slurry reactors.Two California engineers believe they have solved this problem byinventing a fixed-bed photocatalytic reactor system which uses aTiO2-coated fiber optic cable to transmit light to thephotocatalyst.Nicola J. Piell and Michael R. Hoffmann (W.M. Keck Labs, CaliforniaInstitute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; Fax: 818/395-3170)used 3 mm quartz rods and 1 mm quartz optical fibers as substratesfor bonding three coats of titanium oxide from concentratedsuspensions. The reactor system consists of a light source, acoated fiber-optic bundle, and a reaction vessel. The UV lightsource is a 1,000 W xenon arc lamp. The fiber bundle consists of 721 mm quartz optical fibers. The reactor is a 227 ml cylindricalPyrex vessel with a glass frit and a bottom inlet for introducingatmospheric oxygen.Fibers at one end of the cable are inserted individually into thevessel through holes drilled concentrically 1.5mm apart in the cap.The vessel has 3 sample ports arranged vertically 1.5 mm apart.Piell and Hoffman used the system to test the degradation of 190 mlof a 0.1 mM solution of 4-chlorophenol (4-CP). They monitoredchloride ion production during oxidation by means of a chloride-selective electrode and ion chromatography. pH changes weremonitored with a pH meter. The disappearance of 4-CP was observedspectrophotometrically and by high performance liquidchromatography (HPLC).Peill reports in Environmental Science & Technology [29-12, 2974-2981, 1995] that complete degradation of 4-CP took 5-13 hrs.,depending on the input light flux and its incident angle.Increasing the minimum incident angle of light input increased themeasured efficiency of degradation. Increasing the concentration oftitania in the suspensions for coating the glass fibers increasedtheir light absorption efficiency.The overall light absorption efficiency of a bundled array appearsto be a function of both the density of fibers in the array and thetitania coating characteristics. Peill reports that the fiber-opticreactor has a maximum quantum efficiency of 0.011 for 4-CPoxidation compared to 0.0065 for a slurry reactor under similarconditions. This is two orders of magnitude better than previousfixed bed reactors. The fiber-optic system appears to have theadvantages of a fixed bed reactor and a higher efficiency than aslurry reactor. There was no heat buildup in the reactor and nodegradation of fiber coatings, except for the heaviest coatings.It was concluded that coated fiber-optic reactors should beadaptable to continuous flow or batch operations for treating gasand liquid streams. The fiber-optic cable frees the photocatalystfrom direct dependence on a light source so that the fiber-reactorsystem could be used for in situ remediation in the subsurface.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Anaerobic Breakdownof Some Toxic OrganicsEngineers at Tulane University have quantitatively determined theanaerobic biodegradability of some toxic organic compounds inpetrochemical wastewaters.Advantages of anaerobic over aerobic systems include lower energyconsumption, less sludge, and potential recovery of energy frombiogenic methane. John M. Stewart (Dept. of Civil & EnvironmentalEngineering, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118) and fourassociates at Tulane and Union Carbide investigated the effects ofdifferent concentrations of ethylene glycol, acrylic acid,acrolein, and allyl alcohol on acetate uptake by methanogenicbacteria. They quantified the biodegradability of each compound andidentified intermediate degradation products.Stewart reports in Water Research [29-12, 2730-2738, 1995] that thegroup used a glucose and acetate fed enrichment culture that wasdeveloped from an anaerobic digester. Anaerobic toxicity assayswere made at 35(C in 150 ml serum bottles filled anaerobically with45 ml of glucose-acetate medium, 3 ml of nutrient medium, and 2 mlof 50 g/l yeast extract. Acetic acid was added daily for 11 daysand daily gas production measured. They spiked the test bottles onthe 12th day with different concentrations of the four selectedtoxic organic compounds and measured inhibition as the decrease inmethane production in comparison with a control.It was found that ethylene glycol in concentrations of 5,000-20,000mg/l completely inhibited acetate utilization by exhaustingalkalinity within 4 days. Lower concentrations are degraded to lessthan 5 mg/l. Acetic acid, ethanol, and possibly acetaldehyde wereintermediate products before inhibition.Acrylic acid inhibited methane production one day after spiking,but slow recovery followed as volatile acids degraded. Acrylic acidconcentrations up to 100 mg/l can be treated to avoid inhibitingmethanogenesis. Concentrations of 500-1,500 mg/l acrylic acidinhibit methane production for longer periods but bacterialdegradation to less than 1 mg/l takes place within 40 days.Acrolein inhibited methane formation at concentrations as low as 10mg/l immediately after spiking. A slow recovery followed. Recoverytime is directly proportional to acrolein concentration up to 150mg/l. Allyl alcohol at concentrations up to 4,000 mg/l slowlyinhibited methane production after about 10 days because of slowbuild up of volatile acids. However, biological methane potentialtests show that anaerobic bacteria degrade on more than 7% of allylalcohol.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Growth Ahead forTreatment ChemicalsAs the nation's water quality proves increasingly inadequate andthe need for clean water becomes more apparent, the U.S. specialtywater treatment chemicals (WTCs) industry continues to offer aviable means of ensuring plentiful pure water supplies. New andincreasingly stringent environmental and pollution/dumping lawsinfluence the development of alternative water treatmenttechnologies (chemistries) that replace existing treatments.According to Business Communications Co., Inc. report RC-002U,Specialty Water Treatment Chemicals, the vast domestic watertreatment industry remains a mature yet profitable market. Of thattotal market, specialty water treatment chemicals represent about84%, or about $2.6 billion, and most of its profit. The specialtywater treatment chemicals market should see an average annualgrowth rate (AAGR) of 5.3% to the year 2000.With 1995 sales estimated at $947 million, corrosion and scaleinhibitors represent the largest segment of the specialty watertreatment chemicals. New toxicity requirements, among otherfactors, contribute to a forecasted market reaching $1.3 billion inthe year 2000, resulting in a 7.3% AAGR.Following close behind are the biocides and disinfectants withprojected 1995 sales of $821 million. Concerns about chlorine gastoxicity and rising prices are making the higher priced yet safer-to-use specialty biocidal and disinfectant chemicals moreattractive to consumers. The market forecast for 2000 is $984million at an AAGR of 3.7%.The coagulants and flocculants segment continues to evolve. With a1995 market value of $270 million, anticipating a 2000 market of$319 million, environmental restrictions on wastewater dischargesand the need for water conservation will fuel the growth of thismarket. The expected AAGR is 3.4%.Sales of filter media and adsorbents come primarily from activatedcarbon. Those sales are estimated at $202 million in 1995, and areexpected to reach $251 million in 2000, with the 4.4% AAGRreflecting demand for granular activated carbon, a versatile andbroad-spectrum absorbent.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DNA Test for LiveCrypto OocystsBecause bacterial culture methods don't work for Cryptosporidiumparvum oocysts, the standard indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA)method for detecting them in environmental samples relies onisolation and identification. Christine Wagner-Wiening and PeterKimmig (Landesgesundheitsant Baden-Wurttemberg, Weiderholdstr. 15,D-70174 Stuttgart, Germany) point out that detection by stainingand counting by immunofluorescence microscopy does not distinguishbetween live and dead oocysts or between C. parvum and otherspecies of Cryptosporidium.Wagner-Weining and Kimmig devised a genetic test which uses apolymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect live C. parvum oocysts.Their excystation protocol before DNA extraction permitsdistinguishing between live and dead oocysts.Kimmig reports in Applied & Environmental Microbiology [61-12,4514-4516, 1995] that they obtained C. parvum sporozoites byincubating concentrated oocysts in phosphate-buffered salinesolution (PBS) containing 0.25% trypsin and 0.75% sodiumtaurocholate at 37(C for 60 min. They removed the trypsin andtaurocholate by washing and centrifugation, and resuspended themixture of oocyst walls, oocysts, and excysted sporozoites in PBS.Total DNA was extracted from excysted sporozoites by incubation at58(C in a digestion buffer solution with 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate,0.015 ml of 10 mg/ml proteinase K solution, 0.2 ml of 10 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM EDTA and 50 mM NaCl, and 0.07 ml dithiothreitrol inwater. The authors purified the DNA and eluted the dried, pelletedextract in sterile water. They used synthetic oligonucleotideprimers CP 397 and CP 1270 to amplify an 873-bp region of a 2,395-bp DNA fragment which encodes a repetitive oocyst protein.Kimmig reports that PCR gene probe-positive signals occur only whenlive sporozoites are present in the extraction medium afterdigestion times of 5-90 min. DNase digestion after excystationprevented false positive signals from the DNA of dead sporozoites.The authors tested the specificity of the DNA primers for C. parvumDNA by attempting to amplify target sequences from 46 othermicroorganisms that occur in the same environment. They found noamplified DNA products.The sensitivity of their system was determined by direct countingof serially diluted sporozoites before DNA extraction. Kimmigreports that the specific 873-bp fragment is faintly visible whenthe starting material contains as few as 100 sporozoites. A secondround of amplification sometimes increases sensitivity to 10sporozoites, but this step is not always reliable. The specificityand sensitivity of their DNA primers makes it possible to routinelymonitor low numbers of live C. parvum oocysts in environmentalsamples.The shortcomings of IFA are the subject of an editorial article inAnalytical Chemistry [67-12, 731A-734A, 1995] which reviewsalternative methods of detecting C. parvum. These include enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA), flow cytometry withfluorescent cell sorting, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)with confocal microscopy or flow cytometry, microscopy combinedwith imaging by slow-scan charged coupling device, in vitro cellculture, and electrorotation assay.Analytical Chemistry concludes that the best of them takes 24 hoursand none of them yet replaces continuous turbidity measurements byparticle counting as a real-time measure of pathogens. Even thoughparticle counting is an indirect measure, it determines particlesizes and warns of particles in the micron size range of cysts andoocysts.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Differing Viewson ComplianceIts goal of maintaining and protecting surface water quality hasled the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to set some very lowlimits for a variety of toxic pollutants. The demanding EPArequirements for testing and reporting prompt contrasting reactionsfrom the chemical industry and the water treatment industry.While Anna Rule (Hampton Roads Sanitation District, Virginia Beach,VA; Tel: 804/874-1287) exposes the impracticalities andinadequacies of compliance testing, Darrell R. Wilder(Environmental Services Lab, Eastman Chemical Co., Kingsport, TN37662-5054) sees compliance testing and waste minimization asopportunities for self-directed efforts to eliminate sources ofpollution and reduce the burden of testing.Writing in Water Environment & Technology [7-11, 31-34, 1995] Rulepoints out that the minimum concentration at which a chemical'spresence can be determined by a specific method is an exceedinglyminute but imprecise quantity which has nevertheless become aregulatory goal and performance standard. A method detection limit(MDL) is the minimum concentration of a substance which can beidentified, measured, and reported with 99% confidence that itsconcentration is greater than zero. EPA bases MDL on the standarddeviation of a set of replicate determinations.The EPA has set water quality criteria for some substances at orbelow MDLs without considering the limits of analytical technology.Compliance with permit limits set below MDLs or at zero isproblematic because measurement errors, variability, anduncertainty. Measurements at ultradilute levels are consequentlyanything but absolutely true and exact determinations.Rule indicates the flaws in deriving a confidence interval from aset of determinations and suggests that prediction intervals ortolerance intervals are more appropriate for estimating the rangeof future multiple measurements and the probability that a givenpercentage of them attain a given MDL. Rule points out that itintroduces a bias to treat results at or below an MDL as zero ornondetectable while accepting higher values as true and accurate."All measurements, at any level, include defined and unavoidableimprecision. Analytical and sample variance, or relative standarddeviation of measurements (RSD) is not constant throughout theconcentration range but gradually increases as the results approachthe lower or upper end of the analytical range... The practice ofeliminating low-level data by reporting 'less than' or 'zero' iscalled left-censoring and is regarded as an unnecessary loss ofvaluable information." While it is statistically valid to use low-end data, this approach often conflicts with setting regulatorylimits.Rule favors the calibration curve method as an alternative forestimating measurement detection limits. This method findstolerance intervals for assessing future performance and uses themto define uncertainty bands on the calibration curve. The analystmay then compute and define minimum concentrations that have anacceptable level of confidence with a predetermined RSD. Thecalibration curve method is the basis of a proposal presented tothe EPA by a Detection/Quantitation Workgroup representing theregulated community. Other concepts of MDL may be appropriate, butthe problem is the validity of low-end results. Carefully developedand documented protocols should allow a more effective validationand define more appropriate uses although at a higher cost.Working the higher end of compliance testing, Wilder acceptscompliance testing as a fact of life for environmental dischargesin the chemical industry. Now that the NPDES program has entered aphase of diminishing returns, the EPA is encouraging a "front end"approach to pollution control that encourages proactive wasteminimization and pollution prevention.Government initiatives and voluntary programs have createdfinancial incentives for chemical companies to go beyond routinecompliance by developing environmental strategies that reflectenvironmental responsibility. Writing in Analytical Chemistry [25-2, 77-89, 1995] Wilder presents a review of some new measurementtechnologies for preventing pollution and cutting waste.Wilder considers technologies for measurement of wasteloadconcentrations, flow measurements, monitoring specific wastecomponents, monitoring networks, process control of activatedsludge treatment systems, and measurement of air emissions. Wilderbelieves that internal and self-directed efforts by chemicalcompanies in all these areas give analysts scope for ingenuity andcreativity in identifying and eliminating sources of toxiccontaminants. Successful results could reduce the burden ofcompliance testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Overtones inBudget StalemateCongressional action on renewal of the Clean Water Act seems tohave been forgotten during the present confrontation over thefederal budget. Environmental affairs, however, are one of theissues under contention in the battle to balance the budget.Republicans are eager to cut spending on environmental programs intheir quest to trim a trillion dollars from the national spendingplan but they appear to be losing public support for any attempt tolimit the ability of the EPA to protect public health and theenvironment. It is still not clear how the budget battle will end,but it seems unlikely that Congress will be able to reformenvironmental regulation by punitive budget cutting.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:    Rachel Furman of Onset Computer Corp. (P.O. Box 3450,Pocasset, MA 02559-3450; Tel: 508/563-9000, Fax: 508/563-9477)relates that the company's new StowAway TidbiT is the world'ssmallest temperature logger. The TidbiT measures 1.2" wide by 1.6"tall by 0.45" thick and is completely sealed and waterproofed. Itrecords temperatures and times at remote locations and at depths upto 1,000 ft. The logger costs $149 and the base station kit costs$123.    N.J.C. Strahan, F.J. Nicholson, and I.D. Ogden (Food ScienceLab, Torrey, P.O. Box 31, Abbey Rd., Aberdeen AB9 8DG, Scotland,U.K.) have coupled an ion mobility spectrometer to a computer-automated sampling system to detect the volatile gases producedwhen pathogenic bacteria metabolize their substrate. Strahanexplains that IMS uses a 63Ni source to ionize gas particles in anelectrical field. The time of flight of the ions is measured, andthe massive products of bacterial metabolism are identifiable bytheir longer drift times. Results are reported in Analytica ChimicaActa [313-1,2, 63-67, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Regeneration Won'tBog this AbsorptionPeat Technologies Corp. (PTC, 9076 Little Sweden Rd., Cook, MN55723-8814; Tel: 218/666-2962, Fax: 218/666-2963) has received anexclusive, worldwide license from the University of Minnesota tomanufacture and market a new wastewater treatment product based ontechnology developed at the University's Natural Resources ResearchInstitute (NRRI) in Duluth, MN.  The University has applied for apatent, consisting of both composition of matter and processclaims, to protect the new technology.The new material, "MultiSorb 100," is formed into granules ofspecially processed peat and was developed after three years ofresearch at  NRRI.  It has shown outstanding performance inadsorbing a wide variety of organics and heavy metals from variouswastewater streams.  Being granular in form, the peat particlesresist crushing, are dust-free, have high permeability to waterflow, and resist leaking of organic matter, while at the same timehaving good ion exchange capacity.MultiSorb 100 can be recycled and regenerated just as ion exchangeresins.  In contrast to current ion exchange technology, thecomponents of hard water or monovalent cations do not significantlyinterfere with the binding ability of toxic heavy metal ions suchas zinc, copper, lead, cobalt, and chromium.PTC has established and is operating a production facility toproduce the material in pilot quantities at the Leoni Internationalpeat operation located south of Virginia, MN.  This facility, whichcan produce 1/2 ton of product per day, will be upgraded to produce24 tons of product per day by the third quarter of 1996.Roy E. Larson, chairman and CEO of PTC, told WTN that the majorthrust of PTC is to manufacture and market MultiSorb 100 forextracting metals and organic contaminants from wastewaters.  Thenew adsorption material has removed dissolved forms of iron, lead,zinc, barium, nickel, copper, and ethylene glycol from wastewaterat the laboratory-scale level.  Several successful tests have alsobeen made in the field using actual wastewater streams.  In manycases, the effluents met drinking water standards and otherdischarge criteria.Because MultiSorb 100 can best handle wastewaters having pollutionconcentrations of less than 500 ppm, it is most efficiently appliedas a polishing step in an overall wastewater treatment process,following a membrane system for instance.  PTC's short termobjectives are to commercialize the new technology and to identifythe market niches where it is an efficacious and cost-effectivetreatment method for the removal of metals and organics fromwastewaters.  The company is interested in developing variousstrategic relationships to introduce the product and to establisha marketing and sales effort.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Champion Closes theLoop for Pulp MillsChampion International Corp. (1 Champion Plaza, Stamford, CT 06921;Tel: 203/358-7000, Fax: 203/358-2975) has begun commercial-scaletesting of its new Bleach Filtrate Recycle (BFR) Process at itspulp and paper mill in Canton, NC. Champion says the BFR Processhas the potential to reduce the discharges of dissolved organicmatter from bleached-kraft mills and that it is an advance to thegoal of a closed loop system that will eliminate all processeffluents from the bleaching of paper pulp.Champion developed BFR with the technical support of Sterling PulpChemicals (1200 Smith, Suite 1900, Houston, TX 77002-4312; Tel:713/650-3700, Fax: 713/650-9551). BFR is a unified package ofengineering systems that reorganize and redirect the flow of thefluids used to bleach paper pulp. They trap process chemicals forreclamation and reuse in the bleach plant; capture the non-fibrouscomponents of wood that are removed by bleaching and use them asfuel in the pulp mill; and recycle the treated process water to thepulp mill and the bleach plant. Champion says that BFR can reducethe discharge of dissolved organic matter by about 90%, cutdischarges of chlorinated organic compounds to almost zero; andvirtually eliminate any color in effluent from the bleach plant.Champion has licensed the HPD Division of Wheelabrator WaterTechnologies to market BFR worldwide, and Champion and Sterlinghave established The Closed Loop Alliance (10 Pearl St., Kingston,NY 12401; Tel: 914/331-1431) to promote awareness of BFR and theirgoal of making kraft mills environmentally friendly by closing theloop on their waste streams.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Tailoring to MeetApplication SpecsStephen J. Allen (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Queen's Universityof Belfast, Stranmillis Rd, Belfast BT9 5AH, U.K.) foresees ademand for activated carbons which are prepared for specificapplications in water and wastewater treatment. He reports thattechnology now in development will be able to produce carbons withprecisely engineered surface properties and pore sizes. Lignite, inparticular, is a source material that is suitable for activation indifferent ways to produce absorption characteristics for specificpurposes.Allen and a team of four U.S. and British engineers compared thedifferences in absorption of sodium benzoate, 2,4-dichlorophenol,and 2,4,6-trichlorophenol on five activated carbons made from thesame Crumlin lignite. They activated the lignite in a two-stageexperimental process with iron sulfate and steam at 800(C, zincchloride with steam at 600( and 800(C, and iron nitrate with steamat 600( and 800(C.Allen reports in Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology[64, 261-268, 1995] that chemical and steam activation eachimproved the performance of activated carbons from Crumlin lignite,and the two-stage combination gave the best results. The chemicaltreatments that gave the best results on their own, iron nitrateand zinc chloride at 800(C, also gave the best results whencombined with steam treatment.These two carbons showed the poorest agreement with traditionalabsorption theories. Allen suggests that this is because capillarycondensation accounts for significant extra absorption that is notaccounted for by models based on surface absorption. Allen's teamfound a good correlation between surface area measured by nitrogenabsorption and the capacity of the carbons for absorbing benzoicacid. The monolayer benzoic acid capacity also correlated well withtotal absorptive capacity, showing that the dominant mechanism ismore likely to be pure absorption than capillary condensation.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Membrane ReactorPurges Dissolved O2Dissolved oxygen is usually purged from ultrapure water by thermaldegassing, vacuum degassing, nitrogen bubble deaeration, or theaddition of hydrazine or sodium sulfite. Engineers in Singaporehave invented a bench-scale membrane reactor that overcomes thedisadvantages of these physical and chemical methods in reducingdissolved oxygen to less than 1.5 ppb.K. Li, Ivy Chua, W.J. Ng, and W.K. Teo (Dept. of ChemicalEngineering, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent RidgeCrescent, Singapore 0511) used a membrane reactor made from amicroporous polypropylene hollow fiber module packed with acatalyst in the void space. They investigated the simultaneousoperation of both physical and chemical processes in purging thewater of oxygen.The  membranes are hydrophobic with 0.04 cm OD, 0.003 cm wallthickness, and 30 nm pores covering 33% of the hollow fibersurface. The catalysts are beads of palladium-doped anion exchangeresins based on styrene and divinyl benzene. Li reports that theengineers introduced purified hydrogen into the fiber lumens whilethey fed deionized water saturated with air to about 8.3 ppm DOinto the shell side where it flowed through the catalyst packedaround the fibers. Dissolved oxygen (DO) diffuses from the waterthrough the hollow fibers to be purged by hydrogen. At the time,hydrogen diffuses through the fibers into the water and reacts withany remaining oxygen to form water.The authors measured oxygen concentration in the gas phase with aPerkin Elmer gas chromatograph using a thermal conductivitydetector and recorded the detector response on a PC with PerkinElmer software. They used an Orbisphere Model 3600 dissolved gasanalyzer to monitor dissolved oxygen in the feed and effluentstreams.Li writes in Chemical Engineering Science [50-22, 3547-3556, 1995]that the rate of dissolved oxygen removal by both physical andchemical processes was controlled by the liquid film around thehollow fiber membranes and catalyst particles in the shell side. Atlow catalyst loadings, both physical and chemical processescontributed to oxygen removal whereas at high catalyst loadings thechemical reaction was dominant.It was found that mass transfer studies show that the mass transfercoefficient for physical stripping is generally smaller than thecoefficient for the chemical reaction. Both coefficients aredependent on the rate of water flow through the reactor. The groupdeveloped a mass transfer correlation which they expect to beuseful in designing a full-scale membrane reactor that will achievea DO level of 1.2 ppb.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996U.S. Filter IsDealing AgainU.S. Filter Corp. (73-710 Fred Waring Dr., Palm Desert, CA 92260;Tel: 619/340-0098, Fax: 619/341-9368) continues its acquiring ways.This time it is Jet Tech Inc. (Edwardsville, KS) and ContinentalWater Systems Northwest (Auburn, WA). You have to ask, "Is FilmTecnext?"Jet Tech manufactures high efficiency air diffusion equipment whichaccelerate the destruction of organic contaminants in sequencingbatch reactors and autothermal thermophilic aerobic digesters whichtreat sludge and solids for land applications or unrestrictedlandfilling.Continental Northwest supplies water treatment products andservices for high purity industrial water systems for theelectronics industry and operates a facility in Vancouver forregenerating ion exchange resins. U.S. Filter plans to mergeContinental Northwest with its recently acquired Polymetricsoperations in Seattle.U.S. Filter has inaugurated its US$6 million wastewater treatmentplant for the city of Yautepec in the Mexican state of Morelos.Officials from the U.S. and Mexico gathered in Morelos to mark thecompletion of the plant one year after the devaluation of theMexican peso. U.S. Filter designed, built, and operates the plantunder a direct concession agreement. It will treat 5.6 mgd of rawsewage for the city of 48,000 people. Richard J. Heckman of U.S.Filter says the Yautepec project is the company's third in Mexicosince the passage of NAFTA. U.S. Filter has also invested $1million in its pharmaceutical, laboratory, and dialysis watercenter in Mexico City.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DSI, OsmonicsNearly as OneThe transaction requires the final execution of a definitive mergeragreement, approval of the merger agreement both companies,regulatory approvals, and the satisfaction of customary closingconditions, but Osmonics, Inc. (5951 Clearwater Dr., Minnetonka, MN55343; Tel: 612/933-2277, Fax: 612/933-0141) and DesalinationSystems Inc. (DSI, 760 Shadowridge Dr., Vista, CA 92083; Tel:619/598-1800) want to be as one.Outstanding shares of DSI will be exchanged on a share-for-sharebasis for Osmonics common stock.  The transaction is structured toqualify as a tax-free exchange and a "pooling of interests" foraccounting and financial purposes. The value of the transaction isapproximately $30 million.  The merger is expected to add over $20million to Osmonics' 1996 sales. Estimates vary, but DSI probablyhas sales of $18-$19 million at the present time.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996European BankOffers LoansThe European Investment Bank is loaning ECU 70 million, about $92million, to Aguas Argentina to finance the construction of newsewer and wastewater treatment facilities for the northern part ofBuenos Aires. Aguas Argentina is a joint venture of Lyonnaise desEaux, S.G. de Barcelona, Compagnie Generale des Eaux, SociedadComercial de la Plata, Meller S.A., and Banco de Galicia y BuenosAires. The project is part of a $4 billion program to extendwastewater treatment services to 3.5 million people in parts ofBuenos Aires without adequate sewer services.The European Investment Bank has been the long-term financingagency of the European Union since 1958, and it finances capitalinvestments in countries which have cooperation agreements with theunion.The Humanitarian Office of the European Community (ECHO) is backinginternational reconstruction efforts in Haiti by granting ECU 5million, about $6.5 million, in aid for 20 projects which includedeveloping supplies of safe drinking water for urban and ruralareas. This is the third phase of an aid program that ECHO began inJune 1995.The Cohesion Fund of the European has granted ECU 117.7 million,about $153 million, to help Greece in seven water-related projects.They include a water pipeline system from the rivers Aliakmon andAxios to Thessaloniki, enlarging and completing wastewatertreatment facilities at Thessaloniki, reinforcing of the Mornosaqueduct, and biological water treatment and sewage treatmentstations at Agrino, Thiva, Pyrgos, and Yannitsa.French and Chinese officials have signed a 30-year, $200 millionloan agreement to finance four projects in China that use Frenchequipment. The projects include water treatment facilities forrural areas and municipal wastewater treatment facilities for thecity of Xiamen in southeast China. Yves Galland, the FrenchMinister for Foreign Trade, signed the agreement in Beijing onDecember 4. France has granted similar low-interest loans totaling$2.4 billion in the last decade.The North American Development Bank has approved its first twoloans for environmental projects. Alfredo Phillips Olmedo of NADBreports that NADBank directors have authorized funding for a $14.5million  wastewater treatment plant in Ensenada, Baja Californiaand a $25.4 million fresh water system for Brawley, CS. Thebinational bank created under NAFTA to support infrastructuredevelopment will underwrite $6.45 million of the Ensenada projectwhich replaces an obsolete facility. NADBank will fund $17.2million of the Brawley loan where the present water treatment plantfails drinking water standards.Water Stock Watch(At Close, January 2, 1996)                                    Current         LastCompany                   Symbol      Price         Month     ChangeAmerican Water Works      AWK        38.750         32.250    +6.500Aquarion                  WTR        25.375         23.625    +1.750Betz Labs                 BTL        41.250         40.250    +1.000Calgon Carbon             CCC        12.000         12.875    -0.875Connecticut Water         CTWS       27.500         28.000    -0.500Dow Chemical Com.         DOW        71.125         71.375    -0.250Duriron Co.               DURI       25.250         27.750    -2.500FMC Corporation           FMC        67.500         74.000    -6.500W.R. Grace                GRA       59.625          61.875    -2.250Gould Pumps               GULD       25.000         24.375    +0.625Hach Co.                  HACH       17.250         16.125    +1.125Ionics, Inc.              ION        43.375         43.625    -0.250Merck & Co.               MRK        64.375         61.625    +2.750Nalco Chemical            NLC        30.750         30.500    +0.250Osmonics                  OSM        19.875         18.250    +1.625Rohm & Haas Co.           ROH        64.625         61.250    +3.375Sybron Chemical           SYCM       10.750         12.375    -1.625U.S. Filter               USF        26.625         22.500    +4.125Source:  BCC, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Wheelabrator, Betzin Strategic AllianceWheelabrator Water Technologies, Inc. (Liberty Lane, Hampton, NH03842; Tel: 603/929-3129, Fax: 603/629-3129) and Betz WaterManagement Group (4636 Somerton Rd., Trevose, PA 19047;Tel:215/355-3300, Fax: 215/953-5544) have formed a strategicalliance to build, own, and operate water treatment systems atcustomer sites. Betz is responsible for sales, marketing, andsupplying specialty chemicals while Wheelabrator will undertakesystem design, construction, and operations.The alliance proposes to seek new opportunities in the pulp andpaper, petroleum refining, chemical, power, food, and steelindustries. The alliance has also agreed that Ecolochem Inc.(Norfolk, VA) will participate as a preferred supplier of ultrapurewater services and technology.Wheelabrator Water Technologies is a newly-formed subsidiary of WMXTechnologies Inc., and Betz Water Management is the globaltechnology unit of Betz Laboratories, Inc.Wheelabrator Water Technologies reports that its Memtek Div. hassold a third Rinsewater Maintenance System to McAlpin Industries ofRochester, NY. The system will recycle 60-75 gpm for a new platingline which plates steel parts for corrosion protectionBack to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Goodbye WaterMeter ReadersThe Utility Div. of Badger Meter, Inc. (4545 W. Brown Deer Rd.,Milwaukee, WI 53223; Tel: 414/355-0400, Fax: 414/355-8096) hassigned an agreement with CellNet Data Systems Inc. (San Carlos, CA)to develop an automatic water meter reader for water utilities.CellNet will design radio frequency communication modules to relayinformation from Badger's meters to water utilities.Badger Meter has built water meters since 1905 and is a leader inflow measurement and flow control technologies for utilities andindustry. Badger's Dan Zandron says that automatic meter readingwill enable the 60,000 water utilities in the U.S. to deliverimproved customer billing services at much lower costs than manualmeter reading.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Life Industries WinsMexican ConcessionLife Industries, Inc. (219 Orange Ave., Sarasota, FL 34236; Tel:941/361-2106, Fax: 941/361-2127) has won a 15-year concession todesign and build 6 municipal wastewater treatment plants for sixcities in the Mexican state of Morelos. George L. Hagen of LifeIndustries (Tel: 813/351-8617, Fax: 813/351-2004) says that thecompany is acting in partnership with the firm ICA S.A. de C.V. ofGuadalajara. The concession includes management and maintenance ofthe plants. Hagen expects the concession to generate incometotaling $30 million.Life Industries owns two artesian water wells that supply drinkingwater for an area near Guadalajara. The firm has plans to build aplant to treat and bottle the water for local and internationalsales. Life Industries proposes to use a process invented by DeiterGabor and covered by U.S. Patents 5,292,194 and 5,342,529. Itconsists of a chamber which is under pressure at one end and avacuum at the other.  A high-speed rotor draws feedwater into thehigh pressure end where centrifugal force spins out the impurities.The water is treated by vacuum distillation and withdrawn at thevacuum end. Hagen says the product water is highly pure in quality.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996French Do Adorethe British WaterThe European Commission has approved a takeover bid from Lyonnaisedes Eaux for the Northumbrian Water Group which supplies drinkingwater and sewage treatment services in the northeast of England.Lyonnaise already owns two other British water utilities, NorthEast Water and Suffolk Water. Ian Byatt, regulator of Britishutilities, insisted on price cuts of 15% over the next 6 years whenLyonnaise offered $1.27 billion for Northumbrian.Another French takeover bid is taking shape in southeast England,where Generale des Eaux and SAUR Water Services Plc have joined ina buyout offer for Mid Kent Holdings Plc. The two French companiesalready own 39% of Mid Kent, and they say they plan to split thefirm and merge it into two other companies that they already own.General des Eaux and SAUR own nine other British water utilities,and they say the merger would ease water shortages and improveefficiency of service. They did not propose any reductions in waterrates. Mid Kent management has rejected the French bid asunwelcome.A third British utility is looking to international growth toassure its future. Thames Water Plc has a 35% share in a $860million project to supply drinking water to the Turkish city ofIzmit. Thames is the largest investor in the group which has theconcession for the "build, operate, and transfer" project.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Philly SuburbanKeeps GrowingPhiladelphia Suburban Water Co. (762 Lancaster Ave., Bryn Mawr, PA19010-3489; Fax: 610/645-1061) has completed its fifth acquisitionfor 1995 and has an agreement to begin 1996 with another.PSW bought the Schuylkill Township water franchise fromPhoenixville Borough for $1 million. The franchise serves 1,800residents. PSW has connected the area to its system by a 12 in.main that supplies water from its Pickering Plant on PickeringCreek.PSW had earlier bought the Castle Rock water system in EdgmontTownship, as well as the Ivy Hill, Deerfield Knoll, Chesterdale,and Media Borough water systems. PSW now serves 850,000 residentsin four counties of southeastern Pennsylvania. The company hascompleted an agreement to purchase the Hatboro water authorityserving 15,000 residents in Montgomery County.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Briefly Noted:  The Kingdom of Nepal has approved a $185 million project todevelop new water supplies for the Kathmandu Valley. Local andforeign investors will finance the Melamchi Drinking Water Projectto supply 170 million l/d by building a 27 km tunnel to divertwater from the Melamchi River to Kathmandu. The state-owned NepalDrinking Water Corp. will buy water from the Melamchi company andthe Nepal electric authority will buy the electricity it generates.  A.O. Smith Corp. (P.O. Box 23972, Milwaukee, WI 53223-0972; Tel:414/359-4000, Fax: 414/359-4180) is buying the bulk storage tankbusiness of Peabody TecTank from The Pullman Co. for about $18million. TecTank builds epoxy-coated steel and aluminum storagetanks for applications in food processing and water and wastewatertreatment. Its fiscal 1995 sales were $49 million.  Cohesant Technologies, Inc. (1801 E. 9th, Suite 1520, Cleveland,OH 44114; Tel: 216/861-6266, Fax: 216/694-3529) reports that itsAmerican Chemical Co. Unit is buying the business operations ofRaven Lining Systems (Tulsa, OK). Raven manufactures and licensesthe application of high-build epoxy coatings to protect wastewatertreatment systems and similar facilities from corrosion.  Tyco International Ltd. (One Tyco Park, Exeter, NH 03833-1108;Tel: 603/778-9700; Fax 603/778-7700) and Earth Technology Corp.(100 W. Broadway, Suite 5000, Long Beach, CA; Tel: 310/495-4449,Fax: 310/426-0666) have a merger agreement under which Tyco willbuy Earth Tech's outstanding common stock for a total of about $70million. Earth Technology designs and engineers water andwastewater treatment facilities and had sales of $178 million forfiscal 1995.  Core Industries Inc. (P.O. Box 2000, Bloomfield Hills, MI 48304;Tel: 810/642-3400, Fax: 810/642-6816) has purchased CMB Industriesof Fresno, CA, the leading producer of sleeve valves and the secondlargest producer of backflow prevention valves in the world.Backflow prevention valves are used in a wide variety of commercialand industrial applications to protect the quality of drinkingwater.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Bone Charcoal, SandClear the WaterTwenty small springs in northeast England are sources of groundwater that is strongly colored by fulvic and humic acids.Chlorination results in the formation of trihalomethanes at levelswell above the standard allowed by the European Community. J. Lewis(Yorkshire Water plc., U.K.) reports that engineers at YorkshireWater had little success at treating the colored water withadvanced technologies. They have now devised a method of using bonecharcoal in combination with slow sand filters.Lewis explains that bone charcoal upgrades sand filtration byremoving turbidity and absorbing color and metals. Activated carbonis not as good at absorbing metals. The Marsett pilot plant uses acommercial bone char material, Brimac, which is more commonly usedin sugar refining. Brimac consists of 10% activated carbon and 90%hydroxyapatite in a 20/60 mesh size, and it has a structure whichprotects it from rapid erosion. The 8 m3/day pilot plant has 3covered slow sand filters followed by chlorination and storage ina service reservoir.Lewis reports in Water & Environmental Management [9-4, 385-395,1995] on the first six months of monitoring the Marsett pilotplant. Lewis found that pH was initially 11 but stabilized belownine within six weeks. The color of the filtered water and THMlevels were consistently much lower than the EC standards. Bonecharcoal was consistently better than sand in removing turbidityand coliforms, but the level of dissolved metals in the groundwaterwas too low to make any comparison.The success of the Marsett pilot plant convinced Yorkshire Water toconvert five other small treatment works to bone charcoalfiltration. Two have dual-media filters with bone char on sand, andthe others have layers of bone char between sand. Their capacityranges from 3-100 m3/day. The thickness of bone char in most casesis 500 mm. All treated colored water, turbidity, and THMseffectively, though spikes as high as 20 Hazen units mark momentarybreakthroughs during exceptional rains at the Marsett plant. Oneplant reduced Al levels from 0.4 mg/l to less than 0.05 mg/l, andtwo reduced Fe levels from as much as 0.7 mg/l to <0.05-0.1 mg/l.Although bone char costs 35 times more than sand, Lewis found thatit actually produced real savings in labor costs because bonecharcoal filters are easier to clean than sand and the bonechar/sand filtration requires less labor at a small plant than amore complex technology. Bone char filters reduce chlorinationcosts by as much as 70%.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Can StructuredWater Be GoodA new product for the gullible health faddists is "Aqua ResonanceAM" from Quorum International Ltd., a network marketing firm thatalso markets Quorum water filtration and Genesis distillationsystems and Biologics nutrition products over the Internet with ahome page listing at http://www.hk.super.net/~gng/aqua.html.Capitalizing on the peculiar properties of water proceeding fromits polar structure and invoking the perennial appeal of thefountain of youth, its distributors say that "Aqua Resonance AM" iswater that has been clustered "to improve metabolic efficiency andnutrient absorption back into the cells of the human body."Using "sophisticated magnetic resonance, laser and ceramictechnology, Dr. Lorenzen has succeeded in producing micro-clusteredwater with the same properties of youthful biowater." It isLorenzen's thesis that cellular water is not like tap water, rainwater, or mineral water because its molecules share hydrogen atomsand cluster in small bunches, delivering nutrients and removingtoxins as they diffuse through cell walls.The movement of cellular water supposedly slows down as we age andno longer performs its metabolic functions as well. Claiming that"the study of cellular signal transduction has for years pointed tothe need for replacement of biowater as we age," the distributorsof Aqua Resonance AM recommend adding one capful to a 0.75 l bottleof distilled water, shaking well, and refrigerating for 8 hoursbefore drinking.Aqua Resonance is, of course, 100% pure water and so concentratedthat a devotee needs only 2 tablespoons per gallon of distilledwater to prepare the most effective mixture. It is available in 4-oz bottles at $34.95 per bottle plus postage and handling fromAqualogics (Tel: 602/780-5588 or email: Gilbert Ng atgng@hk.super.net).Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Daicel IncreasesIt's ProductionAccording to a report in Separation Membrane Business News in Japan(November 1995), published by CHC Corp. (27-4-205 KoshienguchiKita-machi, Nishinomiya 663, Japan), Daicel (1-Teppo-Cho, Sakai,Osaka Prefecture, 590 Japan) will increase its hollow fibermembrane production capacity from 2,000 bundles a year to 20,000bundles by 1997.  Daicel has marketed Molsep (RO and UF membrane)and Pearlcon since 1975 in its separation systems division.  Thosematerials are applied to preparation of ultrapure water,concentration and clarification of fruit juice, and separation andpurification of enzymes and pharmaceuticals.  Four new productionlines for hollow fiber membrane will be located in the HimejiPlant.Daicel underwent a reorganization last year, and established a newcompany, Daicen, in cooperation with Central Filter to carry outmarketing and maintenance of membrane modules and membrane systems.Daicel continues to produce the membrane in a pilot plant in theirresearch center.The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) has askedmajor water system engineering companies to investigate the use ofnovel technology for recycling wastewater.  The technologiesdeveloped are expected to be composites of various operationsincluding reverse osmosis, biological treatment, ammoniaadsorption, activated carbon adsorption, and oxidation.  Thegovernment will provide a process development budget for the next3-4 years, subject to approval by the Ministry of Finance.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Countertop Systemfrom PremierResearchers at Premier Manufactured Systems, Inc. (17431 N. 25thAve., Phoenix, AZ 85023; Tel: 602/931-1977) have developed acountertop reverse osmosis (RO) unit utilizing a membrane thatpermits operation at abnormally low water pressures, typically aslow as 10 psi (U.S. Patent 5,445,729). Tap water pressure at thefaucet typically is less than 40 psi.The RO unit makes do with only one, small and compact, outlet pump.An optional single, or a dual-channel dual-pass, ultraviolet (UV)light source sterilizes filtered inlet, and/or the purified output.Purified water is stored at atmospheric pressure in a simplestorage bag, and is dispensed on demand by force of the outletpump.The entire RO unit-storage bag, pump, filters, UV sterilizer,membrane and all-is packaged in a compact and aestheticallypleasing, cylindrically-shaped housing. The unit can be kept on ahousehold counter top with flow connected to normal householdplumbing-typically to the faucet and drain of a kitchen sink-whileconnected to normal household power.The RO unit is intended for purification of water in the event ofan emergency or power emergency, and is even operative in thecomplete absence of electrical power, such as after an earthquakeor other emergency, by manual disconnection or bypass of its inletsolenoid valve.Back to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Profit MarginsCan Be SlimCertainly automation and improved fabrication techniques help, butthe profit margins for RO have got to be the slimmest of any of themembrane technologies. Back when RO membranes/modules were sellingfor $7 - $10/sq. ft., that was considered cheap compared to anultrafiltration membrane.  Now we hear about some of the home ROmanufacturers talking about $2.50/sq. ft. for simple flat sheetmembrane.  Those big 8" X 40" modules that we grew up with wereusually in the $1000-$1500 range. Now we hear about 8" X 40"modules going for as little as $550.  Of course that may "depend"on a lot of different things, but price cutting seems to be thenorm.There are about 2,200 million gallons per day of installed ROcapacity worldwide.  Most of this capacity is for brackish feeds.About 14% of installed capacity is in sea water RO.  Life cyclesfor general RO modules have been extended from the 1-3 year timespan of the 1980s to the 3.5-4.5 year time span in 1995. Sea waterRO installations seem to add modules on a continual and on-goingbasis to keep water quality up. The replacement market remainsabout 53% of the global sales of membranes and modules or about$100 million worldwide annually out of a total market of $189million.A lot of ownership changes have taken place in the past few yearsand probably a lot more are in the making.  There seems to be adiversity of players and some of the leaders such as FilmTec/Dowmay be seeing their market share declining. Dow probably had over37% of the world's RO market in 1992. Finishing out 1995, Dowprobably has more like 24-25% of the global RO market.U.S. companies once saw an unrivaled dominance for their ROtechnology.  Interesting that as the profit margins shrink, theU.S. companies seem to be gathering up competitors to share in the$189 million membrane/module global RO market. (see table)Competing in the RO MarketplaceDOMESTICFOREIGNDowMemtec (Australia)DSINitto Denko(Japan)DuPontRoChem (Germany)Fluid Systems/Anglican Water Separem (Italy)Hydranautics/Nitto Denko Toray (Japan)U.S. FilterToyobo (Japan)OsmonicsNWW Acumem (England)TriSepBack to Headline List CopyrightWATER TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CALENDARMarch 19-24, 1996, Water Quality Association Convention andExhibition will be held at the Indiana Convention Center inIndianapolis, IN.  Contact: Jeannie Collins at WQA (Tel: 708/505-0160, ext. 210, Fax: 708/505-9637) for more information.May 1-3, 1996, Ultrapure Water Expo '96 will be held in Chicago,IL.  Contact: Miriam Slejko (Tel: 303/973-6700) for additionalinformation.May 20-23, 1996, 7th World Filtration Congress will be held at theTechnical University of Budapest in Budapest, Hungary.  Forinformation, contact: Magyar Kemikusok Egyesulete (Fo u. 68, 1027Budapest, Hungary; Tel: (011) 361/201 6883, Fax: (011) 361/2018056).June 9-12, 1996, Watershed '96 will be held in Baltimore, MD, (Tel:703/684-2400). Call for additional information.July 14-19, 1996, Ion Exchange '96 will be held at ChurchillCollege, Cambridge, England.  Contact: Society of Chemical Industry( Tel: +44(171) 235-3681, Fax: +44(171) 823-1698).July 16-18, 1996, Semicon/West will be held in San Francisco, CA.Contact: Semiconductor Equipment and Materials International (Tel:415/940-6961).Back to Headline List WT03-B37-19IA059-000325-B020-95http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev01.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002552 text/html 45311HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:24:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:20 GMTContent-length: 45122Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/ev01.html Sample Issue Copyright WORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *************** SLANTS & TRENDS *************** (1030 words) ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLION TO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE (660 words) RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENT MARKET TO BE SUBJECT OF NEW STUDY (324 words) UKRAINE RESEARCH FACILITY BOASTS ADVANCED REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY (273 words) EUROPEAN UNION MOVES TO TIGHTEN ENVIRONMENTAL RULES ON PROJECTS (306 words) JAMAICA SEEKS UN FUNDING FOR SEABED PROTECTION (138 words) CANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL FIRM SETS INDONESIA FISHERIES DEAL (148 words) COMPANIES, REGULATORS AGREE ON STRATEGY FOR NEW TESTS (697 words) UNEP VOICES SUPPORT FOR METHODS THAT ENSURE GREATER DIVERSITY (2499 words) CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996***************SLANTS & TRENDS***************EMERGING MARKETS: Although political and economicinstability continues to plague many Central and EasternEuropean countries, interest in the environmental goods andservices markets there continues. Initially off to asomewhat rocky start, many states, especially such EasternEuropean countries as the Czech and Slovak Republics,Hungary and Poland, are adopting Western-style environmentalregulations. Further, privatization of state-held industrieshas put environmental concerns in the hands of individualsrather than often unaccountable bureaucracies. Still,creating a sustainable development ethic is difficult amidhard economic times, analysts say. And without adequatestate funding or enforcement of existing environmental lawsand regulations, the pace of remediation and pollutionabatement programs has been slow.     This issue of WER looks at several facets ofenvironmental protection in Central and Eastern Europe,particularly the problems faced by Russia and its nuclearpower industry. Because of the inherent safety problemsposed by radioactive materials, this sector requiresspecialized environmental engineers and relatively highcosts, often beyond the reach of the former Second World'sdeveloping economies.* * *CHINA TARGETED: While the West focuses much attention onCentral and Eastern Europe, funds also are flowing toCommunist China, where rapid industrialization andpopulation growth continues to plague the environment. TheEuropean Investment Bank just issued its first loan to Chinafor environmentally friendly development of clean-burningnatural gas reserves. The project will help the environmentthrough the distribution of natural gas in Pudong, asatellite city of Shanghai, which will reduce the airpollution caused  by the present use of coal and town gas.The EIB is providing roughly $73 million for the developmentof the Ping Hu offshore field. The $1 billion project isbeing co-financed by the Asian Development Bank, the EximBank of Japan and France.Central/Eastern European News Briefs     Events creating possibilities for sales ofenvironmental goods and services in Central and Eastern Eu-rope are routine occurrences. The following is a snapshot ofenvironmental news stories that occurred just before orafter the New Year.Russia Having Trouble With CFCs     Russia is asking for more time to cut ozone-threateningsubstances. At a major international conference ofgovernment representatives convened in Vienna to review the1987 Montreal Protocol on ozone protection, RussianFederation Environment Minister Viktor Danilov-Danilyan saidRussia needs more time and a larger pool of investment aidin order to develop substitutes to ozone-harming substancessuch as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Under the MontrealProtocol, signed by 150 countries, such industrializedcountries as Russia are to stop producing CFCs by 1996 andthe rest of the signatories by 2010.     Minister Danilov-Danilyan said the Russian Federationis now producing only half the ozone-threatening chemicalsit was in 1987, but he added that the drop was a by-productof the fall in industrial output. The minister was quick topoint out that he and his government would have preferred tobe able to meet the deadline, as other governments aredoing, but that the economic conditions prevailing withinhis country are making it impossible for the principalfactories from even paying their workers, let alone theirtaxes and electric bills. It will be impossible for theRussian government to force such enterprises, even if theyare state-owned (and many are not) to comply with theprotocol when the ministry has no financial capacity tosupport the enterprise's change-over to non-CFC productionor usage.German, Swiss, Finnish Waste     Germany and Switzerland have decided not to send spentnuclear fuel to Krasnoyarsk-26 for processing, KrasnoyarskKrai Deputy Governor Sergei Arinchin was quoted as saying.The waste would have been processed at the RT-2 plant -still under construction - in the formerly secret nuclearcenter in Siberia. The Russian authorities had hoped tofinance the project by accepting foreign waste, enablingthem to process their own stocks. The Swiss and Germanpullout will deal a major blow to the project. The decisionis likely to be hailed by environmental groups, which havestrongly opposed the importation of nuclear materials,arguing that Russia's waste storage sites are alreadyoverflowing.     Meanwhile, a trainload of spent nuclear fuel from aFinnish nuclear power plant reportedly has arrived in Russiafor processing at the Mayak plant in Chelyabinsk-65. AnEnglish translation of the Komsomolskaya Pravda newspapersays it is not yet clear whether the nuclear residue remain-ing after processing will be shipped back to Finland or keptinside the Russian Federation.Nuclear Safety Threatened     Nuclear safety may be threatened by workers at Russia'snuclear power plants, who say they may shut down thefacilities unless they receive overdue wage payments.Officials say they have scheduled warning protests, but itis not clear what form they will take. Energy consumers owenuclear power plants about 2.5 trillion rubles (US$555million), and on average workers have not been paid forthree months, according to the deputy head of Rosenergoatomin Moscow.Assistance from Germany     A German company has signed a contract with Russia'sKursk nuclear power plant to construct a nuclear wastestorage facility and to provide 240 containers to store theplant's radioactive waste. The German Company for NuclearContainers, a Nukem subsidiary, will control productionquality, train specialists and provide the know-how forproduction. According to Gosatomnadzor, Russia's nuclearsafety agency, the solid waste storage facilities at theKursk plant are full.Kazakhstan Troubled     The amount of radioactive waste accumulating at uraniummining and processing plants in Kazakhstan reportedly isreaching alarming proportions. Since this large, very poorCentral Asian country became independent in 1991, thequantity of radioactive waste stored in Kazakhstan has grownto 219 million metric tons. The republic's Ministry ofEcology and Biological Resources claims the aggregateradioactivity from the waste comes to 250,000 curies, whichis "many times more than the accepted norm." Kazakhstan doesnot have the means to deal with the waste because under theSoviet Union's regime disposal was a national responsibilitycarried out by the government in Moscow. Today, there areneither any Kazakh laws nor bilateral agreements with Russiawhich adequately address this type of nuclear waste disposaldilemma.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996ARTHUR D. LITTLE IS AWARDED $7.6 MILLIONTO HELP BELARUS TACKLE DEFENSE WASTE     The international consulting firm Arthur D. Little hasbeen awarded a $7.6 million contract to help the formerSoviet republic of Belarus solve environmental problemsrelated to its former Strategic Rocket Forces (SRF) bases.     The two-and-a-half-year contract from the DefenseNuclear Agency (DNA) is part of the Cooperative ThreatReduction (CTR) Program developed under the l991 Nunn-Lugarlegislation intended to assist the countries of the formerSoviet Union in the elimination, and to prevent theproliferation, of weapons of mass destruction.     Arthur D. Little experts will help Belarus personnel toassess the radiation and conventional environmental damageat sites where intercontinental ballistic missiles werebased, transported, operated, or maintained, and help thecountry restore them for other purposes. In Belarus alone,at the height of the arms race, there were more than 80 SS-25 missiles. Belarus has since declared itself a non-nuclearstate and wishes to return the facilities to civilian use.     Arthur D. Little consultants will integrate a number ofdifferent technical resources within the program to providetraining and technical assistance to the Belarus officialsand experts. The consultants will work with the Belaruspersonnel to analyze the environmental problems at onemissile site and devise a restoration plan, then oversee theBelarus technicians as they do environmental restorationwork at a second site. The ultimate goal is to transferenough knowledge to Belarus so that they can complete theenvironmental restoration work at the remaining sites.     Potential environmental problems include heavy metaland low-level radioactive contaminants, spilled petroleum,spilled liquid rocket fuel, and some minefields around thesites' perimeters which have unexploded ordnances.     As part of the effort to transfer expertise in theenvironmental restoration field, Arthur D. Little willconduct international conferences co-sponsored by DNA andthe Belarus Ministry of Defense. Experts from around theworld will be invited to Belarus to discuss a variety ofenvironmental restoration experiences, technologies, andmanagement issues.     As part of the CTR program, an agreement was signed inl993 between the United States and the Republic of Belarusto assist in development of the Environmental RestorationProject. Other CTR projects in Belarus under Nunn-Lugarinclude assistance in defense conversion, export controlsystems and training, government-to-governmentcommunications links, and emergency response equipment andtraining.     Belarus, located between Poland and Russia, has anespecially high water table and active groundwater movement,which can exacerbate groundwater pollution.     Other organizations involved with Arthur D. Little onthe Environmental Restoration Project include the Army Corpsof Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Los AlamosTechnical Associates, Technology Management Company, theEnvironmental Chemical Corp., the Environmental HazardsSpecialists International, Environmental CareersOrganizations, the World Environment Center, and CleanSites, Inc.     Arthur D. Little, which conducted the largestenvironmental impact assessment ever conducted in the FormerSoviet Union by a Western company, has handled more than3,000 environmental audits and assessments in 30 countriesthroughout Europe and the United States. Headquartered inCambridge, MA., Arthur D. Little has offices around theworld. It provides consulting in three areas: environmental,health, and safety consulting; management consulting; andtechnology and product development.* * *     RUSSIAN NUCLEAR SAFETY: Viktor Mikhailov, Russia'sminister of nuclear energy, announced Jan. 2 that nuclearsmuggling should be the top item on the agenda for the AprilG-7 summit in Moscow. Mikhailov said the summit, devoted tonuclear safety issues, should draft "common procedures" fordealing with nuclear smuggling and tightening control overnuclear materials. He also announced his ministry made $1.65billion from exports in 1995, a significant contribution toRussia's $63 billion in total exports, and not much lessthan the $2.5 billion Russia earned by exporting arms.However, many of the countries that want to purchase Russiancivilian nuclear technology, such as Iran and Cuba, have aquestionable ability to pay for it, casting doubt onMikhailov's prediction that nuclear exports can be boostedto $2 billion by 1998.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996RUSSIAN ENVIRONMENT MARKETTO BE SUBJECT OF NEW STUDY     Arthur D. Little has undertaken a study of the Russianmarket for environmental equipment and services to help U.S.companies determine export potential as that area of theworld rebuilds its economy.     The study, requested by the U.S. Department of Commerceand the American Embassy in Moscow, will determine thepotential for U.S. environmental goods and services inRussia, indicate current and future trends, and highlightthe dominant driving forces and pressing environmentalconcerns in the Russian market.     The information will be used to help U.S. companiesdecide whether and how to compete in the Russianenvironmental services market, and help lay the groundworkfor U.S. government-sponsored trade promotion events.Many Subjects Targeted     Special areas Arthur D. Little consultants will exploreinclude the most pressing environmental needs in air, water,and solid waste pollution control and prevention, and thebarriers that could restrict access to the Russian market byU.S. environmental services firms.     U.S. firms have indicated a growing interest in thepotential for environmental goods and services sales inRussia as more public and private money is invested inrebuilding the economy.Services being assessed include:     l Solid and hazardous waste management;     l Waste site cleanup or construction;     l Pollution abatement in such areas as asbestos, lead,and radon; and     l Environmental consulting and engineering in hazardouswaste, air and water quality, pollution prevention, andenvironmental management.     Equipment markets include:     l Air, water, and solid waste pollution controls;     l Environmental monitoring systems;     l Waste containment, disposal and treatment tech-nologies;     l Thermal technologies;     l Bulk liquid removal; and     l Groundwater collection.     Anthony Montrone, vice president in charge of Arthur D.Little's environmental business strategy practice, and DavidWebb, director of the firm's Moscow office, said Arthur D.Little was chosen because of its long history of helpingcompanies enter international environmental products andservices markets, and its experience addressingenvironmental issues in Russia.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996UKRAINE RESEARCH FACILITY BOASTSADVANCED REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY     Ukraine has recently produced two technologies that maysignificantly facilitate remediation of industrial wastewaters as well as the recycling of used oil and suchcomposite wastes as grinding swarf and certain sludges.     Marketing of the technologies is being handled throughthe Struten Institute, which promotes access to these andother technology-transfer opportunities.     One Ukrainian research institute has developed methodsto produce a semipermeable membrane made of syntheticdiamond, the Struten Institute says. The material may beplaced on a variety of substrates, including ceramics.     The result is a semipermeable membrane that issimultaneously resistant to heat, abrasion and pressure.     In a separate yet linked development, another Ukrainianinstitute has perfected a method for "scrubbing" the surfaceof semipermeable membranes. From a physical chemistry stand-point, it is now possible to continually and economicallystir-up otherwise sedate layers.     The method has so far been applied to polymericmembranes, speeding reverse osmosis pressures as low as 2-5atmospheres, the Student Institute says.     The Struten Institute is a nonprofit organization basedin the United States and geared toward bringing technicallytrained individuals from Ukraine in contact with Westerncompanies.     "This business level, technical contact, mediatedthrough the Struten Institute, is a dividend some businesseswill realize from the fall of communism," the institute saidin a statement.     Differentiating between Ukraine and the RussianFederation, the Struten Institute says it is keen to helpcompanies economically secure research and developmentpartners and tap Ukraine's emerging market of 52 millionpeople.     Contact: Mike Mychajlonka, executive director, StrutenInstitute, PO Box 162, Saline, MI 48176-0162; e-mail:strutinst@aol.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996EUROPEAN UNION MOVES TO TIGHTENENVIRONMENTAL RULES ON PROJECTS     European Union environment ministers have reached apolitical agreement to extend the range of developmentprojects requiring environmental impact assessments (EIAs)before final approval is granted. Meeting in Brussels inlate December, the ministers endorsed proposal COM(93)575,which expands the EIA requirements under directive85/337/EEC.     The move, termed a decade too late, was hailed by manyin the environment industry for opening the door to newgoods and services sales. The revised rules will come intoeffect in January 1998, but only after parliamentaryapproval.     Spanish Transport and Public Works Minister JoseBorrell, who chaired the meeting as EU environmentpresident, said the union now has a complete series of ruleson which investment projects require EIAs. In recent years,EIAs largely have been conducted on an ad hoc basis, have attimes been poor in quality, and recommendations fromstakeholders sometimes have not been followed, EU sourcessay.     Under the new regime, the EIAs will more accuratelyidentify potential environmental problems associated withproposed development projects and give stakeholders,including developers, authorities and the public, ampleopportunity to discuss them, the ministers said in aconcluding statement. Projects plagued by poor EIAimplementation include Britain's Twyford Down transportationproject and Greece's plan to divert the Acheloos River.     The new rules extend mandatory EIAs to such sectors asroad-widening, nonhazardous waste storage facilities, waterwells and management, oil and gas drilling, petroleumpipelines, dams, intensive hog and poultry farming, pulp andpaper factories, open mines and  quarries, overhead powerlines, and chemical storage facilities exceeding 200,000metric tons. EIAs may also be required, but will not bemandatory, for forestry, mineral extraction, energy, metaland chemical processing, food, textiles and  tourismprojects.     Contact: European Commission Environmental Secretariat,Rue de la Loi 200, B-1049 Brussels, Belgium; +32-2-299-11-11; fax: +32-2-295-01-38.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996JAMAICA SEEKS UN FUNDINGFOR SEABED PROTECTION     Kingston asked the United Nations Dec. 26 to restorefunds for the International Seabed Authority, a group thatwould oversee economic activities in international waters.One of the authority's main responsibilities will be tosupervise seabed mining. The move follows a U.N. decision tocut 1996 funding from $2.6 million to $770,000. The rulingalso would eliminate several of the 17 proposed posts.     Although the authority boasts 170 member countries,participants have not been able to decide on who should siton the council or who should serve as the secretary general.The authority will meet next in Kingston in March. Jamaica,which was chosen two years ago as host to the InternationalSeabed Authority.     Contact: Ministry of Public Service and Environment,Citibank Building, 9F, 63-67 Knutsford Blvd., Kingston 5,Jamaica; +1-809-926-3235; fax: +1-809-929-6616.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996CANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL FIRMSETS INDONESIA FISHERIES DEAL     The Canadian firm Epicore Networks Inc. has signed afive-year, $8.75 million contract through its subsidiary PTEnvironmental Network Indonesia Ltd. to supply Sulawesi AgroUtama (SAU) with aquaculture products and technical servicesto support the company's shrimp hatchery and farm operationsin South Sulawesi.     The contract calls on Epicore to help address the manyenvironmental problems that have plagued the Indonesianfacility. Environmental and other problems are said toseriously threaten the $7 billion international aquacultureindustry. "This contract, with a major Indonesian aqua-culture company, confirms the effectiveness of Epicore's"solutions" based strategy," said Chief Executive OfficerIan Fraser.     Epicore uses natural microbes and enzymes that arefriendly to the environment, the company said. Thecorporation's products and services have applications inaquaculture, agriculture and horticulture, cleaning andsanitation and waste water treatment. Contact: Ian Fraser,chief executive officer, Epicore, England, +44-1932-355230.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996COMPANIES, REGULATORS AGREEON STRATEGY FOR NEW TESTS     Multinational companies concerned about the cost ofassessing the environmental and health hazards posed bytheir operations may benefit from a new set of toxicologytest strategies drafted last month. The new methods aredesigned to save time and money, better predict healtheffects of drugs, chemicals, radiation and other substancesand reduce, refine or replace animal use.     The Interagency Coordination Committee on theValidation of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) has issued areport viewed as important to the international environmentcommunity because it should enhance global efforts toharmonize toxicity testing methods. Countries are trying toharmonize methods so health regulators around the world canshare data and make comparable risk assessments.Corporations support the effort which would make it easierto conduct tests accepted throughout the global economy.     More than 150 people discussed a draft report by theICCVAM at a National Toxicology Program workshop held inmid-December. ICCVAM represents 15 U.S. federal agenciesincluding National Institutes of Health, the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Centers forDisease Control, the Department of Energy, the Agency forToxic Substances and Disease Registry and the Department ofTransportation.     ICCVAM designed its report to apply to all proposedtoxicological testing methods for health and ecologicaleffects. New tests could supplement or be alternatives tothe traditional two-year rodent bioassay used in riskassessments and regulatory decisionmaking. New tests couldinvolve transgenic animals, mathematical and computermodels, and in vitro methods, such as test tube or petridish experiments with tissue samples. The new methodologiesshould help agencies better protect human health and safety,said ICCVAM co-chair William Stokes.     The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Devel-opment (OECD), which represents 25 nations, approvesguidelines for new test methods. OECD-member nations mustaccept data generated by tests that followed approved guide-lines, said OECD representative Herman Koeter. OECD expertswill review ICCVAM's report Jan. 22-24 at a workshop onalternative test methods.     ICCVAM's report describes eight criteria agencies woulduse to assess a proposed test method's validity. Forexample, researchers or manufacturers should test the newprocedure on agents similar to the substances to which themethod would be applied. The researchers also should giveagencies a detailed protocol describing the method,materials needed, criteria by which data will be evaluatedand the procedure's limitations. The protocol should bereviewed by an independent scientific panel.     Agencies should consider more than a dozen criteria indetermining whether they should accept a new test method,ICCVAM said. For example, the new procedure should: beapproved by the scientific community; adequately predict theendpoint of interest; be readily transferred amonglaboratories; and generate data that is as good or betterfor hazard identification and/or dose-response assessmentthan the test for which it is proposed to be a substitute.     "The report is excellent," said David Brusick, echoingcomments expressed by many participants. Brusick, CorningHazleton's scientific director, co-chaired one of threepanels making recommendations for the report. He suggestedICCVAM define a formal validation process and highlight itand other key recommendations in tables and flow charts.     Companies, agency scientists and other stakeholdersshould be involved early on and throughout the process ofvalidating and accepting new methods, said PatriciaWilliams, vice president of Glycomed, a biopharmaceuticalcompany. Risk assessors also must be involved to help ensuredata will meet their needs.     Lawmakers and/or private industry should fund ICCVAM ora similar committee to educate regulators about new testmethods, coordinate agencies' actions, and work with theinternational community, several speakers said. Sinceindustry will benefit if these tests are accepted, companiesshould consider funding, through a user fee, efforts toapprove the tests, said Steve Niemi, vice president of theGenzyme Transgenics Corp.Harmonizing testing methods may save firms millions ofdollars annually, Senior Scientist David Neuman, of the IlsiRisk Science Institute later said. Currently, to satisfydivergent requirements, companies may conduct severalexpensive tests that vary in only minor details. Duplicatingtests does little to help researchers or regulatorsunderstand the substance being studied, he said. ICCVAMexpects to issue a final report this summer. Contact: AlmaBritton, +1-919-541-0530.Back to Headline List CopyrightWORLD ENVIRONMENT REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996UNEP VOICES SUPPORT FOR METHODSTHAT ENSURE GREATER DIVERSITY     Local, regional and global initiatives to preservebiodiversity were lauded Dec. 29 by world leaderscelebrating the International Day for Biological Diversity.     In addition to touting the virtues of biodiversity,leaders said companies looking to market their pollutionabatement and remediation goods and services will benefitfrom helping improve public awareness of environmentalproblems.     Summarizing the day's theme was a statement by theUnited Nations Environment Program (UNEP), which saidbiological diversity constitutes the resource upon whichfamilies, communities, nations and future generationsdepend.     (The Convention on Biological Diversity went intoeffect Dec. 29, 1993. The document was signed by 167countries plus the European Union on June 5 1992 and has todate been ratified by 136 states.)     Describing all living creatures as having its place andfunction, the UNEP believes that through thoughtless action,mankind is eroding the Earth's biological capital at analarming rate.     "The world is being impoverished by the loss of itsrichest resources - of forests, wetlands and seas anddepletion of its most fundamental stock - its species, itsecosystems and its habitats," said UNEP Executive DirectorElizabeth Dowdeswell. Further, the loss of every gene,species or ecosystem means a loss of an available adaptiveoption.     Although many countries and industry sectors take forgranted the Earth's natural bounty and resilience, theability of natural systems to bounce back after disruptionis declining. "If the environment is reaching the limits ofits endurance, what can each one of us do to conserve ourplanet's biological capital?" the statement asks.     An active and well-informed public is the best defencefor the environment, UNEP says. "An education that empowersand enables people to seek collectively ways to overcomecurrent destructive trends is a critical component of anysuccessful strategy for achieving a sustainable future.     Toward this ends, UNEP is eager to enlist the supportof indigenous conservation groups, whose indigenousknowledge and wisdom about the environment may well providethe resilience to adapt to the future environmental changes.And, experience has shown that wherever local people havebeen given greater responsibility for managing their ownresources, they have shown both a capacity and a willingnessto conserve.     Sectors that should become more actively involved inpreserving biodiversity include the pharmaceutical industry,agriculture, tourism, fisheries and industries requiring rawmaterials.     The United Nations Environment Program today works tosupport the Convention on Biological Diversity bystrengthening the national and global base of knowledge onbiodiversity.Industry Reaches Out     The Paris-based Association Valentin Hauy hastranslated the Convention on Biological Diversity intobraille and an initial print run of 1,000 English and 1,000French copies were released Dec. 29. The version will bedistributed free of charge to organizations for blind andpartially sighted people around the world.     The Spanish National Organization of the Blind (ONCE)based in Madrid released 200 copies of the Spanish brailleversion plus 200 copies on cassette. The event representsthe first time industry has joined forces with theSecretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity tofinancially support a braille project.     Contributions were made by a number of internationalpartners including: the European Senior Advisory Group onBiotechnology (SAGB), the US-based Biotechnology IndustryOrganization, the Japan Bioindustry Association, theCanadian Pulp and Paper Association and the European-basedGreen Industry Biotechnology Platform. "These contributionsshow industry's commitment to make available the content ofthe convention to as many people as possible, thus sig-nificantly contributing to increasing public awareness -paramount in our drive to promote balanced economic andsocial approaches for the protection of all life forms," thesecretariat said in a statement.     Contact: Robert Bisset, UNEP, Nairobi, tel: +254-2-62-3084; fax: +254-2-62-3692; e-mail: Robert.Bisset@unep.no; orCalestous Juma, Executive Secretary, European SeniorAdvisory Group on Biotechnology, Geneva, tel: +41-22-979-9360; fax: +41-22-797-2512.News Briefs     l AIR POLLUTION - EUROPEAN UNION: The EuropeanCommission plans to introduce two environmental initiativesand to focus on member states' implementation of existingenvironmental laws in 1996. The new initiatives will take onindustrial emissions of VOCs and the waste problems posed byscrapped vehicles. Proposals to increase compliance with ex-isting rules will include revisions to Directive 70/220 tocut air pollution from "not privately owned" motor vehiclesand amendments to Directive 88/77 on pollution from dieselemissions. Also pending are two initiatives for eco-labelingof packaging and packaging waste.     l CLIMATE - FINLAND: Pekka Kauppi of the Finnish ForestResearch Institute has concluded that the U.N. FrameworkConvention on Climate Change's goal of stabilizinggreenhouse gas emissions at 1990 levels is an "unattainable"goal. His warning follows a conclusion by internationalscientists that humans are at least partially responsiblefor climate change.     l ENERGY - AUSTRALIA: Australian Energy Minister TonyMcGrady has announced 49 megawatts of electricity fromburning the sugar industry by-product bagasse will join theQueensland power grid by Jan. 1, 1998. Mills in Invicta,Kalamia, Inkerman, South Johnstone and Maryborough areparticipating. The environmentally friendly technology maybe transferred to the thousands of sugar mills throughoutthe world.     l GROUNDWATER - INTERNET: The International GroundWater Technology magazine can be reached via World Wide Webat http://waternet.com. The company also operates electronicmailing lists for paid subscribers to that publication andanother for subscribers to Water Technology magazine.Contact: Publisher, e-mail: waternet@waternet.com.     Also, a new mailing list named simply Groundwater hasbeen started. To subscribe, send e-mail to:majordomo@ias.champlain.edu. In the body of the e-mail typethe command: subscribe groundwater. To send mail to the listafter you have subscribed, address the mail to: groundwater@ias.champlain.edu. Kenneth Bannister is the list owner.     l MANAGEMENT - INFORMATION: TG International Ltd. ofOttawa, Canada, will conduct a free seminar on improvingcorporate competitiveness through environmental management.The seminar, A Mine From Hell: A Business Approach toEnvironmental Management Issues, will be held Jan. 30 at theOttawa Public Library. The gathering will discuss the CrownButte Mines Inc.'s New World Mine in Montana. The Canadiancompany Noranda Inc. owns controlling interest in the NewWorld Mine. Neither condemning or endorsing the mine, theseminar will present a set of circumstances that will allowparticipants to appraise and discuss a business managementapproach to identifying stakeholders' concerns andoperational environmental issues, organizers say. Contact:Peter Downing, TG International Ltd., PO Box 38120, 1430Prince of Wales Drive, Ottawa, Ontario Canada K2C 1N0;tel/fax: +1-613-225-7204; e-mail: az387@freenet.carleton.ca.     l MARKETING - INTERNET: Companies looking for marketingopportunities in the Eastern and Central Europe may beinterested in a new World Wide Web site established by theSacred Earth Network, a networking service among Western andEurasian Environmental nongovernmental organizations. Thesite is located at http://www.igc.apc.org/sen/."Nongovernmental environmental organizations in the formerSoviet Union play an important role at home and abroad," theorganization said in announcing the site. "Their dedicatedprofessional and volunteer members strive to providereliable information about current conditions and theeffectiveness of remedial or conservation techniques. Asinternational collaboration grows, electronic mail hasbecome vital to the efficient development and implementationof environmental programs." The site includes a directory ofe-mail users.     l MEDICAL WASTE - AUSTRALIA: Too much waste isconsidered infectious, drinking up hospital waste disposalcosts, according to the Australian Medical Association(AMA). The contention was voiced during the Medwaste '95conference sponsored by Griffith University. The AMA saidsurveys show that 60 percent of what is put in hospitalinfectious waste containers, including packaging andflowers, is not infectious. With disposal of infectiouswaste costing three times as much as general waste, the AMAis concerned there is an over-zealous attitude towardinfectious waste. The AMA wants doctors to take the lead indifferentiating truly infectious from ordinary trash. InAustralia, hospitals only generated 0.5 kg of waste perpatient per day 15 years ago and now generate 15 kg. Allhospitals together produce  an  estimated  600,000 kg ofsolidWorld Environment Report wants to provide you with thelatest information on global environmental trends that couldaffect your interests or provide new business opportunities.We welcome your comments and story ideas. Contact theeditor, David Bottorff, at Business Publishers Inc., 951Pershing Dr., Silver Spring, MD 20910-4464, 1-301-587-6300,ext. 3005; fax: 1-301-587-1081; Internet: bottorff@aol.com.waste daily. The buildup is partially due to theintroduction of single-use items, including medication cupsand oxygen masks.     l POPULATION - WORLD: Because population growth and itsdemand on natural resources is one of the leading causes ofenvironmental degradation, countries and internationalinstitutions are looking for ways to integrate familyplanning into long-range sustainable development goals. ThePopulation Institute revealed Dec. 28 that 4.7 billion ofthe world's 5.7 billion residents, or 80 percent, liveoutside the industrialized world. The population innonindustrialized countries will double in between 32 and 36years, compared with 430 years for developed countries,according to the institute's most recent report. Inaggregate, the world's population will double in 40 years.This means that the vast majority of the 100 million newmouths that will enter the world in 1996 will be found incountries least able to meet the demand. As a result, thefragile environment in these countries will suffer greatly,the institute says. Particular problems include excess useof firewood and overfarming of eroding lands.     l PRODUCTS - INTERNET: Magnet Inc. of Seattle, Wash.,has established a World Wide Web site, Better World, topromote environmentally friendly products and informationfor individuals and industry. The site, located athttp://www.betterworld.com, includes a wide range ofenvironmental information, including recycling and wasteminimization. Companies also can post online storefronts fordirect sales, product information, public relationsmaterials, and any other information they wish to convey topotential customers. Contact: MagNet Inc. on the World WideWeb at http://www.magnets.com or Barry HarringtonAssociates, +1-510-376-4109; e-mail: barry.harrington@magnets.com.     l RADIOACTIVE WASTE - ITALY: Italy will receive atleast 7,000 cubic meters of its own radioactive waste,according to the National Agency for the Environment (ANPA).The country had sent it for containment in England in thelate 1960's. Italy is way behind schedule in constructingstorage containers for the waste, said ANPA spokespersonRenata Montesanti. Further, waste in England is the tip ofthe iceberg, says the report, which recommends a creation ofa central government body and national standards tocoordinate radioactive waste management.     l SOLAR ENERGY - ISRAEL: A plan to build a large solarpower facility in Israel is expected to draw a proposal fromAmoco-Enron Solar Power Development Co., in cooperation withIsraeli partners. A report from Israel said Amoco-Enron isworking with the Israeli companies Solel and Ormat Engineson a proposal for a 100-megawatt solar facility for theIsrael Electric Corp. (IEC), but an official of the Houston-based company declined to identify the firms involved. RickBarsky, senior vice president for development at Amoco-EnronSolar Power Development, said he expects a request forproposals for an 80-MW facility to be issued in the firsthalf of 1996. "We intend to look at that RFP and potentiallyto respond to it," he said.     l WASTE - GERMANY: There are at least 240,000 wastesites suspected of polluting the German environment,according to the International Trade Fair for Waste andWaste Water Disposal. The Federal Environment Ministry saidearlier federal and state governments could provide DM24billion to DM30 billion for clean-up in eastern lands by2002. The German Institute for Economic Research in Berlinsaid western Germany needs between 60 billion and DM100billion for cleanups through 2005.     l WATER POLLUTION - GERMANY: A treaty between theGerman Chemical Manufacturers Association (VCI) andRotterdam in The Netherlands aims at reducing industrialpollution of the Rhine River. The agreement affects about 50VCI companies with sites along the Rhine. By 2000, theypromise to cut 1986 levels of zinc by 78 percent, mercury 77percent, chromium 87 percent, copper 69 percent, nickel 64percent, cadmium 58 percent, lead 57 percent and arsenic 2percent. In return, Rotterdam, situated where the Rhineenters the North Sea, will renounce until 2000 any damageclaims against VCI member companies for arsenic, cadmium,chromium, mercury and nickel. The Port of Rotterdam issensitive to pollution of silt, which it must dredge con-tinually.Calendar     Jan. 8-11: Essentia '96: International Technology Forumon the Bridge Between Opportunities in Central and EasternEurope and Partners Worldwide, Prague, Czech Republic. Thisevent will evaluate the current state of technology transferand commercialization, advanced communication andinformation technologies, and environmental protection andrehabilitation. Essentia '96 consists of four parts:research and development market, advanced technology fair,partnership development center, and conferences. Contact:Essentia '96, Technology Park AS CR, Rozvojova 135, 165 02Prague 6, Czech Republic; +42-232-7677, fax: +42-232-5630;e-mail: technopark@icpf.cas.cz.     March 3: CEMP Conference, Workshop & Training Program1995-1996, Aberdeen, Scotland. The programs are organized bythe Center for Environmental Management and Planning (CEMP).The topics to be covered include environmental assessmentand Management, waste management, international courses forthe oil & gas operations, tourism, and environmentalauditing for business. Contact: Center for EnvironmentalManagement and Planning, AURIS Business Center, 23 St.Machar Drive, Old Aberdeen, AB2 1RY, Scotland, UnitedKingdom; +01224-272483; fax: +01224-487658     March 18: International Sustainable DevelopmentResearch Conference, Manchester, United Kingdom. Theconference will examine international dimensions ofsustainable development as well as implementation of Agenda21 at a local level. Contact: The Conference Manager, ERPEnvironment, P.O. Box 75, Shipley, West Yorkshire, BD17 6EZ,United Kigdom; +44-1274-530-408; fax: +44-1274-530-409; e-mail: r.j.welford@hud.ac.uk.     March 19-23: Entsorga, International Trade Fair forRecycling and Waste Disposal, Cologne, Germany. Entsorga '96may appeal to specialists seeking the latest environmentaltechnologies. Contact: Koln Messe, P.O. Box 21 07 60, 50532Koln, Germany; +49-221-8210; fax: +49-221-821-3415.     March 24: Energy & Resources Law '96: 12th AdvancedSeminar, Prague, Czech Republic. Trends in energy, East-Westenergy trade, energy treaties, electricity and theenvironment, recent developments in mining, coalbed methane,and nuclear law will be covered. Contact: International BarAssociation, 2 Harewood Place, Hanover Square, London W1R9HB, England; +44-171-629-1206; fax: +44-171-409-0456.     March 24-27: Environmental Technology, A Course onApplied Technology for Remediation and Purification,Antwerp, Belgium. The objective of this course is to informparticipants with a background in  natural sciences orengineering about the latest scientific developments andlegal issues with respect to the applied techniques forremediation and purification of water, soil, and air.Contact: Isabelle F. Galode, EERO Training Center, P.O. Box182, 6700 AD Wageningen, The Netherlands; +31-317-482-796;fax: +31-317-484-941.     April 10-13: Environmental Chemistry of InorganicPollutants: A Course on Risk Evaluation, Applied Aspects andFundamentals, Nancy, France. This course may helpscientific, industry or government professionals evaluatingrisk issues. Contact: Isabelle F. Galode, EERO TrainingCenter, P.O. Box 182, 6700 AD Wageningen, The Netherlands;+31-317-482-796; fax: +31-317-484-941.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-20IA059-000325-B020-126http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi92.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002722 text/html 92297HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:24:46 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:32 GMTContent-length: 92108Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi92.html Sample Issue Copyright THE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PW, E&Y PLAN JERSEY MOVE TO LIMIT PARTNERS' LIABILITY (568 words) NEW ORGANISATION CREATED AS CKL AND IAA MERGE (316 words) UK: COURT REJECTS NAMES' ACTION AGAINST LITTLEJOHN FRAZER (351 words) DUBLIN'S MCGRATH & CO FORMS ALLIANCE WITH BELFAST PRACTICE (294 words) ICAEW/CIMA MERGER TO COST 130 JOBS (569 words) FORMER BDO PARTNERS STUNNED BY RULING (480 words) ACCA MAY ADOPT A FEDERAL STRUCTURE (562 words) COMMITTEE SET UP TO REVIEW CADBURY CODE (471 words) US TO CRACK DOWN ON PENSIONS FRAUD (496 words) ACCOUNTANTS ADVISED TO BROADEN HORIZONS (487 words) PRACTICE PROTECTION EATS INTO KPMG AUSTRALIA FEES (218 words) GRANT THORNTON EXPANDS IN UK WITH NEW FIRM (301 words) NEWS BRIEF TOUCHE ROSS HEADS GROUP BID FOR MILLENIUM CONTRACT (137 words) HLB SIGNS UP KRESTON MEMBER IN SINGAPORE (252 words) BEWARE OF THE `FAT CAT' OBSESSION (1068 words) INTERVIEW PUSHING FOR CHANGE (1084 words) IS INCORPORATION THE ANSWER? (1111 words) FEATURE PROFESSIONAL SURVIVAL (2165 words) SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESS (3130 words) CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PW, E&Y PLAN JERSEY MOVE TO LIMIT PARTNERS' LIABILITYPRICE WATERHOUSE and Ernst & Young in the UK have announced plans tochange their legal status to limited liability partnerships (LLPs) andto take their businesses off shore to Jersey.The move is designed to protect partners' personal assets in the eventthat a firm is successfully sued for negligence. Currently, like mostother UK accounting practices, the firms trade as unlimited liabilitypartnerships.The move to LLP status, which cannot be done under UK law, would becomepossible due to planned changes to Jersey law by the island'sgovernment. In a statement issued on December 11, Jersey'sParliamentary Finance and Economics Committee said it will propose abill to the island's Parliament permitting the creation of LLPs. Thegovernment is keen to promote Jersey as an offshore financial servicescentre.Under the proposed law, the partnership would remain totally liable forall the firm's debts, but individual partners who are not responsiblefor a particular negligent act would have their personal assetsprotected from debts arising from that negligence.Each LLP would be required to have at least one general partner and allLLP assets would be available to creditors. In addition, the LLP wouldbe required to provide a #5 million financial provision, a sort ofbond, for judgments against the partnership. The draft law will bedebated in Jersey's Parliament, the States of Jersey, during the firstquarter of 1996. If approved, it will then go to the Privy Council forsanctioning and is expected to be operative by year-end."We are actively considering whether adoption of the limited liabilitypartnership structure is appropriate for the UK practice," said E&Ysenior partner Nick Land. "Initial consultation with a small number ofclients and all of our partners has produced a very positive reaction."The firms' partnership culture would continue within the UK and therewould be no change to their UK taxation arrangements. The Jersey optionis claimed to be cheaper than the incorporation route chosen recentlyby KPMG (TA 5902). A senior partner at one of the firms estimates thesaving could be as much as 10 percent of pre-tax profits compared withthe cost of KPMG's chosen route.Accountants are not the only ones who stand to benefit from the new lawin Jersey. Other professionals, including solicitors, architects andsurveyors, will be able to establish partnerships on the island.Practices in other countries could also relocate to Jersey."At the moment, if you are found to be liable for negligence then youare liable for everything, no matter what one's contribution to thatnegligence might have been," said Ian Brindle, senior partner at PW.All the Big Six have been working with the Institute of CharteredAccountants in England and Wales to get the UK Government to change theprinciple of joint and several liability contained in the Companies Actof 1985. "This can't happen overnight," Brindle said. "These thingstake time and time is not necessarily on our side." In the meantime,the firms need a way to protect themselves from "Armageddon", he said.Brindle described the UK's current limited liability law forpartnerships, which was created in 1907, as"not relevant to moderntimes". Like joint and several liability, time-consuming primarylegislation would be needed to change it, he said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ORGANISATION CREATED AS CKL AND IAA MERGECKL INTERNATIONAL, the network that lost two of its founding members inthe space of a year, has agreed to merge with International AccountingAssociates (IAA) and its US affiliate, the Continental Association ofCPA Firms (CACPA).The agreement was finalised in mid-November and takes effect on January1. The merger is expected to create a network of 130 accounting andconsulting firms, with offices in 58 countries and annual revenues ofover $400 million (#260 million). Total staff is put at 6,700.The new organisation will be known as AGN (Accountants Global Network)International. Its board will be comprised of six representatives fromCKL and six from IAA-CACPA. CKL chief executive Nick Blake will remainin that role at AGN.The network will be divided into four regions: Asia/Pacific,Europe/Africa/Middle East, Latin America and North America, where AGNexpects to have its strongest presence.CKL has been in trouble since its UK firm and founding member ClarkWhitehill quit to join Horwath International (TA 5890) in September1994. It eventually signed up the smaller firm Levy Gee as areplacement (TA 5894).Things got worse earlier this year when another founding member, USfirm Kenneth Leventhal, merged with Ernst & Young, taking with itannual fees of $195 million (TA 5897). CKL firms in Belgium, Israel,Greece and Denmark have also left within the last 18 months.IAA, with headquarters in Engelwood, Colorado, had revenues of $193million in 1994. CACPA, a group of 26 firms in the US, accounted forabout $150 million of that total.Whether all of CKL's members will go along with the merger is still notclear. South African firm Levitt Kirson is known to be considering amove to Nexia International, although no decision had been made as TAwent to press.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UK:  COURT REJECTS NAMES' ACTION AGAINST LITTLEJOHN FRAZERA #200 MILLION negligence suit brought by investors in the Lloyd's ofLondon insurance market against Littlejohn Frazer has been thrown outof court.Littlejohn was being sued in the High Court over its audits of theGooda Walker syndicates at Lloyd's, which ran up losses of almost #1billion in the late 1980s and early 1990s.In October 1994, 3,000 Lloyd's investors, or Names, won damagesestimated at about #400 million from the agency that managed theirinsurance underwriting (TA 5890).The Names then sued the auditor, claiming that the syndicates' accountshad disguised underwriting losses by overstating the value of theirinvestments. The Names said they would not have invested in later yearshad they known of the losses.The High Court decided that the precedents established in the 1990Caparo case applied. Whether or not Littlejohn was negligent inauditing the syndicate was irrelevant as no duty of care was owed tofuture investors at Lloyd's.The case is a setback to attempts by Lloyd's to organise a market-wideout-of-court settlement of the litigation that has dogged the marketfor the last three years. Names are seeking damages for the estimated#11 billion of losses run up by the market since 1988. There is nowless pressure on the auditors to contribute to the proposed #2.8billion settlement fund (TA 5898).Littlejohn senior partner Alastair Campbell said:"The judgment makesclear the losses were not caused by the auditors, even if there hadbeen negligence by the auditors, which is something we hotly dispute."The case related to losses run up on Gooda Walker syndicates 290 and164's 1989 years of account. Littlejohn now plans to apply to haveanother case struck out in relation to syndicate 387, where a claim forabout #80 million has been made by the Gooda Walker Names. Two othercases, where a total of #8 million is being claimed, will continue to afull hearing.The Names are expected to appeal the High Court decision.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DUBLIN'S MCGRATH & CO FORMS ALLIANCE WITH BELFAST PRACTICEMCGRATH & Co, the Republic of Ireland member of accounting network ACPAInternational, has established a formal association with Belfast firmMTF to cope with its growing need for representation in NorthernIreland.McGrath has worked with MTF on a number of projects since the NorthernIrish peace process began 15 months ago. Although McGrath previouslycovered the entire island for ACPA, an increase in outside investmentin the north, particularly from the US, has created the need for arepresentative firm there."The peace process has set it all in motion," said Tom Kavanagh,managing partner at McGrath. "We've already seen a rise in inwardinvestment and this can only increase."McGrath was attracted to MTF because of its specialty in mergers andacquisitions, an area in which the Dublin firm is not particularlystrong. One of MTF's partners, Michael Townsley, already does some M&Awork in the south, and McGrath hopes to develop this.Although MTF is not a member of ACPA it will do any referral work toNorthern Ireland in co-operation with the Dublin firm. According toKavanagh, McGrath gets"regular work" from ACPA, mostly in the taxsector, although this does not make up a large portion of its feeincome.McGrath reported revenues of IR#1.75 million (#1.8 million) in 1995,putting it 17th in the Irish league tables (TA 5902). Kavanaghestimates that MTF's revenues for 1995 were about IR#750,000. Combinedrevenues at both firms are expected to reach IR#2.7 million in 1996.McGrath, which operates out of one office, has five partners and atotal staff of 45. MTF, also a one-office firm, has three partners anda total staff of 25.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ICAEW/CIMA MERGER TO COST 130 JOBSSOME 130 jobs are expected to go as part of a cost-cutting exercise ifthe proposed merger between the Institute of Chartered Accountants inEngland and Wales (ICAEW) and the Chartered Institute of ManagementAccountants (CIMA) goes ahead.Details of the cost cuts were revealed in the prospectus for themerger, which was published in early December after being approved bythe governing councils of both bodies.The new organisation, to be known simply as the Institute of CharteredAccountants, has budgeted to save 20 percent of the combined costs ofthe two existing bodies, which employ 630 people between them. ICAEWchief executive Andrew Colquhoun said efficiencies will be possible asa result of the inevitable duplication of services currently beingprovided by the two bodies.Colquhoun said the job cuts will be phased in over five years. Heexpects few compulsory redundancies since staff turnover at the ICAEWis currently running at 10 percent to 15 percent.The savings will allow the institute to reduce its #138 annualsubscription fee by #20, bringing it closer into line with the #110currently charged by CIMA.However, Colquhoun denied that cost savings are the main motive behindthe merger. "We are not promoting this on the financial issue," hesaid. "We are promoting this because the environment for the professionis becoming harder and we believe we can serve the interests ofaccountants better by being bigger."The new institute will offer two types of qualification: one aimed atthose training in public practice, who will continue to be known as"chartered accountants"; and the other for those working in industry,who will bear the title "chartered management accountant". The PrivyCouncil granted CIMA members the right to use the "chartered"designation in early December.There will be a four-stage education syllabus, consisting of twofoundation levels, an intermediate and a final level. Students will betime barred if they do not pass their final examinations within sevenyears of starting the foundation course. Students will be able toaccumulate examination credits at all levels except the final level.The "England and Wales" part of the current ICAEW name will be droppedin an attempt to give an international image to the new body. The planinvolves actively marketing the new qualifications abroad incompetition with the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants."This is not marketing for its own sake, but we believe we can offer ahigh quality qualification around the world," Colquhoun said."They willhave to meet the standards we have here in the UK, but we do thinkthere is a market out there for our qualification."The new institute will have nine regions in England and Wales, each ofwhich will be able to elect six members to the new council; three fromindustry and three from practice. The exception will be London whichwill elect 14 members.There will be further elections in Scotland, Ireland and in regionsaround the world such as Malaysia, Hong Kong and South Africa.The merged institute will have 150,000 members - 109,000 from ICAEW and41,000 from CIMA.Members of both institutes are expected to vote on the merger proposalin April or May.(See page 8 for interview with CIMA president Allan McNab)Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FORMER BDO PARTNERS STUNNED BY RULINGFORMER PARTNERS of BDO Binder Hamlyn have been stunned by a High Courtruling which holds them liable for damages, interest and costs of #105million, arising from the 1990 take-over of one of the firm's auditclients.The damages of #65 million are believed to be the highest ever awardedagainst a UK accounting firm and have added new urgency to auditors'search for liability protection.During the court case, counsel for Binder said the firm had insurancecover of #71 million, leaving #34 million of the award to be met fromthe partners' personal assets. With between 120 and 150 partnersbelieved to be involved, the average bill could be as high as #280,000per partner.The suit related to an agreed bid by electronic security company ADTfor Britannia Security Group in 1990. ADT paid #105 million forBritannia, basing the price on accounts for fiscal 1989 which had beenaudited by Binder.Following the acquisition, ADT discovered that Britannia's 1989 profitswere #3.2 million, not #8.7 million as stated, and that its net assetswere less than half the #36.5 million shown in the accounts. ADT waseventually forced to write off its investment and filed suit againstBinder in 1992.The judge in the case found that Binder had been negligent in its auditof Britannia, and that, crucially, the firm owed a duty of care to ADTbecause of remarks made by Martyn Bishop, the partner who signed off onthe accounts, at a meeting with ADT officials in January 1990.At that meeting, held shortly before the bid was announced, Bishop wasasked if he stood by his opinion that Britannia's fiscal 1989 accountsgave a true and fair view of the company's financial health. Bishopreplied that he did.Binder argued that this "off the cuff remark" in no way constituted aduty of care to ADT. It said it had not entered into any agreement,verbal or otherwise, to advise ADT, nor had it been paid for anyadvice. The firm cited the landmark Caparo ruling of 1990, which heldthat auditors do not owe a duty of care to third parties, regardless ofwhether they are negligent.Binder has pledged to appeal against the decision and is confident thatit will succeed in overturning the verdict."The firm is certain thatthe Caparo principles apply," a spokesman said.BDO Binder Hamlyn ceased trading in October 1994, when the bulk of thefirm merged with Arthur Andersen (TA 5887). Other Binder offices mergedwith Stoy Hayward, the current BDO representative in the UK, while someof the partners joined other accounting firms or went into industry.Binder Hamlyn is still trying to determine exactly how many partnersare liable in the Britannia case.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCA MAY ADOPT A FEDERAL STRUCTURETHE CHARTERED Association of Certified Accountants (ACCA) looks set tobow to pressure from radical East London University professor PremSikka to reform the way the body is governed.Chief executive Anthea Rose put forward proposals at an ACCA councilmeeting in early December to disband the current London- based counciland replace it with a federal structure. This will take greater accountof the rights of the association's 18,000 overseas members - 40 percentof the total - who Sikka has argued are effectively disenfranchised.The proposed structure devolves power to a number of new regionalcouncils, which will in turn report to an international committee. Adiscussion document outlining the proposals was sent to all ACCAmembers on December 15.An ACCA source said: "It is true the way our council is structuredmakes it very difficult for members to play a meaningful role if theylive on the other side of the world. Instead, we are to propose someform of devolution with a federal structure."The powers to be devolved will be debated in the discussion document.It is thought unlikely that the regional councils will have any controlover the examination syllabus. Powers to be devolved could includedirect dealings with regional governments and the issue of guidance andadvice on local auditing accounting and taxation matters.The changes follow criticism by Sikka that the ACCA is undemocratic.His call for the association's president to be directly elected by themembership received widespread support at an extraordinary generalmeeting in September. Nearly 3,000 of the 10,000 members who votedbacked the proposal (TA 5901).The ACCA is not ruling out direct presidential elections, but a changeto the current practice of having the president elected by the councilis not part of the latest proposals.Sikka has been in a long-running conflict with the association. He hastaken his campaign for reform to Parliament, where he has won thesupport of Labour MP Austin Mitchell.While Sikka said he supports the new federal system, he insisted thatthe proposals do not go far enough. He called for more transparencywithin the ACCA, open council meetings, access to agenda papers andminutes, and repeated his call for direct elections to key positions."Basically, the people who are leading the organisation need to bemandated," he said.Meanwhile, the ACCA's application to change its name to the Associationof Chartered Public Accountants has been turned down by the PrivyCouncil, the body which must approve all changes to an organisation'sRoyal Charter.In a letter to the ACCA, the council said it objected to the use of theword "public" in the proposed name. However, it had no problem with theuse of the term "chartered".In submissions to the council, the Institute of Chartered Accountantsin England and Wales argued that the name change would cause confusionwith the certified public accountant designation used in the US.Mitchell argued that the ACCA did not act sufficiently in the publicinterest for it to merit the title"public".The ACCA has been asked to come up with a new proposal and expects toput forward a new name for its members to vote on in the near future.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMMITTEE SET UP TO REVIEW CADBURY CODETHREE YEARS after the Cadbury Committee published its landmark code onthe financial aspects of corporate governance in the UK, a new body isto examine how far compliance with the code has progressed and toconsider whether it needs updating.Headed by ICI chairman Ronnie Hampel, the Committee on CorporateGovernance will have 12 members drawn mostly from commerce andindustry. They include David Simon, chairman of British Petroleum, andNorthern Foods' chairman Christopher Haskins. The only representativeof the accountancy profession is Coopers & Lybrand chairman PeterSmith.The committee's sponsors include the Financial Reporting Council, theLondon Stock Exchange, the Confederation of British Industry, and theConsultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies.Apart from reviewing compliance with the Cadbury recommendations,Hampel's committee will also take account of the so-called Greenburyproposals in the controversial area of directors' pay (see page 7).Hampel is anxious that the push to clean up British boardrooms will notlead to a host of new restrictions on business."There is much debate about the pace of change in corporate governanceand it is my intention that the committee will take appropriate time -and consult widely - before reaching any conclusions on all aspects ofits remit," he said."Above all, we must enhance, not inhibit, theprospects for UK business in an increasingly-competitive globalmarketplace."The Cadbury report's recommendations included a proposal that companydirectors should report on the effectiveness of their system ofinternal financial control and on whether the business can continue totrade as a going concern; that audit committees be comprised solely ofexternal directors; and, in effect, that the role of chairman and chiefexecutive should be separated.The establishment of Hampel's committee comes at a time when a spate ofcorporate scandals has led to growing international concern overcorporate governance. In July, France tackled the issue with the VienotReport, which recommended a greater role for independent directors andboard sub-committees to deal with the annual audit and the appointmentand remuneration of directors.On a wider scale, the International Capital Markets Group (ICMG) hascalled for more transparent reporting of corporate governance processesby large listed companies across the globe. Founded as a co-operativeventure by the world's legal and accountancy professions, the ICMG madeits call after analysing the main corporate governance issues arisingin the world's six biggest economies in a report titled, Who holds thereins?.In its review of corporate governance practices in Japan, Germany,France, the US, Canada and the UK, the ICMG found some evidence ofconvergence. But it concluded that entrenched cultural and legaldifferences mean that the world is not yet ready for common rules toimprove corporate governance.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996US TO CRACK DOWN ON PENSIONS FRAUDUS AUDITORS could be required to report financial irregularities in acompany's employee pension funds, if proposed legislation is approvedby Congress.The Labor Department, which is investigating hundreds of companiessuspected of illegally dipping into their employees' pension funds, isworking closely with the American Institute of Certified PublicAccountants (AICPA) to reach agreement on the language in the bill.The legislation has been around for years in one form or another. But,even though it would increase government regulation of the work ofauditors, "chances for passage are stronger now than ever before",according to Richard Steinberg, a member of the AICPA's employeebenefit plans committee and chairman of its emerging issues task force.The proposed measure was given new life after the Labor Departmentfound evidence of an increase in pension plan fraud. The department hascivil and criminal investigations in progress against 300 companies fordiverting funds from 401(k) plans, tax- deferred savings accounts setup by employers. Its caseload is at least triple what it was one yearago.In some cases, auditors have found that companies failed to make goodon their obligations to match employee contributions as required byfederal law. In other cases, companies not only reneged on theirobligations, but also diverted employee contributions withheld fromweekly pay cheques.In the largest Labor Department case, Coleman American, based inDothan, Alabama, allegedly withheld several months' worth ofcontributions to its 401(k) plan affecting 200 employees. Confronted byregulators last summer, the company's owner paid the $607,893 that wasdue. In another case, a Wisconsin firm diverted $12,354 incontributions from a plan covering 23 employees before closing itsdoors.The 300 Labor Department enforcement cases represent less than 0.5percent of the more than 140,000 active 401(k) pension plans, whichhave become popular because they limit employer obligations to retireesand make it easier for workers to take their benefits with them whenthey switch jobs. Money contributed to such plans is tax deferred.Steinberg, who heads Coopers & Lybrand's benefit plan audit practice inNew York, said the Labor Department began a programme last spring toeducate companies on their responsibilities regarding employee benefitplans. "Only recently has Labor Secretary Robert Reich become veryassertive in emphasising the need for a stronger hand. The emphasisseems to have shifted from education to something much tougher andproactive."According to Steinberg, the Labor Department probe focuses on threekinds of pension cost discrepancies: companies that do not understandthe law; companies that use the benefit funds to solve temporaryfinancial problems; and companies that are committing direct theft ofassets or fraud. "The third group of companies appears to be thesmallest group," he said.If an auditor finds evidence of fraud,"he must identify it on theauditor's schedule or take exception in the auditor's report",Steinberg said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCOUNTANTS ADVISED TO BROADEN HORIZONSACCOUNTANTS MAY be skilled in auditing and tax advice, but they need toacquire a more general knowledge of the world around them to compete inthe global marketplace.That's the view of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC),the worldwide professional body, which has just issued a draft revisionto its guidelines on education. The new guidance is aimed at ensuringthat accountancy students will be able to cope with such issues as theglobalisation of business enterprises, the relaxation of trade rulesand growing regulatory pressures."We're putting greater emphasis on general knowledge rather than stricttechnical knowledge," said Milou Kelley, manager of IFAC's educationcommittee. "We want accountants to develop a broad base of knowledge inthe arts, sciences and humanities that will make them better able tolook at international issues in wider perspective."The issues that face professional accountants have become much morecomplex. They need to be able to look at complex transactions and knowwhat is involved so that they can become good decision-makers andbetter problem-solvers," she said.IFAC is less concerned about accountants' ability to apply accountingrules than about their ability to deal with a situation where nostandards exist. "Once the standards are set, that's the easy part,"Kelley said."We're trying to remove all of the layers surrounding complex issues,such as changes in technology," she explained. "Our standards aredesigned to deal with real life."The new exposure draft revises its International Education Guideline 9,Prequalification Education, Tests of Professional Competence andPractical Experience of Professional Accountants. It recommends thataccounting curriculums place greater emphasis on the development ofintellectual, interpersonal and communication skills, and it stressesthe need for curriculums to help students become committed to highethical values and standards."This draft guideline continues to develop our thinking on educationfor the year 2000 and beyond," said Cecil Donovan, chairman of the IFACeducation committee."Comments and reactions are very important to us atthis stage."The comment period extends to May 31 1996, to give IFAC member bodiesand others sufficient time to comment on the issues raised in thedocument.Since 1977, IFAC has represented accountants on an international level.Its membership is comprised of the American Institute of CertifiedPublic Accountants (AICPA) in the US and more than 100 similar groupsfrom 80 countries.IFAC's education committee has just issued two pronouncements relatingto information technology: International Education Guideline 11,Information Technology in the Accounting Curriculum and the discussionpaper, Integrating Information Technology Across The AccountingCurriculum: The Experience of the Certified General AccountantsAssociation of Canada.Guideline 11 establishes a framework for devising an informationtechnology curriculum, including the skills required by an accountantwho uses information technology, manages information systems, designsbusiness systems or evaluates information systems.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PRACTICE PROTECTION EATS INTO KPMG AUSTRALIA FEESKPMG'S AUSTRALIAN firm paid out about 7 percent of total fee income forpractice protection, including professional indemnity insurance, duringfiscal 1995.According to KPMG's 1995 annual report - the first of its kind to bereleased by a major Australian firm - practice protection cost morethan A$21 million (#10.5 million) in the year to June. Total fee incomerose 6 percent to A$301 million.The firm said that since risk management procedures are now takingeffect, practice protection costs have peaked. "One of the board's mainobjectives is to halve this cost but it must be recognised that, givenour past claims record, this will take some years to achieve," thereport said.A breakdown of fees showed that consulting revenues rose 37 percent toA$32 million. Audit and corporate finance, the mainstay of KPMG'sbusiness, grew 3 percent to $120 million, while corporate recoveryrevenues fell 13 percent to A$12 million.The firm's gross contribution percentage - fees less labour costs - was53.1 percent of fee income, compared with 53.5 percent the year before.In the report, which did not reveal profits, KPMG chairman JohnHarkness said revenues are expected to rise 4 percent in the currentfiscal year.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRANT THORNTON EXPANDS IN UK WITH NEW FIRMGRANT THORNTON in the UK has continued its expansion programme with theaddition of a two-partner firm which has served London's Polishcommunity since 1955.The ten employees at Potworowski Kinast joined Grant Thornton's WestLondon office on December 1. Potworowski's Polish office has been amember of Grant Thornton International since 1993 and will continue topractise as Potworowski Kinast Grant Thornton.The firm has annual revenues of about #500,000. One of the partners,managing partner Tad Potworowski, is based in London, the other inPoland.Grant Thornton country managing partner David McDonnell said his firmhas supplied Potworowski with training and support since the Polish armjoined GTI some years ago. "The intention always was that the [Londonfirm] would join us at some stage," he said.Acquiring Potworowski, with its strong roots in the Polish community,ties in with the West London office's strategy of targeting certainethnic groups in the capital, McDonnell said.The latest deal brings to eight the number of firms which have mergedwith Grant Thornton in the last 18 months. In October, it acquiredVandenburghs, another London firm whose three partners were retiring.That firm had revenues of about #800,000."We are actively seeking further acquisitions over the next year,"McDonnell said. Grant Thornton is in preliminary talks with a number oflocal firms, none of which are linked to a national network, he said.Grant Thornton's revenues rose 6.5 percent to #114 million in the yearto March 1995. Excluding the firm's insolvency business, organic growthfor the current year is forecast at 7 percent to 8 percent. Insolvencyfees are likely to shrink by about #3 million from #24 million lastyear, McDonnell said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOUCHE ROSS HEADS GROUP BID FOR MILLENIUM CONTRACTTOUCHE ROSS is heading a consortium which is bidding to run the UK's#400 million Millenium Festival, planned for the year 2000.The consortium, called M2000, also includes MAI, the televisionfranchise owner, construction company Bovis and property groupStanhope. Touche's role will be as project manager.The festival will be held at a site in Greenwich and is expected toattract 50 million visitors over its one-year duration.Three rival bids appear to be less comprehensive than the M2000proposal. They include a site at the Birmingham National ExhibitionCentre, which is backed by a promised #50 million from the localcouncil. The other two bids appear to have failed to win any seriousbacking and are almost certainly out of the running.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HLB SIGNS UP KRESTON MEMBER IN SINGAPOREHLB INTERNATIONAL has strengthened its newly-formed Asia-Pacific regionby signing up Loke Lum & Partners, a two-partner firm which waspreviously a member of Kreston International.Kreston, meanwhile, has linked with David Yeung & Co, a one- partnerunaffiliated practice.Loke Lum, which became a full member at HLB's annual conference inMexico in November, has revenues of about $3 million (#4.7 million) andemploys 50 staff. It has already referred work to HLB members inAustralia, Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia and Hungary.As a result of the link with Loke Lum, HLB has cut its ties with FooKon & Tan, a correspondent firm it shared with Grant Thornton. No feeincome figure is available for Foo Kon, which is nearly three timesbigger than Loke Lum in staff terms.HLB chief executive Peter Frost said: "Asia-Pacific is a keydevelopment area for HLB, targeted for significant expansion in thefuture, and we are delighted to appoint a new representative for thegroup in Singapore."As part of a general restructuring, HLB established a formal Asia-Pacific regional committee at the annual conference. Daniel Loke,senior partner of Loke Lum, is one of four members of the council.Chris Flint, Kreston's international secretary, said Loke Lum'sdeparture was not a total surprise, and his group "acted quickly" toplug the gap. David Yeung & Co has revenues of $1 million and employsaround 40 staff.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BEWARE OF THE `FAT CAT' OBSESSIONSome of the Big Six are committed to disclosure of directors' pay aspart of their plans for incorporation. William Gleeson wonders if theyknow what they've let themselves in forWARM BEER, cricket and an obsession with directors' pay. There are somethings people from other parts of the world will never fathom about theBritish. When KPMG publishes its results for fiscal 1995 at the end ofJanuary, the main focus of the press will be on the pay of what TheTimes has already dubbed the biggest "pride of fat cats" to be revealedat one time.Colin Sharman, the firm's senior partner, could be forgiven forregretting the public fascination with the issue. Speculation about hissalary has been rife, with some estimates putting it as high as #1million - although KPMG denies the figure will be anywhere near thislevel.Nevertheless, there is known to be a big difference between what new,young KPMG partners are paid and the salaries of top people at thefirm, particularly in the southeast of England.Hardly a day goes by without a UK national newspaper publishing detailsof what a listed company pays its directors. Reporters are sent up anddown the country by business news editors keen to beat the competitionto the latest "fat cat" revelations.Annual reports are scrutinised for details of the "directors'emoluments". During a hostile take-over bid, a close eye is kept on thevarious offer and defence documents for details of boardroom pay. Theofficial stock exchange news service is examined daily forannouncements of changes in directors' shareholdings in their owncompany, in case it reveals the award or cashing in of share options.But a question mark must hang over whether all this is good for Britishbusiness. It is arguable that, with a few exceptions, the furorecreated every time a director does well for himself may end up damagingthe company he works for.The advertising industry is a case in point.When Martin Sorrell, the chief executive of WPP, sought to getshareholder approval for changes to his pay package, he met withimmense opposition. The big guns from the City institutions came outagainst the deal. The press had a field day.True, Sorrell was after a lot of money. The package could have beenworth almost #30 million over six years. But he argued that similardeals were given to rival advertising agency bosses around the world.At one stage, Sorrell threatened that if he did not get his way, hewould take his agency lock, stock and barrel to the US. In the end, acompromise was reached, which allowed Sorrell to take a lot of moneyaway if the company met certain earnings growth targets.But things were not amicably resolved at what was Saatchi & Saatchi.Maurice Saatchi found shareholder opposition to his pay deal so strongthat he was forced to leave the company. In doing so he took half ofthe agency's best creative staff with him. Now, another business hasbeen created and is doing well having poached a significant number offormer Saatchi clients.The issues are more complex in the case of the privatised utilities.These were once regarded as bureaucratic edifices staffed by careercivil servants who never thought they would earn more than #50,000 ayear.After privatisation, the likes of British Gas chief executive CedricBrown saw their salaries take off. Brown earned #275,000 in fiscal1995. Then British Gas proposed that for the current fiscal year, hisbasic salary should be increased to #475,000. Add to that a share bonusworth 125 percent of the basic - that's #590,000 - and Brown is set toearn over #1 million this year. Not bad for a man who just a few yearsearlier was an unaspiring career civil servant.But, as legitimate as the public interest is in British Gas, it is hardto see the interest the public could have in the pay of a seniorpartner at a chartered accountancy firm. How the firm's profits aredoled out is surely a private matter between the senior partner and therest of the partnership.Even more of a mystery is that since the accounting firms are notrequired to reveal this level of detail, why are they doing it? UnderUK law, KPMG will only be required to disclose directors' pay for KPMGAudit Plc, the incorporated part of the business. But, the firm hassaid that it will go further and disclose full audited accounts for thepartnership.Ernst & Young, which is considering becoming a limited liabilitypartnership (see page 1), is also going further than it needs to. Ithas said it will reveal the pay of the management committee that runsthe firm and the pay of all its partners.This information will be presented in a table which will band theremuneration of the partners in #5,000 steps, as is the practice in UKcompany accounts. Yet who, other than the curious, will benefit fromsuch disclosure?The media hype has the effect of introducing an anti-success culture.This in turn can prevent people from aspiring to become what some mightderide as a "fat cat", but what others would describe as a success inbusiness.The accounting firms have long kept a close secret of what theirpartners earn. The average Big Six partner is undoubtedly on close to#200,000. Making that known could damage accountants' calls forprotection from liability. The massive damages against BDO BinderHamlyn has undoubtedly provoked some public sympathy towards theprofession (see page 3), but how long will that last when it is knownwhat partners earn?The publicity could be destructive to the profession in other ways.Revealing that, despite the cost of litigation, partners are allwealthy, may provide an excuse for some clients to try and force feesdown further.Another factor is the pressure that disclosure will put on executivesat less profitable firms to justify their high salaries. No bad thingfor the firms concerned, of course, but one wonders whether the"fatcats" of the accounting world are ready for the challenge.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PUSHING FOR CHANGEAs plans for the merger between the Chartered Institute of ManagementAccountants and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England andWales take shape, Nick Speechly talks to CIMA president Allan McNabLEADING MEMBERS of the UK accountancy profession must have lostcountless chargeable hours over the years engaged in fruitless mergertalks between different professional bodies. Allan McNab, president ofthe Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (CIMA), hopes thatthe time he has spent discussing a merger with the Institute ofChartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW) has not added to thetally.In early December, McNab presented CIMA's ruling council with detailedproposals for the merger thrashed out over the preceding year by nofewer than 14 joint working parties of the two institutes. Theprospectus for the merger has now been sent out to members of bothbodies (see page 3), and in January, the institutes will embark onenergetic campaigns aimed at explaining their plans to members. Ifmarket research exercises show the proposals are well received, memberswill vote on the plans in April or May.The UK accountancy profession has a long history of ambitious plans fororganisational change which have come to naught - including the mostrecent Bishop committee proposals for a wholesale regrouping of theinstitutes. Divisions among the different bodies and opposition tochange from many of their members have derailed many proposals.Distinctions blurredSo, what benefits from a merger between CIMA and the ICAEW can justifyMcNab and his colleagues spending yet more time in negotiations?McNab can point to his own career, working with a CIMA qualification asa partner at Coopers & Lybrand, as indicative of some of the forcesdriving change. With some CIMA members working in public practicefirms, as he is, and many more ICAEW members working in industry, thedistinctions between the roles of the institutes are becoming moreblurred."It goes to show that the rationalisation of the profession might be agood idea," he said.The proposals would produce a stronger combined institute, focusedequally on the needs of both accountants in public practice and thosein industry, according to McNab. Members who move between audit firmsand business would benefit from strengthened support from within thesame organisation, while the structure will also recognise thediffering needs of the two groups."The two institutes overlap in the middle," McNab said. "But, there arealso distinctive parts of both which we would like to preserve in twostreams of qualification."The combined institute would offer two qualifications, with thosequalified in public practice retaining the "chartered accountant" titleand those trained in industry using "chartered management accountant".The two syllabi would include many common elements, and the process oftransferring from one qualification to another is to be simplified.For CIMA, a major benefit of the merger could be in attracting moreemployers to offer formal management accountancy training schemes. Withmany corporate finance directors holding ICAEW qualifications, they arelikely to be more enthusiastic in supporting trainees in theircompanies for their own institute than they might have been in the pastfor a separate CIMA qualification, McNab suggested."I'd hope that the combined institute will be so attractive andprestigious that we'd encourage more industrial and commercialcompanies to set up formal programmes," he said.The gain of the prestigious "chartered" tag would be another benefit ofthe merger for CIMA members, although McNab did not rank thisparticularly highly."It's a factor - but it's not an overwhelming one," he said, pointingout that CIMA has already received Privy Council permission to use the"chartered management accountant" label in its own right (see page 3).The CIMA president admitted that the ICAEW's attempts to set up its ownindustry management scheme - TOPP (training outside public practice) -had encouraged support from CIMA for a merger. "Obviously if we were toremain independent, and the ICAEW managed to adapt its training so itwas successful in industry, there would be a serious competitor fortraining capacity. One of the minor advantages of a merger would bethat it would take care of the competitive threat."While many attempts to merge institutes in the past have fallen in theface of members' resistance to change, McNab can have a degree ofconfidence that his members, at least, broadly support the principle ofmerging. Market research carried out among members over the Bishopproposals showed support for restructuring, and also showed support fordiscussions with other institutes should Bishop collapse. Further back,CIMA members also voted in favour of the abortive plans for areorganisation of the profession proposed in 1970.Benefits to members"Our members voted for rationalisation at that time, and we've beenconsistent ever since for the last 25 years," McNab boasted.It is more difficult for leaders of the two institutes to be confidentof gaining the support of ICAEW members. But the ICAEW and its memberswill also benefit from the move, according to McNab. Memberstransferring to industry after training in public practice particularlywill gain through having a simpler route to a further qualificationspecifically designed for their new career path."What we hope is that when a chartered accountant moves into industry,he would see the benefits of doing the other side of the qualification - doing the business planning and management accounting," McNab said. "Iactually think that the combination of the two - qualifying throughboth routes - would be the best possible accounting qualification."What is more, the combined institute would be better placed to adapt tochanges in the structure of training within the profession."The nature of audit firms is changing. It's less dependent on lots ofjunior staff and more on senior people, with computer auditingtechniques and that sort of thing. For people who want to become anaccountant nowadays, there are less opportunities through the classicchartered accountancy route."Combination with CIMA provides the ICAEW with the best way of adaptingby providing more training in industry, McNab argued. "If they weregoing to be successful in training in industry, they would have to dosomething that was very much like what CIMA does anyway," he said."So,they might as well join us."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IS INCORPORATION THE ANSWER?In the last issue of TA, Richard Turnor looked at the unlimitedliability of partners. This month, he considers whether incorporationprovides a solutionTHE NEWS that KPMG is to incorporate part of its audit practice,combined with the award in the ADT case (see page 3), has generatedgreat interest in incorporation as a means of protecting partners'estates.Both accountants and solicitors can now, like members of otherprofessions, practise in corporate form. A company has a separate legalpersonality, and the shareholders of a limited liability company inprinciple are not liable for the acts or defaults of the companyitself. Thus, the shareholders of a professional firm who wouldotherwise be partners can protect their personal estates even if thebusiness itself is at risk from claims against the company. In theevent of a catastrophic claim, the shareholder/director may lose hislivelihood, but at least his personal assets will be safe. It may alsobe possible to protect different parts of the business from problems inother parts by incorporating a series of separate companies.But, it is important to be aware of what incorporation cannot achieve.It will not, for example, release those who were partners beforeincorporation from pre-incorporation liabilities, leases and debts.Nevertheless, this is not necessarily a reason to reject incorporation.In time, claims arising from prior advice will become statute barred,the lease will expire, all pre- incorporation partners will retire andeventually the company's shareholders will have no responsibility forpre-incorporation debts.A director or employer of the incorporated company who gives negligentadvice may still incur personal liability under normal agencyprinciples. A director who fails to supervise an employee adequatelymay also incur liability. Thus, incorporation does not provide completeprotection to those immediately involved, but at least the directorsshould have no personal liability for matters for which they are notresponsible. Furthermore, creditors may not in practice think itworthwhile to claim against a small group of directors and employeeswho have been directly involved.KPMG has said that it will incorporate the high-risk part of its auditpractice (TA 5902), while continuing other aspects of its business inpartnership. Arrangements of this nature need to be structured verycarefully. A claimant who is unable to recover adequate compensationfrom the company will explore every possible means of gettingcompensation from the partners. An obvious line of attack is to arguethat he thought he was dealing with a partnership rather than with acompany, or that the company was a sham which ought not to standbetween him and his claim against the partners.Care must, therefore, be taken to ensure that the company genuinelycarries on its own business, and that all advice and services providedby the company are demonstrably given by or on behalf of the company,and not on behalf of the partnership. It will not be enough to ensurethat the engagement letter is written on behalf of the company. Whereit is intended that a client should have no claim against thepartnership, all advice must be given by or on behalf of the companyand all correspondence must be conducted on the letterhead of thecompany. All time incurred on behalf of the company must be recordedseparately from time recorded working for the partnership.It should be remembered that if the company becomes insolvent, it maythen have a claim against the partnership relating to services providedto the company by partners and employees of the partnership. Careshould be taken to insulate the partnership from these difficulties.For example, those who provide advice on behalf of the company shouldbe employed directly by the company to do so.If a partnership incorporates in order to protect the partners'personal estates and the company then incurs a liability to a clientwhich it is unable to meet in full, the client is the loser. Thus, theadded protection of incorporation is obtained at the expense of clientsand others who deal with the firm. How are they likely to react?Clients are likely to be particularly concerned about the financialstrength of the company after incorporation. Partnerships do not haveto publish their accounts, and the fact that the incorporated firm mustdo so may be of some comfort to clients since it will give them aregular indication of the company's net financial position.However, the published accounts will not disclose the company'sinsurance arrangements and some clients may ask for details of covermaintained and of the identity and financial security of the insurers.Most firms will be reluctant to disclose this kind of information sinceit could be valuable to potential claimants. If the clients are notsatisfied with the information provided about the company, they may betempted to take their business to a firm which still practises inpartnership.But, clients may attach more importance to other factors, such as thedegree of skill of the proposed client service team, and itsfamiliarity with the client's business and the issues involved. Indeed,the track record of the client service team may often be regarded as astrong indication that a claim is unlikely to arise in the first place.Clients may not think that the remote risk of a claim that cannot bemet in full justifies losing the benefits of a long-term relationshipthat has been otherwise successful, especially if those firms whichcould offer an equivalent service have also incorporated.In conclusion, while incorporation may not be a complete solution tothe problems of unlimited liability, if it is carefully planned, itshould protect the personal estates of partners from future liabilitiesfor which they are not personally responsible. In practice, clients maybe unlikely to think that the reduced protection justifies abandoningan otherwise satisfactory relationship, especially if the alternativefirms also practise as corporate firms. In such circumstances, why doesany professional firm continue to practise partnership?The main problems are likely to arise in the context of taxation, bothof the profits of the business and of transactions where shares in theincorporated business change hands. I would not presume to instruct areadership of accountants on such matters.Next month, I will consider the implications of limited liabilitypartnerships in jurisdictions outside the UK.Richard Turnor, a partner at London law firm Allen & Overy since 1985,advises professional partnerships on all aspects of their partnershipstructure and documentation.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PROFESSIONAL SURVIVALRonald Gage, chairman of the Canadian Institute of CharteredAccountants and head of Ernst & Young in Canada, talks to Gundi Jeffreyabout the major issues facing the professionIN CANADA, as elsewhere, the accounting profession is facingunprecedented challenges. Years of recession, followed by economicstagnation have flattened revenue growth at most of the firms in thecountry.Traditional audit services were further eroded by an amendment to theCanadian Business Corporation Act in 1994 which eliminated therequirement of privately-held companies to file audited financialstatements. Litigation in the wake of business failures, although notas fierce here as in the US, for example, continue to dog the firms.Times are tough, and Canada's accountants are fighting back.The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) is now in thethroes of several major initiatives aimed at ensuring that its memberscontinue to provide relevant, expert and valuable services to Canada'sbusiness community and thereby hang on to their pre-eminence in themarketplace.The body, which has 58,000 members, differs from other accountinginstitutes in the world in that it alone is responsible for settingnational standards for accounting and auditing. These standards arerecognised in company, securities and banking law at both federal andprovincial level. The CICA develops the Uniform Final Examination allaspiring CAs must pass to qualify, as well as joint continuingeducation programmes with the provincial institutes.It also liaises with the provincial institutes, which are responsiblefor the licensing and governance of their members.TA recently spoke to Ronald Gage, chairman and chief executive of Ernst& Young Canada and current chairman of the CICA, about some of the morepressing challenges facing the Big Six in Canada and the charteredaccounting profession generally.Gage qualified as a CA in 1964, while with Clarkson Gordon, which isnow E&Y. He became a partner in 1970 and worked his way up the ranks tobecome executive partner and chairman of the firm's managementcommittee in 1986, chief operating officer in 1987 and E&Y chairman andchief executive in 1993.As chairman of the profession, as well as head of one of the largestfirms in Canada, Gage has a unique perspective on the profession'sproblems and opportunities in today's information- driven society.TA: Earlier this year, Ontario Premier Mike Harris endorsed the conceptof limited liability partnerships (LLPs) for Ontario's charteredaccountants (TA 5900). Have you any idea when we will see this backingtranslated into legislation?Gage: Although every provincial institute has, for the last year or so,had a task force working on this subject, three provincial governmentshave expressed some commitment to proceed. In Ontario, the timing ofwhen the government will consider this matter really depends on itspriorities and legislative agenda. My own thinking is that is unlikelyto appear on the government's agenda before spring 1996. I would behopeful that we might well see some legislation in Ontario within thecoming year.The governments in Nova Scotia and Alberta have also been addressingthe matter, and I'm hopeful that we will see the legislation some timebefore the end of 1996.TA: If it happens in Ontario first, how will that affect the structureof the national firms?Gage: My understanding is that the firms could establish their nationalpartnership in any province that has the LLP legislation. That wouldthen become their governing legislation and would be respected on aninterprovincial basis. I suspect that, once one or two provinces haveintroduced this kind of legislation, the other provinces would followfairly promptly.TA: Is the profession lobbying to push the matter along?Gage: We have a group in place charged with maintaining an activedialogue with the provincial governments to make sure that they clearlyunderstand what the issues are, that we have an opportunity to answerany questions or reservations they might have, and to keep up to dateon the status of each province.TA: How exactly does an LLP function?Gage: It enables you to practise in partnership form but have the samekind of protection against liabilities that you would have under thelimited liability corporate form. It protects the personal assets ofthe partners in the firm, but it does not protect the assets of thefirm itself. The one exception is that, if one or more of the partnerswere found to be personally negligent in connection with a legalmatter, then their personal assets would not be protected.TA: Once the legislation comes into effect, is that enough? Will itgive the firms the protection they are seeking?Gage: LLP legislation is really just the first step. The far moreimportant issue is the very inequitable situation the firms face underjoint and several liability. That's even a more serious problem thanthe partners' personal assets being at risk. It puts the entire firm atrisk.To deal with that, we are trying to encourage legislative reform inCanada that would provide for proportionate liability in the way thatdamages are allocated in the case of professional negligencelitigation. If we're found to be, say, 5 percent contributory to aproblem, we would be responsible for only 5 percent of any financialaward that was given, irrespective of whether other defendants wereable to pay their awards.TA: Are you making any headway with this one?Gage: I would say yes. We are doing this on a co-ordinated basis rightacross the country, working with all the provincial governments. Theyhave been quite prepared to hear our story, and several have indicateda willingness to examine the matter on a more formal basis over thecoming one or two years and determine whether there is a legislativeinequity that needs to be addressed.TA: In the meantime, what has been happening in the insurance marketfor the firms?Gage: Generally, the commercial insurance market continues to be veryexpensive, continues to offer relatively limited coverage, and the BigSix have to provide a very large proportion - 50 percent or more -through their own captive insurance companies.TA: So what are the firms doing in terms of risk management strategiesto reduce exposure to lawsuits?Gage: Over the past two or three years, all the firms have beenfocusing on managing their risks. In the case of Ernst & YoungInternational, I chaired a task force a couple of years ago on how wecould deal more effectively with risk management in light of thelitigation scene.The kinds of things we put in place are: continuing to educate ourpeople on the risks that are out there and how to best manage thoserisks; putting enormous emphasis on the acceptance and continuance ofclients; and re-emphasising and continually improving our approach toour internal quality control process. We are also re-engineering ouraudit methodologies to heighten our focus on the risk of the industrythe client operates in, and the risk profile of the individual client,so that we can understand where those business and operating risks areto direct our audit activities accordingly.We also strongly support the various initiatives that are going on inthe areas of sound corporate governance. We think that improvedcorporate governance practices go a long way to helping us manage therisks, and part of that is, of course, a strong and effective auditcommittee.TA: What are risky clients and might you decide not to continueauditing them?Gage: We, along with other firms, have declined to take on prospectiveclients, and have decided reluctantly to part ways with existingclients where we felt that their risk profile became inappropriate forus. Certain industries, such as hi-tech, are much riskier than othersin terms of the potential rate for business failure. You also have tolook at the quality of the corporate governance, the quality of theinternal controls and the quality of management. You must always beconcerned with the integrity of the people you're dealing with.TA: Moving on to your role as chair of the CICA, what kind of agendahad you built yourself before you started out?Gage: It seems to me that, to be successful over the long term, ourprofession has be relevant to the society we operate in; we have to bepre-eminent and we have to be attractive to retain the best people. Wehave been experiencing tremendous change and turbulence in the Canadianeconomy, which has had a huge impact on us over the last five or tenyears. It seemed to me that, when I got on the ladder to become chairof the CICA, we needed to take one of these longer, more far-reaching,very integrated views of the profession and create a new vision for thefuture.That was the number one item on my agenda and I'm pleased that, lastFebruary, we created the Vision Task Force (TA 5898). This task forcewill report to the board of governors on a preliminary basis inDecember, offering its long-term view of the future and a series ofrecommendations on what action the profession should take over thecourse of the coming years.It will address several issues. Like, should we be separatingcertification, that is, becoming a chartered accountant, fromlicensure, that is, the right to practise public accounting? Should weformally recognise specialisation? What amount and type of experienceshould be required in the assurance services area to get your CA? Howdo we ensure reciprocity and harmonisation among the provinces?Accounting firms are doing a lot more than accounting. How do wedetermine fees and billings? Who can or can't be a partner? They'realso looking at the very governance of the CA profession itself. Thereis nothing off the table. There are no sacred cows.TA: Did you have anything else you wanted to accomplish as chair of theCICA?Gage: Another area of real deep interest to me, really an offshoot ofthe Vision project, is that we have to re-examine how and where weprovide our assurance and attestation services. Our traditional role asauditors has been to audit historic cost financial statements.As we move out of an industrial economy to an information and knowledgeeconomy, some of the most important assets won't be on a historic costfinancial statement. Intangible assets such as intellectual capital,human resources, research and development, and innovation, don't appearon financial statements. Likewise, we probably have to find new ways tomeasure performance in this emerging information economy.I believe that, as we change our focus and learn to address the moreimportant assets of the new economy, auditors can play a useful role inwhat are now called non-traditional attestation areas. I think thechallenge is for us to identify what those areas are and to what extentthey will have a marketplace value. We shouldn't be trying to sell anattestation service just because we can do it. We should be focused onthe marketplace to see where the market believes there will be value inthird-party assurance. Then we have to establish ourselves in thoseareas.For example, there might be value in users knowing that certaincommercial databases had a process to keep the information accurate andtimely. An audit firm might go in and evaluate the procedures formaintaining the database. There might be areas in the environmentalfield where there was a desire to know to what degree a company hadgood processes and systems in place to monitor compliance withenvironmental regulations.Right now, a lot of this is quite speculative and we need to examinewhere the values of our society are changing and what kind ofinformation is going to become critical in performance evaluation inthe future and whether that performance information would be morevaluable if it had an auditor's opinion on it. I think there is areally critical issue to keep our profession relevant to our society.Again we have established a small task force that, over the next fewyears, will examine this area in a comprehensive fashion. It is co-ordinating its work with a similar committee in the US. TA: Any otherchallenges?Gage: The big issue we haven't talked directly about is attractiveness.We have to make sure the profession is dynamic and challenging, thatmembers are highly respected and regarded within society. And we haveto make sure that it's financially rewarding. That's the only way we'regoing to continue attracting the very best people. Like any profession,we're only as good as the quality of people in it.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE ACCOUNTANT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SUCCESS BREEDS SUCCESSIn Malaysia, healthy economic growth and a flood of investment iscreating a lucrative market for accounting firms. Sally Roden reportsTHE LAST ten years have seen a remarkable economic turnaround inMalaysia. In the mid-1980s, with the country deep in recession, thegovernment was forced to extend university courses from three to fouryears in a bid to combat unemployment.Today, the problem isn't a lack of jobs; it's an acute shortage ofskilled labour in every industry sector. The government has even had toreverse its decision of a decade ago and cut university courses back tothree years.Economic growth has been impressive. In each of the last seven years,gross domestic product has risen by more than 8 percent.Such economic success, combined with a stable political environment -the National Front Coalition has been in power for 38 years - hasresulted in a flood of investment into the country. And that kind ofinvestment - RM38.4 billion (#10 billion) in 1994 alone - is good newsfor accounting firms."Growth has been bullish and will continue for at least the next threeyears," said Ian Appleby, shortly before retiring as Asia- Pacificregional managing partner at Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu International."There has been plenty of infrastructural projects and many governmentagencies are being privatised which results in investment," said GohJoon Hai, managing partner of Hew & Tan, the local member of MooresRowland International.Under a privatisation programme launched over ten years ago, roads,railways, the national airline, hospitals, telecommunications and powergenerators have all been sold off. More recently, the governmentannounced that a further 200 state- owned bodies were to be privatised,which is likely to result in more work for accountants.Another source of overseas funds is the government's recently adoptedstrategy of turning Malaysia into an international financial servicescentre. In June, it announced a range of measures to liberalise thecountry's capital markets, while two new derivatives exchanges areexpected to open this autumn.In response to the influx of foreign investors, accounting firms havehad to change the kind of services they offer.Chris Low, tax manager at HALS & Associates, said his firm's clientsused to be concerned only with tax compliance. "Now they have adifferent attitude and look more to consulting to minimise their taxexposure," he said. Changes in tax regulations occur every year, hesaid, as the government moves towards greater emphasis on indirecttaxation.Goh said Hew & Tan is providing more management consulting and taxservices. "Increased investment has meant more tax payers and more taxwork," he said. Taxation is currently handled by a civil servicedepartment but there is a move afoot to establish an inland revenueboard which would be independent of the civil service. There is also aparallel move to introduce a system of self-assessment, which would begood news for accounting firms.Hew & Tan has also been active in corporate finance. "We have played abig role in helping clients gain public listings," Goh said. "We selecta merchant banker and are involved in the initial public issue."The government has also encouraged Malaysian companies to expand intoother markets in southeast Asia. During 1995, it introduced a law thatallowed all profits earned outside Malaysia to be repatriated forinvestment free of tax."Companies with expertise in plantation are buying land in Indonesiaand Vietnam," said Zainal Putih, country managing partner at ArthurAndersen. "Other companies which are experts in road building,particularly because Malaysia's north/south motorway has just beencompleted, are setting up in India and Vietnam where these services areneeded."This drive overseas has provided new challenges for accounting firms."As Malaysia advances towards developed nation status, it can beexpected that competition in the profession will intensify and clientswill become more demanding," said Lai Siew Peng, practice developmentmanager at Ernst & Young.While few Malaysian firms were prepared to disclose revenue figures forlast year, most of those that did reported robust growth. More tellingare the staff figures. Of the 23 firms that replied to TA's survey,only three recorded a decline in total head-count.None of the Big Six would reveal fee income figures, but in terms oftotal staff, E&Y is the market leader with 1,222 employees. The firm'sclients include the state-owned Bank Bumiputra, agriculture andfisheries group Multi-Purpose Holdings and Malaysia's largestconglomerate, Renong Holdings.Lai said the biggest areas of growth for E&Y are tax and consulting.She believes the healthy growth in the Malaysian market is set tocontinue. "The anticipated robust economic activity, rising businessconfidence, lowering of corporation tax [to 30 percent] and theincrease in reinvestment allowance are among the reasons," she said.In second place is KPMG with an estimated total staff of 973. TA putsthe firm's total partner numbers at 23 and professional staff at 750.Arthur Andersen comes next with total staff of 906, up 4.4 percent froma year earlier. This figure does not include Andersen Consulting.According to Zainal, Andersen has benefited greatly from thegovernment's privatisation programme. He said many of the privatisationcontracts go to the Big Six "because of the international nature andcomplexity of the work".Fourth in the staff rankings is Price Waterhouse, with estimated totalstaff of 826, followed by Coopers & Lybrand on 722.Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, which also operates under its local name ofKassim Chan & Co., takes sixth place in the tables with total staff of714, a rise of 5.8 percent on the previous year.Unlike their western counterparts, firms in Malaysia have been largelyunaffected by fee pressure in the audit sector. "Price competition isnot a problem. Clients are concerned with quality, not price," saidChia Kwong Chow, managing partner of KC Chia & Noor, the MacIntyreStrater affiliate.Part of the reason for this is the Malaysian Institute of Accountants'(MIA) monitoring of audit fees. Until three years ago the MIAstipulated a minimum audit fee. It now simply offers a guideline offees that should be charged.By far the biggest problem facing the Malaysian profession is ashortage of staff. The country's thriving commercial sector can affordto offer high salaries in order to lure staff from accounting firms,while stringent immigration laws make it hard to bring in expatriatestaff."This country has had about 8 percent growth for about eight years.With a population of only 20 million, problems are inevitable," saidZainal at Andersen. "Opportunities pop up everywhere."Kim Guan, managing partner of Kreston International member firm THLGKreston - M, believes the only way around the staff shortages is tooffer higher salaries. But others see potential pitfalls in such astrategy."This pushes up the cost of production and can push up prices," saidLow at HALS. "The work environment must be good, and every individualmust be looked at separately to find out what his needs are." Hebelieves the government will have to deal with this growing problemsoon.Other small firms say the biggest difficulty they face is clientsmoving over to Big Six firms when they reach a certain size."Most of the big assignments are dominated by the Big Six," Chia said."The survival of the smaller firms depends on the partner's personalcontact and the market niche carved out by the firm."But, as Goh at Hew & Tan pointed out, this is not a problem unique toMalaysia. "It happens in every country when clients grow to a certainsize," he said. "We have lost one or two jobs over the last two yearsbut this was not a case of clients defecting to the Big Six."In response to the growing globalisation of the profession, more firmsare adopting international names. THLG Kreston adopted the Krestonmoniker 18 months ago. "From the client point of view, it shows thefirm is moving in a certain direction, even though it is not a Big Sixfirm," he said. International work makes up about 15 percent of thefirm's total business.Chia & Noor has not adopted the MacIntyre Strater name. Chia does notthink it would offer the firm any advantage. "We have largely localclients, and membership of MacIntyre Strater is not very useful forthis type of client," he said.The main professional issue on the agenda in 1995 was the proposedmerger between Malaysia's two accounting bodies. The statutory body,the MIA, and the older Malaysian Association of Certified PublicAccountants (MICPA), a private association established by charteredaccountants who qualified in England, are in the process of formalisingthe agreement. It was the MICPA which originally governed theaccounting profession in Malaysia, before the MIA was established in1967."Two bodies are not justified for a relatively small number ofaccountants," Zainal said. The MIA has about 8,000 members and theMICPA about 4,000, while some accountants are members of both.Some people hope that the merger will bring about professional changein the country. For example, Malaysian accountants are not allowed toadvertise, a legacy of the British influence on the MICPA, according toZainal. He thinks this will have to change. "Customers and the publicneed more information," he said. "This is one anomaly in theadvancement of the profession."Looking to the year ahead, most accountants believe the favourablebusiness climate will continue. The economy is forecast to grow by over8 percent again, and Malaysia's enhanced role throughout southeast Asiais expected to produce new business opportunities. In terms of economicmuscle, Zainal said,"we are now moving on to the same plane asSingapore and Hong Kong".SELECT ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - RANKED BY REVEUNE                                       Fee     Fee                                       income  income  Growth Effec-                     International     1994    1993    rate   tiveFirm                 affiliation       (RM/m)  (RM/m)  (%)    dateMoore Stephens       Moore Stephens    4.1(1)  3.6(1)  13.9   Dec 94THLG Kreston - M     Kreston           2.8(2)  2.5(2)   n/a   Dec 94HALS & Associates    -                 2.0     1.8     11.1   Dec 94Wong Liu & Partners  Morison           2.0(1)  1.8(1)  11.1   Dec 94Shamsir Jasani       Grant Thornton                     /HLB              1.9     1.8      5.6   Dec 94Anuarul Azizan Chew  Morison           1.3     1.3      0.0   Dec 94Neoh WM Lam          SCI               1.1     1.0     10.0   Dec 94KK Chow & Partners   IGAF              1.0     0.9     11.1   Dec 94Ong & Wong           IA                0.8(1)  0.8(1)   0.0   Dec 94(1) Figures supplied in US dollars and converted to Malaysianringgit at the year-end exchange rates(2) Estimated by TANote:  Some firms declined to give fee income dataSource:  The AccountantLEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - RANKED BY TOTALSTAFF                             Number       Number       Number of                             of           of           chargeable                             offices      partners     staffFirm                         1993  1994   1993  1994   1993   1994Ernst & Young(1)             13    12     24    22     n/a    950KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat                       10(2) 10(2)  20(2) 23(2)  570(2) 750(2)Arthur Andersen(3)           14    14     18    15     610    648Price Waterhouse              8     8(2)  26(2) 26(2)  605    600(2)Coopers & Lybrand            11(2) 11(2)  26(2) 23(2)  n/a    n/aDeloitte Touche Tohmatsu(1)   6     7     18    22     494    525Hew & Tan                     2     2      5     5     162    158Shamsir Jasani                4     4      7     7     125    129Robert Teo Kuan               1     1      3     4      80     85Moore Stephens                5     5      5     5      90     76Horwath Mok & Poon            1     1      3     3      48     65Yeo Yong Poh                  2     2      6     6      57     65Roger Yue Tan & Associates    1     1      2     2      52     58KC Chia & Noor                3     3      4     3      41     45Russ Ooi & Associates         3     3      4     4      44     48Ong & Wong                    2     3      3     3      10      9HALS & Associates             1     1      3     3      35     40Anuarul Azizan Chew           2     1      3     3      39     38Wong Liu & Partners           3     3      2     4      39     38Gong & Co                     2     2      3     3     n/a     40Neoh WM Lam                   2     2      2     2      35     40THLG Kreston - M              2     2      2     2      26     28KK Chow & Partners            1     1      1     2      20     20                                    Number of                                    administrative  Total                                    staff           staffFirm                                1993    1994    1993    1994Ernst & Young(1)                    n/a     250     1,124   1,222KPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat   180(2)  200(2)    770(2)  973(2)Arthur Andersen(3)                  240     243       868     906Price Waterhouse                    194     200(2)    825(2)  826(2)Coopers & Lybrand                   n/a     n/a       n/a     722Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu(1)         163     167       675     714Hew & Tan                            30      29       197     192Shamsir Jasani                       16      16       148     152Robert Teo Kuan                      20      20       103     109Moore Stephens                       15      20       110     101Horwath Mok & Poon                   12      15        63      83Yeo Yong Poh                          9      10        72      81Roger Yue Tan & Associates           10      12        64      72KC Chia & Noor                       17      20        62      68Russ Ooi & Associates                 9       9        57      61Ong & Wong                           41      42        54      54HALS & Associates                    10      10        48      53Anuarul Azizan Chew                  11      10        53      51Wong Liu & Partners                   9       9        50      51Gong & Co                           n/a       5       n/a      48Neoh WM Lam                           6       5        43      47THLG Kreston - M                      4       4        32      34KK Chow & Partners                    6       6        27      28(1) Figures refer to 1994 and 1995(2) Estimated by TA(3) Does not include Andersen Consultingn/a = not availableSource:  The AccountantLEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - FEE SPILT                     International        Account-     Consult-Firm                 affiliation    Audit ing     Tax  ting    OtherArthur Andersen(1)   AA & Co, SC    67     -      17   10       6Hew & Tan            MRI            60    10      18    -      12Shamsir Jasani       Grant Thornton                     /HLB           52     -      18   16      14(2)Robert Teo Kuan      Nexia          39     -      36    2      23Moore Stephens       Moore Stephens 65(3)  -      18   17       -Horwath Mok & Poon   Horwath        35     5      25    5      30(4)Yeo Yong Poh         DFK            50    10      23    7      10(4)KC Chia & Noor       MacIntyre                     Strater        28     5      20   27      20(4)Russ Ooi & Associates          RSM            26     8      20    -      46(4)Ong & Wong           IA             60     -      20   10      10HALS & Associates    -              50     -      20   20      10Anuarul Azizan Chew  Morison        70     2      10    3      15(4)Wong Liu & Partners  Morison        58     6      15   21       -Gong & Co            CKL            51     7      16    -      26Neoh WM Lam          SC             46     8      18    -      28(5)THLG Kreston - M     Kreston        65     -      25   10       -KK Chow & Partners   IGAF           47     4      19    -      30(5)(1) Does not include Andersen Consulting(2) Share registration and corporate recovery(3) Includes accounting(4) Includes corporate finance(5) SecretarialSource:  The AccountantLEADING ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING FIRMS IN MALAYSIA - WHO'S WHOArthur AndersenLevel 1Block C (South)Pusat Bandar Damansara50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-255 7000Fax: 60-3-255 5332Contact partner: Dato' Hj. Zainal Abidin PutihAnuarul Azizan Chew (Morison International)18 Jalan 1/64Off Jalan Kolam Air/Jalan Ipoh51200 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-441 7233Fax: 60-3-441 0395Contact partner: Azizan Bin Mohd. NoorKC Chia & Noor (MacIntyre Strater)229-1 Jalan Perkasa SatuTaman MaluriCheras55100 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-984 3102Fax: 60-3-984 7952Contact partner: Chia Kwong ChowKK Chow & Partners (IGAF)Suite 171317th FloorIGB Plaza6 Jalan Kampar50400 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-442 2055Fax: 60-3-441 7719Contact partner: KK ChowCoopers & Lybrand22nd FloorIGB PlazaJalan KamparOff Jalan Tun Razak50400 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-441 1188Fax: 60-3-441 0880Contact partner: Mohammad AbdullahDeloitte Touche Tohmatsu (DTTI)3 Changkat Raja Chulan50200 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-230 6822Fax: 60-3-232 4585Contact partner: Mohd Kassim Bin SulongErnst & Young1st & 4th FloorsKompleks AntarabangsaJalan Sultan Ismail50250 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-244 2333Fax: 60-3-241 0676Contact partner: Ali Abdul KadirGong & Company (Clark Kenneth Leventhal)3 Jalan SS2/6447300 Petaling JayaKuala LumpurTel: 60-3-776 4612Fax: 60-3-775 4362Contact partner: Felix GongHALS & Associates (-)12th FloorMing BuildingJalan Bukit Nanas50250 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-201 1322Fax: 60-3-201 1326Contact partner: Chew Weng KitHew & Tan (Moores Rowland International)Wisma Selangor Dredging7th FloorSouth Block142A Jalan Ampang50450 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-261 5222Fax: 60-3-261 3909Contact partner: Goh Joon HaiHorwath Mok & Poon13-1 Pertama ComplexJalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman50100 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-292 9560Fax: 60-3-292 9361Contact partner: Mok Yuen LokKPMG Peat Marwick/KPMG Desa Megat4th FloorWisma PerdanaJalan DungunDamansara Heights50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-255 3388Fax: 60-3-255 0971Contact partner: Ramli IbrahimTHLG Kreston - M (Kreston International)Suite OneWisma Rolnic 97CJalan Bangsar59200 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-32-827 889Fax: 60-32-827 897Contact partner: Kim GuanMoore StephensBlock D3rd FloorBangunan SPPK46 Jalan DungunDamansara Heights50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-254 1888Fax: 60-3-254 7673Contact partner: Eddy ChongNeoh WN Lam(SCI International)Acctax Corporate Centre2 Bawasah Road10050 PenangTel: 60-4-228 0020Fax: 60-4-228 0023Contact partner: Lam Wai Min                 Neoh Chin WahOng & Wong (IA International)3rd FloorWisma Ho Weng Kee138-140 Jalan Petaling50000 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-230 4033Fax: 60-3-232 4863Contact partner: Ong Kong-LaiRuss Ooi & Associates (RSM International)Letterbox No. 8Wisma Damansara Penthouse14th FloorJalan Semantan50490 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-254 3388Fax: 60-3-255 5101Contact partner: Russ OoiPrice Waterhouse11th FloorWisma Sime DarbyJalan Raja LautPO Box 1019250706 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-293 1077Fax: 60-3-293 0997Contact partner: Khoo Eng ChooShamsir Jasani(Grant Thornton/HLB)Level 17Menara BankPembangunanJalan Sultan IsmailPO Box 1233750774 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-292 4022Fax: 60-3-291 5229Contact partner: Narendra JasaniRobert Teo Kuan (Nexia International)171-175 Jalan Maharajalela50150 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-248 3700Fax: 60-3-244 2880Contact partner: Robert TeoWong Liu & Partners (Morison International)62-A Sri Bahari Road10050 PenangTel: 60-4-263 5540Fax: 60-4-263 4953Contact partner: Dean LiuYeo Yong Poh (DFK International)Suite 40244th FloorPresident HouseJalan Sultan Ismail50250 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-241 2555Fax: 60-3-242 6355Contact partner: Khoo Pek LingRoger Yue Tan & Associates (BKR International)2nd FloorWisma Tai Yoon9B Lorong Medan Tuanku SatuMedan Tuanku50300 Kuala LumpurTel: 60-3-292 0722Fax: 60-3-291 6569Contact partner: Roger YueSource:  The AccountantCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT03-B37-21IA059-000325-B020-197http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi113.html 205.156.212.5 19970115002834 text/html 164107HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:25:57 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:55 GMTContent-length: 163917Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi113.html Sample Issue Copyright ACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & Dogs (6721 words) Top Financial Planning Software (1309 words) Financial Planners' Secrets of Success (1112 words) This Just In: Getting Back to Business (5706 words) Editor's Note: Another Nail in the Coffin? (922 words) Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting Software (1968 words) Information Services: In Search of On-line CPAs (2060 words) Practice Development: Form 5500 Follow-up (1742 words) Newspages: Tax Vendors for Sale (1328 words) Quicklooks: MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics Suite (1986 words) Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound (1085 words) CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The Best and Worst of 1995: Diamonds & DogsEach year as the holiday season approaches, the editorial staff at AccountingTechnology gathers for one of the most enjoyable tasks of the year-choosingproducts for our annual Diamonds and Dogs article.  Pouring through countlessback issues of computer and industry trades, newspaper clippings, and our ownnotes accumulated over the year, we narrow down our choices until we wind upwith the dozen and a half "awards" presented here.This year, things were really pretty slow for the first half of the year.With many vendors waiting for the release of Windows 95, not all that muchexciting happened until late summer.  At least, that's what it seems like inretrospect.  In actuality, it was an interesting year all around.  And, as hasbeen the trend in recent years, much of what took place was of benefit to you,both in terms of what you can accomplish, and what it costs to do so.  This isreflected in the large number of Diamonds, with just a smattering of MixedBags and Dogs.The brightest diamond of allFinally, no article on the best of 1995 would be complete without a nod to the"best of the best."  To the staff here at Accounting Technology, that's youthe reader.With this first issue of the new year, everyone at Accounting Technology wouldlike to wish you and yours a happy, healthy, and profitable New Year!So, without further ado, and presented in no particular order (and with noreal malice intended), here are our choices for the Diamonds and Dogs of 1995.DIAMONDSSometimes you Win(95)...And it seems as though Microsoft has indeed won big with this newest releaseof its graphical operating system.  Often delayed, and put through the largestbeta test in history (more on this later), the software was finally releasedwith much fanfare on August 24th.  The papers reported users lining up incomputer stores to purchase the upgrade when it went on sale at midnight.And, with the OEM deals Microsoft cut with hardware vendors, there aremillions of copies out there already, with a fairly large proportion of themactually being used, rather than stuck on the shelf.More conservative users, including many accountants, are biding their time,waiting for a second release.  Of course, as magazine editors, no one expectsusto be all that conservative, so we followed Win95 through the end of the betatest and used it exclusively on our production machines (we still testhardware with Win 3.11, unless it's a PC that comes with Win95 pre-installed).And, we have to admit that a lot of the hype surrounding Win95 is justified.We installed it on several workstations effortlessly, while one hung up untila network card was removed.  The new desktop is really a big improvement overWin 3.11, and once you get used to it, Windows Explorer is more powerful thanthe File Manager it replaces (though you can continue to use File Manager ifyou prefer).Plug and Play, when it works, is a joy, and a terror when it doesn't.  Alltold, just as with any operating system that's preceded it (including IBM'sOS/2 Warp), Microsoft Windows 95 has its good points and bad.Overall, we started out liking it, and as we discover just how to use some ofits not-so-obvious features, that liking grows.2+2 finally = 4Last year at this time, Intel was just recovering from a media blitz nailingthe vendor on its cover-up of math problems inherent in its Pentium processor.Jokes were rampant, and Intel was desperately trying to find some graceful wayout of the mess.  It finally bowed to the inevitable and offered to replaceany Pentium that contained the fault.  You had to give a credit card number,but if you actually returned the faulty chip, your charge account was nevercharged.This strategy worked just fine.  Today, the Pentium CPU rules.  Sure, you canstill buy a 486, but why would you want to?  Everything goes better with aPentium, and system prices on the 75-MHz version (the 60- and 66-MHz CPUs haveall but disappeared) are under $2,000.  Even notebooks are Pentium powered.Cyrix and AMD are still able competitors, carrying the banner for their "5X86"technology.  But while the alternate CPUs are powerful, Intel's Pentium stillhas the edge in both power and market share.  But that's right now.  You neverknow what the future will bring.How much is that accounting package in the Window(s)?Accountants, as a professional group, have been rather slow to adopt Windows.And even those who have moved into the Windows environment haven't embracedWindows-based accounting applications with much gusto.Part of this is that while the benefits of Windows-based productivityapplications such as word processing and spreadsheets are pretty obvious,accounting itself is such a data entry oriented task that it's been difficultto understand the benefits that a visually oriented approach could offer.  Toborrow from the last, short-lived "Zorro" TV series, most of us just want to"Get in, make some Z's, and get out."This situation has resulted in a sort of Catch 22.  With accountants resistantto Windows-based accounting, vendors have been hesitant to invest much moneyand time in R&D.  With few packages available, accountants haven't felt muchpressure to change.That's changed pretty dramatically over the last two years.  It happened firstin the consumer market the year before last.  Windows-based packages fromPeachtree, Intuit, Microsoft, and scores of other vendors started to dominatethe market.  Not only in accounting applications, but in retail tax prep aswell.  With much of their Windows R&D already a sunk cost, many of thesevendors turned their attention to the professional market.  1995 saw a floodof products announced and shipped.  And those vendors that don't already havea Windows product line will most likely offer one this year.  When Win95 wasannounced, we received almost two dozen press releases from accounting and taxsoftware vendors announcing Win95 compliant packages.We're convinced that Windows-based applications offer concrete benefits inease of use, with drop-down menus, a consistent interface, pick-lists, andsimilar features.  Easier to use also means easier to learn, so your trainingand re-training costs go down as well.If you're still primarily a DOS shop, it's time for you to take a close lookat Windows applications.  In many cases, they really are better.CD-ROM gets faster, easier, and cheaper1995 will also be remembered as the year that CD-ROM became a standard, andeven expected, feature on desktop PCs.  Much of the reason for this is aone-two punch.  First, the year marked a switch from SCSI- and AT-interfaceddrives to the ATAPI IDE standard, which allows a drive just to plug into ahard disk cable or second IDE channel on the motherboard if available.This easy interfacing came along with the arrival of inexpensive quad-speeddrives, which dropped in price from over $400 at the start of the year tounder $150 by year's end.  When you purchase them with a complete system, oras part of an upgrade kit, it's quite possible to receive a quad-speed drivethat costs in the $100 range.But quad-speed is hardly even the state of the art.  Driven by more demandingmultimedia applications, six-speed drives are plentiful.  Diamond MultimediaSystems is shipping an eight-speed drive with its top-of-the-line upgrade kit,and several vendors are showing (but not yet shipping) ten-speed units.Many of you already have CD-ROM drives.  But with the silver disc now thedistribution media of choice, if you don't yet have a CD-ROM drive, it's timeto add one.  And if you have a slower drive, it's not very expensive toupgrade to one of the newer, speedier units.ZIP and EasyDrive give you lots of space for very little cashThe mass move to Windows has had one not-so-beneficial effect.  Suddenly,almost everyone is suffering from a lack of hard disk space.  With operatingsystems such as Win95 taking up mucho megabytes on their own, it doesn't takethe installation of too many megabyte-hungry application such as MicrosoftOffice (up to 75MB) before you start getting Disk Full messages from your PC.PCs these days are coming with larger hard disk drives, and replacement driveshave dropped below $400 for a gigabyte drive.  But what do you do if you arealready maxed out in your system?  Most PCs will only support two hard diskdrives.  Unless you want to start transferring files back and forth betweendiskettes and/or tape, you have a problem.Well, you did until recently.  Well-known vendors Iomega and SyQuest haveintroduced your solution-ZIP and EZ*DRIVE removable media drives.  Both thesevendors have a long track record in the removable media industry.  SyQuest hasbeen making high-capacity removable cartridge drives since the Apple II.Iomega followed suit with its Bernoulli Box for the IBM PC in the early 1980s.Over the years, both have been somewhat successful, mostly in verticalindustries.  Many of Iomega's sales have been to various branches of thegovernment and military, where the units' ruggedness is greatly valued, andthe relatively high cost is of secondary concern.  SyQuest has been a big hitin the publishing industry.  Many publications (including this one) send filescreated with page layout software to the printing house on SyQuest cartridges.But relatively high drive and media prices have kept either company from beingas successful as it might have been.  In 1995, however, both vendorsintroduced consumer-oriented, high-capacity storage solutions at affordableprices.  And sales for both have really taken off.The ZIP drive, introduced first, is a terrific-looking external drive thatuses a special 3.5-inch, flexible-media, removable disk.  Providing 100MB perdiskette, both the drive, at about $200, and the media, at $20 per 100MB, areeasy on your wallet.  We've been testing the parallel-port version of the ZIP,and we just love it (the review will be in a future issue).  It seems usersdo, too.  The drives have been flying off the shelves, and many vendors havebeen backordered almost continuously since the drive started shipping.This situation has worked out pretty well for SyQuest.  Its EZ*DRIVE is acomparably priced 135MB cartridge hard disk unit, available in bothparallel-port and SCSI versions (as is the ZIP), and in internal and externalversions (the ZIP is strictly external).  We also have an EZ*DRIVE underreview.  Except for some initial problems installing the SCSI interface, italso has been a joy to use.In fact, about the only fly in the ointment with either of these drives isthat Iomega has already announced a bigger and better drive.  Its Jaz driveshould be shipping about the time this appears.  And while we haven't yet seenone, it's expected to sell for under $500, with 1-gigabyte cartridges costingabout $100 each.  If Iomega does as good a job with the Jaz as it did with theZIP, there's no way it (or you) can lose.Tape backup hits rock bottomWhile we're on the topic of additional storage, let's not forget tape backup.1995 will probably be remembered as the year that tape backup becameaffordable enough for even home users.Tape backup is a technology that's been around almost as long as PCs.  We'veseen it go from the large, clunky 3-M cartridge technology to the tiny DAT(Digital Audio Tape) format.  One thing has remained constant over the years.Tape backup has been expensive, slow, and generally a pain to use.That was then.  The popular QIC format speeded up the backup process.  But ittook inexpensive parallel-port tapedrives to make tape backup an attractive technology.  Prices were falling allduring 1995, but MicroSolutions really hastened the process with an 800MBTravan-technology capable parallel-port drive for under $170.  Iomega quicklyfollowed suit with a similar Ditto drive.  Colorado Memory Systems, now ownedby Hewlett-Packard, already has a large chunk of the installed market, withthe lion's share of OEM deals with system vendors.  You can be sure Coloradowon't give up any sales easily to other tape drive vendors.Just to make things even better, backup software has really improved alongwith drive and tape technology.  Arcada Software provides the software forMicroSolutions and Iomega, and sells an enhanced version on its own.  Othervendors also have excellent software for backup available.Just about all of today's backup software offers extensive scheduling optionsand various data compression features to squeeze more data onto a single tape.Sure, we know you already have a tape backup drive on your system.  Butperhaps it's an older unit, with limited capacity.  With today's units, andtoday's prices, right now is a good time for you to upgrade.Accountants on-lineWhen it comes to technology, accountants generally get a bad rap.  Thestereotype is a green eye-shaded clerk bending over a ledger with a quill penin hand.  The reality, as we all know, is much different.  Accountants areusually quick to embrace a technology once the cost/benefits become clear.And nowhere is this more evident than in telecommunications, this year'shottest technology.Everyone's on the on-line services such as CompuServe and Prodigy.  CompuServehas long served as a support vehicle for numerous accounting software vendors,and if you sign onto Prodigy's Special Interest Section, the first listing youfind is one for accountants run by Sid Breman.The Microsoft Network hasn't been left out either.  F&G, AccountingTechology's publisher, is a Service Provider on MSN, and you'll find currentand back issues of Accounting Technology as well as its sister publicationsThe Practical Accountant and Accounting Today.  The Accounting Office, an arearun by Educational Edge, also provides MSN subscribers with access toaccountant-oriented resources.Even more interesting, however, is how accounting software vendors are amongthe leading-edge innovators on the Internet.  SBT, well known for itsaccounting software products, has an entire new division with the task ofhelping accountants find ways to profit from the Internet.  WebTrader, thedivision's first product, offers a secure method for conducting business overthe Net.  Abacus Accounting Systems, another well-known software vendor, isalso heavily into Internet development.And let's not forget the numerous vendors that have established Web homepages.  If you have an Internet account, be sure to check out Wayne's Web, theweb "home" of Wayne Harding.  Wayne's the VP of CPA Relations for Great PlainsSoftware, and his section can be found on Great Plains' Web page(http://www.gps.com).  If you're an Internet "newbie," Wayne's Web is a goodplace to start your Web exploring.Video conferencing hits the big time:  Here's looking at you, kidOne of the breakthrough technologies in the year just past was videoconferencing.  The basic technology has been available for several years, butit hasn't made much of a splash because of the incredible amount of resourcesneeded to make it work.  We've all been reading about PicturePhones, perhapsthe ultimate video-conferencing technology, for years.  And for years, they'vebeen just around the corner.  Some vendors, such as Casio and Matsushita, havebriefly sold consumer videophones, which sent a single frame of video everyfive or ten seconds.  These haven't been successful, as you may as well justpaste a picture of a person you're talking to on the phone.AT&T has had a bit more success.  If you want to video conference, you canbook some time in a local AT&T center in many major cities and havefull-motion video with other conferencees in similar facilities in othercities.The problem is bandwidth.  Video signals, when digitized, comprise a lot ofdata.  Normal telephone lines don't have the capability of carrying enoughinformation in real-time to allow full-motion video to be transmitted.  EvenAT&T has had to go to special dedicated lines for its video-conferencingservices.This limitation is also felt on the network, but things are changing rapidly.Today's high-speed Ethernet networks can carry much greater information loads.And ISDN phone lines are many times faster than standard ones.  Real-time datacompression reduces the amount of information that needs to be transmitted,while Pentium-level CPUs make it possible to do this compression anddecompression on normal desktop PCs.  Finally, video conferencing is becomingnot just technically feasible, but affordable as well.While it's not yet an off-the-shelf technology, since it needs somewhatspecialized skills to install and set up, there are some big names gettinginto video conferencing.  Intel's ProShare comes in several levels ofcapability.  We reviewed the mid-level package, which offers collaborationover a network, but not video.  With ProShare, video conferencing requires anISDN telephone line for each workstation, even if you're conferencingcompletely in-house.  Corel's new video-conferencing system only requires anISDN line for remote conferencing.  In-house, the video signal is sent over anunused pair of network wires.Video conferencing still isn't cheap.  With most of the systems available now,when all of the costs are tallied up (including a video camera for eachworkstation), you can expect to pay in the neighborhood of $1,000 per seat,with prices expected to drop again this year.  But in a mid-level firm, that'snot all that much money to have instant real-time video conferencing.  It mayeven be worthwhile to consider setting up a video-conferencing system betweenthe firm and its most important clients.  After all, how many other accountingfirms could offer a similar service?Color inkjets:  Better and even cheaper this yearOkay, we gave these inkjet printers a Diamond last year, so we really weren'tplanning on doing it again in '95.  However, we've just finished testing a newbatch of color inkjets, and we have to admit that as impressed as we were lastyear, we're even more so this time around.First off, there are more vendors in the field.  Yes, you can buy aninexpensive monochrome inkjet, but this class of printers is quicklydisappearing, being replaced by low-cost inkjet printers such as the EpsonStylus IIs, Lexmark 1020, and HP DeskJet 600.  All of these printers are"color-capable."  If you replace the monochrome print head with a three-colorunit (cyan, magenta, and yellow), you get full-color output.  The blacks are alittle muddy, since they're comprised of a mixture of the three colors, butoverall the color output looks just great.  And at under $350 (the Lexmark isunder $300), none of these will break the bank.You'll also have more choices in inexpensive four-color inkjets.  The CanonBJC-4100 and BJC-600e, HP 660, and Epson Stylus Color II all offer excellentoutput on plain paper, and are priced in the $550 price range.  Finally, theEpson Stylus Color Pro and HP 850 offer great output, good speed, andoffice-quality durability for well under $1,000.  For adding color to yourproposals and reports, this is definitely the year of the color inkjet.Multifunction printer/fax systems:  They dice, they sliceWe didn't start out liking multifunction office machines.  The idea isn't bad:a Swiss-army knife approach of incorporating a printer along with ascanner/fax machine.  After all, many offices need all of these capabilities,so why pay for separate machines and give up all of that desktop real estatewhen you can put them into one handy package?When we first looked at this solution, we were less than impressed.  Okidata'sDoc*It, one of the first of the breed, was large, expensive, and required aseparate interface card in your PC.  It worked pretty well, but it definitelywasn't a machine for the masses.  Panasonic's initial venture into thismarket, reviewed in the January 1995 printer round-up, was priced right, butgave us a bit of difficulty in setup and use.  Both these vendors deservekudos for their pioneering efforts.As with most technology, time has brought improvement.  We're currentlyreviewing the new breed of office equipment, and there's been a quantum leapin what these new units offer.  Hewlett-Packard's Office FX, Canon'sMultipass, and Lexmark's Medley are all inkjet based, and work with plainpaper.  All of them give excellent results, and the Lexmark unit can evenprint in color!  Brother's MF-4500 and Panasonic's new unit cost a littlemore, but both offer a laser printer, with its additional speed, as the basicprint platform.Couple attractive packaging, easy setup and use, and reasonable prices (in theneighborhood of $1,000 for laser-based units, under $700 or so for inkjetbased), and you have a real winner sitting on your desk.Your desk is alive with the sound of musicAccountants have embraced multimedia with both hands.  And they're not onlyusing multimedia products, but are creating their own multimedia reports andpresentations.  New presentation packages such as PowerPoint, ASAP, andAstound have wizards and assistants that take you step by step through theprocess.  Pre-designed templates offer just the right background, and OLE(object linking and embedding) makes it simple to place an "object," such as agraph, video clip, or even sound file, into your presentation.  There's even aspecialized package from Midisoft called Presentation Partner that makes iteasy to go even further, assembling various multimedia pieces into dynamitedog and pony shows.Technology has enabled the average user to incorporate a lot of fairlyesoteric "objects" into everyday presentations.  Video capture boards let youeasily use your camcorder to shoot video clips that just "drop" right intoPowerPoint, Freelance Graphics, or even Word for Windows, using the InsertObject command.  Lotus ScreenCam makes it possible to capture the action onyour screen while you're running an application.In fact, about the only place this scenario falls down is on the soundtrack.A really professional multimedia presentation generally features some sort ofmusical accompaniment.  You could just connect your CD or tape player to themicrophone input on your sound card, but that's not really a good solution.Not only are you stuck with the prerecorded length of the song you'repirating, but you're also violating someone's copyright.  Sound clipcollections, available on CD-ROM, are a better solution, but they're expensiveand also of fixed length.A better solution is one of the new soundtrack generators.  Available fromvendors such as Sonic Desktop, Yamaha, and Blue Ribbon Software (recentlyacquired by Microsoft), these products let you specify a style (rock, jazz,swing, reggae, country, etc.), a tempo, and a length, then stitch together amade-to-order file from musical components.  Each one works a bit differently,but they all let you adjust the instrument mix to some extent and perform somedegree of blending of musical style when your presentation changes mood.Obviously, none of these products is as good as having a group of professionalmusicians record a custom soundtrack specifically authored for you by apersonal composer.  But even if you have family in the music business, you'renot going to get it done for the under-$200 price tag that all of theseproducts sport.  And you'll be pleasantly surprised at how good a result youcan achieve with just a little playing around.  It's not essential technology,but it does let you add a good deal of polish to your presentations at minimalcost in money and effort.DOGSPentium Overdrive:  Sales shift into reverseOne of Intel's marketing strategies when it was first engineering thechangeover from the 486 to the Pentium was to provide an upgrade path.  Justas it had enabled you to upgrade 486 CPUs by popping in an "Overdrive" chip,Intel suggested that system vendors include a spare socket on their 486motherboards where a Pentium Overdrive chip could be plugged in at a latertime, converting the system to a Pentium-based PC.  Well, it sounded nice intheory, at least before Intel started shooting its own toes off one at a time.First came the delays.  With the math problems uncovered in the originalPentium CPU, you can be sure that Intel wasn't about to bring a replacementCPU to market with the same flaw.  So that delayed the introduction of theunit for a while.  (Bang!  There goes one toe.)  Retooling the chip productionlines to produce all the additional Pentiums needed to replace the originalCPUs put the Overdrive project even further behind.  (Bang!  There goesanother.)  Then there was the great socket problem.When Intel first started pitching the Pentium Overdrive at motherboardvendors, it specified an upgrade socket based on the pin-out design of theupgrade chip at that time.  Unfortunately, as the Pentium upgrade projectprogressed, the chip was continuously redesigned, and the number of pins thatthe chip had was changed.  All of a sudden, the original socket wouldn't workwith the upgrade chip.  (Bang!)  Intel respecified the socket configuration,and many motherboard and system designers went to a different colored socket.Even if you are willing to open up your PC before ordering your PentiumOverdrive and look for the socket (and possibly count the number of holes init), you still may not be able to get the right Pentium Overdrive for yoursystem.  Intel has been very slow in releasing different-speed versions.(Bang!)  And, assuming you've been lucky enough to find and install theversion for your particular 486 system, you may not have seen the speedincrease you expected, since Intel had to leave off some of the Pentium'sperformance features to make it compatible with 486 system design.  (Have werun out of toes yet?)There are a few companies that have survived in the system upgrade business.Evergreen Technologies, Improve, and Kingston still provide modules that letyou wring some additional performance out of your existing 486 at a reasonablecost.  But at this time last year, there were at least two other companies inthis business; they seem to have gone away since then.  Given Intel's ownexperiences, this doesn't seem too surprising.Novell:  Not so Perfect after all?Back in the '80's, Novell Corporation was king.  Its NetWare software was themust-have product if you were serious about having a network.  NetWare isstill the most popular network operating system, but over the years otherproducts, such as Artisoft's LANtastic and Microsoft's Windows NT, have shownNovell that it has to work to keep its dominance.But, riding high with its NetWare success, Novell made some acquisitions thatin retrospect may have done more harm than good.  Its UnixWare division,intended to make Novell as powerful in the Unix market as it is in DOS, hascome and gone, now residing with SCO.  And WordPerfect, once the king of wordprocessing and a prized Novell acquisition, is on the block, as is the QuattroPro spreadsheet software that Novell acquired from Borland.It's laudable that a company would want to diversify.  After all, anessentially one-product company such as Novell is at great risk if that oneproduct becomes less desirable and/or subject to increased competition.Novell's big mistakes were buying a company with products that its ownmanagement had no experience with (NetWare isn't a retail product, whileWordPerfect's product line is), and moving too slowly out of the DOSenvironment.  WordPerfect may still have the largest number of DOS users ofany product, but who cares.  Like it or not, the world is moving to Windows.Let's hope Novell's foray into retail applications hasn't done too muchdamage.  After all, NetWare is still the standard for networking, and withless of a drain on its resources, hopefully Novell will become a bit quickerin addressing some of the challenges that newer Windowing environments offer.As for WordPerfect and Quattro Pro, it may be that they have peaked and arenow waning.Tax software vendors:  And another one bites the dustThe year just past was a rough one for tax prep software vendors.  Every yeara few more vendors leave the tax prep market.  Some, such as Prentice-HallProfessional Software, sell out to another vendor.  In P-H's case, it wasacquired by CLR.  With its own GoSystem and EasyGo products, CLR will mostlikely concentrate on the FAST!  audit software it acquired, rather thanexpending effort on aging tax prep products that compete with its own.  Twoother vendors, FlashTax and Tax Resources, closed their doors before ourannual 1040 Face-Off over the summer.  Right after our 1040 Face-Off wascompleted, a fourth vendor, RAM Software, was acquired by SCS/Compute.It's pretty inevitable that these won't be the last tax prep vendors to closetheir doors.  After all, the professional tax prep market is just aboutsaturated, with very few new, first-time sales being made.  For a vendor togain a new client, it either has to cannibalize some other vendor's user baseor buy out another vendor.  The only other places to generate new business areout in the retail market, as Intuit is doing with its consumer/retail sales ofbusiness tax products, or moving into entirely new markets, as Pencil Pushershas done with its CFS services division.The food chain is a fact of nature.  Big fish eat little fish and areconsumed, in turn, by the next rung up the food chain.  But tax prep vendorsaren't fish; they're people who in many cases have spent an enormous amount ofeffort trying to build a business.  Change is an unavoidable part of life, butwe always experience a twinge of sadness when we read about another vendorpassing into the pages of tax prep history.MIXED BAGS ...And sometimes you don'tWhat we didn't like all that much was Microsoft's Win95 Beta Program.  Billedas the largest beta test ever, it was plagued by media mismanagement anddeadline pressure.  Once Microsoft decided that it couldn't afford the badpress that was sure to result if it blew another announced shipping deadline,the highly touted beta program was mostly for show.  Going through several"final" release candidates, Microsoft's answer to an inability to solve somefairly major problems was to pare features out of the operating system.  Thestrategy worked; after all, it was able to ship a moderately robust product onAugust 24th, as promised.  But it wasn't the product Microsoft initiallyintended to ship when beta testing started.We won't state that Microsoft should have let the deadline slip again tocorrect, rather than cut, features it had difficulty getting to work.  Afterall, at some point you have to bite the bullet and ship a product, even if itisn't 100 percent of what you had hoped.  It takes a lot of courage to airyour dirty laundry in public, as Microsoft wound up having to do during itsextensive beta test program of Win95.What we do take umbrage with is all of the hype that went on with this betaprogram.  Not only was Win95 the largest beta test in history, it was uniquein that thousands of copies of beta software were sold as part of Microsoft'sPreview program.  Savvy software vendors such as Symantec's Norton divisionjumped right on the bandwagon, with "preview" versions of its Win95 utilities.Come on, guys.  There's such a thing as carrying things too far!PentiumPro, not for beginnersJust when you thought it was safe to go back into the computer store, you findout there's a new big fish in the pond.  Intel has had great success prettymuch killing off the 486 in favor of its Pentium CPU.  But the Pentium is acouple of years old already, and it's old news.  By the time you read this, anumber of vendors will be advertising, and probably shipping, systems withIntel's next generation of CPU, the PentiumPro.  The PentiumPro has moretransistors, more cache RAM (moved to a separate chip), and at least on paper,more power.But just as was the case when almost every new generation of hardware has beenintroduced, the advances in hardware have outstripped most users' ability totake advantage of them.  Yes, you can use a PentiumPro-equipped PC as a sortof "super" Pentium.  But only if you are already running 32-bit applicationsunder a 32-bit operating system such as Windows NT, Win95, or OS/2.  If youstill run mostly 16-bit applications (as most of us do), early benchmarksindicate that these applications run slower on a PentiumPro than on a Pentium.Additionally, the early marketing hype on the PentiumPro talked up thebenefits that this new CPU would bring to Asymmetric Multiprocessing.  Thistechnology uses several CPUs within a system and splits the computational loadbetween them.  Unfortunately, it's been more difficult to get this technologyworking reliably than the vendors had anticipated.  Even with the highlytouted PentiumPro.Make no mistake about it.  Intel will be successful with the PentiumPro CPU,just as it has been with its other CPU products in the past.  It just won'thappen overnight.  The Pentium CPU, which will achieve speed of 150s and 175MHz this year, is still going to be the CPU of preference for a while.IBM 1-2-3?And, as long as we're talking about strange acquisitions, let's not forgetIBM's 3 billion dollar purchase of Lotus.  You've got to admire IBM; it's acompany that's succeeded in spite of itself.  First there was the IBM PC, aproduct that none of IBM's top management at the time believed would sell.When it took off like a rocket, quickly becoming the standard for desktopcomputing, IBM made a series of incredible design decisions.  Remember thePCjr?  How about IBM's version of the Compaq transportable?  The P70?  And whocan forget the MCA (Micro Channel Architecture) bus?As incredible as it may seem with this track record, IBM still manages to makelots of money.  When you're that big, it takes an awful lot to throw you offthe course.  At the same time, Big Blue doesn't exactly have a stellar recordin applications software either.  How many of you remember TopView, IBM'sanswer to the original Windows?  The IBM Accounting Series?  Hollywood?  Wereyou even aware that IBM started up a PC software division, acquired marketingrights to a number of products, then closed down the division?And who else but IBM could consider OS/2 a hit?  Sure, it really is a greatoperating system, and it has shipped a couple of million copies, about whatWin95 shipped in the first month of availability.  Even IBM provides Windowson its Aptiva PCs that it sells through Radio Shack.With this string of software successes behind it, it kind of makes sense thatIBM would want Lotus.  After all, Lotus has the tremendously successful 1-2-3,which will hopefully be available for Win95 by the time you read this.  Thenthere's AmiPro, oops, we mean WordPro, the hit word-processing package.We admit it, we're being mean.  Accountants still use 1-2-3, probably morethan any other specific user group.  But how many are buying the newestversion when they go looking for an upgrade?  1-2-3 has steadily given groundto Excel as Windows has become the operating system of choice.  It's possiblefor a product to go into a slide and recover, but it doesn't happen often.Most of the other Lotus applications, such as Freelance Graphics, are alsobeing overtaken by products from other vendors.But it's a good bet that IBM really wanted Lotus for the wildly successfulNotes product.  Notes is the premier groupware product on the market today,and it almost single-handedly set many of the standards for workflow officeproducts.  But the paradigm has changed with the popularity of the Internet.Notes was designed around (and optimized for) a network environment.  TheInternet is sort of a super wide-area network, and the current version ofNotes doesn't work as well with it as some other technologies.  You can besure IBM is working on it; it's got a lot of strength and experience inclient-server technology, which is one of the bases of the Internet.Having many of Lotus's top management people take a hike after the acquisitioncan't be helping matters, however.  Notes is a "big company" kind of product.Lots of "big companies" have made large investments in Notes technology, sothere's a very strong reason for IBM to make a commitment to keeping themomentum going with the product.The downside is that technology changes quickly; witness the Internet.  Andwhile momentum can often be good, it also makes it difficult to changedirections quickly.Will Notes (and Lotus) survive the IBM approach?  Right now the acquisition isa Mixed Bag.  But it could go either way this year.Color lasers:  Set lasers on intermittentOn paper, a color laser printer is almost irresistible.  For around $6,000, ornot quite twice what one of the original LaserJet printers sold for, you getthe best of both worlds.  When you need black and white, your printer zoomsout a speedy 12 pages per minute.  And, when there's a client presentation orreport to do, gorgeous color pages flow from the printer, on plain paper, at 3pages per minute.  With competition for clients getting fiercer by the minute,even that six grand price tag doesn't seem all that imposing, measured againstthe print-on-demand capabilities offered by one of the new color lasers.Color inkjets are terrific, but ah, for a color laser!That's the way it would work if a color laser was as easy to use out of thebox as regular monochrome lasers are.  That hasn't been our experience,however.  When a major vendor of color lasers offered us the opportunity lastyear to look at its latest model, we jumped at the chance.  Weighing in atover 100 pounds, it took two of us to unpack it and move it into position, anda fair amount of time to set it up.  Mechanically, with four different colortoners (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black), these printers are more complexthan a single-color laser.  Even this setup, though somewhat time-consuming,isn't beyond the abilities of most potential users.But in several months of testing, we ran into problem after problem.  Flakydrivers for Windows and Windows NT drove us nuts.  Problems with long printjobs were also disconcerting.  Sometimes the job printed in its entirety,sometimes the same job printed halfway through, then started spewing pages ofPostScript code.  The vendor's technical support was helpful, but in the endwe decided that we had experienced just too many problems to continue ourreview.  Thanking the vendor, we offered to come back at a later time foranother look.We have another vendor's color laser currently under review at the moment.This is a new product, and the vendor has a strong background in providingterrific software drivers.  We won't mention the vendor since we want somemore experience before we decide on a full-scale review, but so far, so good.We've been running Windows 3.11 drivers under Win95 with no problems yet.  Thenext step is to try networking the unit and moving it between a number ofdifferent PCs.  At over 100 pounds (all color lasers are heavy!), this won'tbe easy, but we want to make sure that this unit doesn't have the sameproblems we ran into with the last printer.  If it doesn't, than you canexpect a review soon, and maybe in next year's Diamonds and Dogs, we canchange the Mixed Bag into a Diamond.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Top Financial Planning SoftwareFinancial planning software can help you and your clients find perfect ways toearn more money.  Here's a selection of top packages to help you find theperfect solution for your clients' needs.The All-Star Line-Up.  BNA Income Tax Planner, BNA Software, 1231 25th St.,NW, Washington, DC 20037, $495; with Fifty State Planner, $890.  Available nowfor either Windows or plain DOS (the DOS version is called BNA Income TaxSpreadsheet), BNA's planner lets you project federal income tax for up to 10years.  With the optional Fifty State Planner, you can do the same for all 50states, the District of Columbia and New York City.  It calculates regular,alternative minimum and capital gains, self employment, lump sum and estimatedtaxes and lets you input data from K-1s and 1099s.  Along with the Income TaxPlanner, BNA sells a Corporate Tax Planner and Estate Tax Planner.Easy Money Plus, Money Tree Software, 1753 Wooded Knolls Dr., Philomath, OR97370, (503) 929-2140, $500; Golden Years, $500; Retirement Solutions Plus,$250.  Easy Money Plus prepares the key pieces in a client's financial plan,including net worth, cash flow, retirement, survivor, education funding,estate taxes and income taxes.  It uses questionnaires to create its reports.Golden Years produces a 52-year projection of assets, income, expenses andincome taxes using a Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows template.Retirement Solutions Plus supplies nine programs that cover lump sum and earlyretirement distributions, 401(k) and IRA accumulation accounts and otherretirement issues.ExecPlan, ExecPlan, Inc., 777 Alexander Rd., Princeton, NJ 08540, (609)987-5000, $1,995.  ExecPlan's estate-planning features let you draw up assetdistribution plans.  Using a flowchart, you move assets between family membersand the program recomputes the results.ExecPlan also offers federal and state tax planning, retirement and educationplanning, stock option analysis and cash management.  You can do investmentplanning, draw up a capital needs analysis in case of disability or death andprepare a financial profile.Vista, ViewPlan, Inc., PO Box 80788, San Diego, CA 92138, (800) 826-2127,$699.  A Windows-based estate-planning package, Vista provides visualpresentation tools, such as flowcharts and graphs, along with text, thatillustrate estate tax consequences for your clients.  A DOS version, EstateForecast Model, is available, and ViewPlan offers Data+, a $99 Windows and DOSadd-on program to help you gather client asset information.In addition, ViewPlan sells Factuary, a $349 Windows program for calculatingwhat-if scenarios and tax effects for clients; Progeny, a $349 DOS productthat graphically displays the tax benefits of using generation skipping; andBenequick, a $349 Windows and DOS product that calculates charitable gift taxdeductions and illustrates their benefits.  Later in the year, ViewPlanintends to offer Beneview, a Windows product that will graphically display thetax advantages of charitable trusts.Expert Series, Sterling Wentworth, 57 W.  200 South, Ste.  500, Salt LakeCity, UT 84101, (800) 752-6637, $695 per module, $1,995 for full system.Sterling Wentworth's Windows update to its DOS-based Planman incorporatesRetirement Expert, Portfolio Expert, Estate Expert, Risk Management Report andExpert Tool Kit modules.  Retirement Expert provides 55 reports that you cancustomize through a drag-and-drop interface.Portfolio Expert lets you evaluate your clients' investment objectives anddefine 10 portfolio categories and nine portfolio allocations.Estate Expert analyzes your clients' current estate value and tax liabilitiesand estimates what they'll be in the future.The Risk Management Report covers survivor needs and disability income.  Andthe Expert Tool Kit handles lump sum distributions, accumulation, mortgagerefinance, income tax and cash flow.Financial Planning Professional, Lumen Systems, Inc., 4300 Stevens CreekBlvd., Ste.  270, San Jose, CA 95129, (800) 233-3461, $1,495 single-user.This comprehensive financial planning system can produce either modular orfull plans, or macro or micro plans, depending on the amount of informationyou want.Leonard 2000, Mobius Group, P.O.  Box 13959, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,(800) 632-3044, $1,500.  Leonard 2000 generates professional-looking reportspacked with information and graphs.  The reports are organized into sectionsfor the Objective and Recommendations.In addition, Mobius sells Leonard 5000, which covers asset and riskmanagement, cash flow and income taxes and retirement and estate planning.M-PREPS (Professional Retirement Planning System), a $200 product from Mobius,offers extensive modeling, historical rates of return for assets, andprojections in full color reports.PFP Partner, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, P.O.  Box2209, Jersey City, NJ 07303-2209, (800) 226-5800, $595 for AICPA members, $655for non-members.  The AICPA's financial planning product automates goalcalculations, producing a five-year statement of projected net worth,five-year cash flow projection and tables for education, retirement anduser-specified goals.In addition, the software lets you try out what-if scenarios, showing whathappens when you increase annual contributions according to any rate.  Ithandles risk management and performs a needs analysis for life and disabilityinsurance.Professional Series, International Financial Data Systems, Inc., P.O.  Box888165, Atlanta, GA 30356-0165, (800) 554-8004, Professional Series/3, $599;Professional Series/2, $399; Penny Pincher II, $199.  Professional Series/3provides an interactive database, including an investment and tax shelterlibrary, client directory, balance sheet projection by asset category,mortality table, tax rate maintenance programs and a variety of personalizedreports, including five-year projections of AMT and federal income tax.Professional Series/2 is a more scaled back product that can store up to 30investments or tax shelters.  Penny Pincher II analyzes net worth, educationcost and capital needs.Profiles Plus, Financial Profiles, Inc., 5421 Avenida Encinas, Ste.  A,Carlsbad, CA 92008, (800) 237-6335, $695.  Profiles Plus includes personalfinancial planning and business planning modules, client data management and arun-time version of Harvard Graphics.ProPlan, Financial Planning Consultants, Inc., 2507 N.  Verity Pkwy., P.O.Box 430, Middletown, OH 45042-0430, (800) 666-1656, $495; Lifescape graphingmodule, $85; monthly support, $95.  ProPlan handles planning in a variety ofareas:  income tax, investment, risk management, educational funding, cashflow, estate, survivor income and retirement.  It figures estate income andliquidity, analyzes retirement income and retirement account projections andcomputes the effects of disability for either spouse.Quicken Financial Planner, Intuit, P.O.  Box 3014, Menlo Park, CA 94026, (800)816-8025, $39.95.  This retirement planning product takes your clients who useQuicken through an interview about their finances and retirement goals andbuilds a plan.  To refine the plan, they can just click a button and see whathappens if they save more money or less in the bank, retire sooner rather thanlater, and invest more conservatively or aggressively.  The program helpschoose an appropriate mutual fund and assists with planning other goals suchas college and a second home purchase.  To top it all off, there are 30minutes of multimedia advice from Newsweek columnist Jane Bryant Quinn.Total Resource, Wilson Associates International, Inc., 1355 Terrell Mill Rd.,Bldg.  1462, Ste.  200, Marietta, GA 30067, (800) 831-7636, $2,495 ($1,000rebate available).  Total Resource lives up to its name, with capabilities inthe areas of marketing, practice management, asset tracking and portfoliomanagement, general financial planning, tax and cash flow, retirement, estate,insurance, education, disability and compliance and commission tracking.  Itincludes a database of 2,500 securities and lets you set up your own assetcategories for portfolio tracking.You can also set up a client prospect database with the system, usequestionnaires to gather data from clients and produce financial statements.For other purposes, you can produce a survivor needs analysis, see the cashvalue of insurance policies, analyze disability needs for your clients andtheir spouses and track the status of buy and sell security orders.Financial planning software can provide valuable information for your clientsand rewarding returns for your practice.MICHAEL COHN is senior editor of Accounting Technology.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Financial Planners' Secrets of SuccessAfter 10 years of grinding out monthly financial statements and tax returns,Peggy Ruhlin shut down her CPA practice to go into financial planning.  Andshe never looked back.  At the height of the next season, she called herharried friends at the old firm.  "I'm going skiing," she told them.  "Whatare you doing?"  She could almost hear their teeth gnashing.  "I went on twovacations during that first tax season.  It was wonderful."Since then, Ruhlin has built a major financial planning practice, Boudros &Ruhlin, in Columbus, Ohio.  Boudros & Ruhlin manages about $250 million inclient funds, making it a major discount broker's biggest operator in theregion.And she is not alone.  More and more tax and accounting professionals, many ofthem CPAs, are getting into financial planning.  Some enter the field byaccident, pushed by faithfulclients seeking help as they enter their most fruitful years.  Others arepulled by the huge promise of an exploding market of monied but fretfulbaby-boomers.Different Challenges.  To be sure, the typical fee-only financial planningfirm remains as small a business as the average tax and accounting practice.Industry sources say most offices have one owner, who may net about $75,000 ayear, and one assistant.  About 25 percent of the financial planners arewomen, a much higher level of ownership than in accounting.  Few practiceswill have more than $10 million in funds under management, priced at a 1% feeor less.But freed from billing by the hour, a practitioner's income is limited only byhis or her ability to develop clients.  Fees based on a percentage of assetsunder management can rise with little or no incremental costs, meaning everynew dollar falls straight to the bottom line.  In a bull market year, everytick upward in the Standard & Poor's index is another clang of the assetmanager's cash register.  "When the S&P is up 25%," said one practitioner,"clients don't notice the 1% annual charge.""If your target market is small business and professionals," says CPA BobPhillips, "you end up dealing with financial planning issues whether you likeit or not."  Phillips is one of eight partners at the CPA firm of Whipple &Co., which, with 60 people and revenue of more than $5 million, is one of the10 largest firms in Indianapolis.In his firm, Phillips is the one charged with the mission of building thefinancial planning practice.  "We decided years ago to help our clients plantheir personal lives as systematically as we do their businesses," he says.As a result, Phillips is now playing an active role in his clients' investmentdecisions and portfolio structuring.But serious financial planning work, which always involves actual investmentdecisions and execution, is much different from traditional estate planning.The leading financial planners, whether they work on commission or onfee-only, relish their roles as active players.  They share a desire to bemore than a mere advisor.  They also cherish the challenge of makinginvestment decisions, choosing products and running money.People-Oriented Focus.  Many traditional CPAs and tax professionals just don'thave the constitution for it.  "There's a lot more uncertainty in this work,"says Phillips.  "All of a sudden, you are much more accountable for a lot ofthings you can't control.""You have to be very people-oriented," adds CPA Cynthia Conger.  "It's a lotmore difficult for the technical types to get into the counseling aspects ofthis work."  Conger, now one of two principals in the Arkansas FinancialGroup, in Little Rock, earned her CPA certificate in 1981, using it first as acorporate controller and later in insurance sales.  She started full-blown,comprehensive financial planning in 1985 with an associate from the insuranceagency.At first, she shunned tax returns.  But bending to client demand, todayConger's Arkansas Financial Group handles about 175 tax customers a year,including corporate and fiduciary forms.  Her firm also handles accounting atsix to eight small businesses.  But the core of the business is the 250 to 300financial plans she writes a year and the $35 million in assets undermanagement.  Eventually, she and her partner plan to launch a trust company toadminister all the trusts they've put in place for clients.  But before that,Conger may launch a line of administrative services for individuals, to handleroutine bill-paying and banking chores, which could be invoiced monthly.  "Wedeal with a lot of double-doctor households who just don't have the time to dothis kind of thing," she says.Gary Shalhoob, a Dallas financial planner, agrees.  "CPAs need a much broaderperspective as a financial planner," says Shalhoob.  "You have to weigh notonly the estate and tax consequences, but also the investment ramifications aswell."  Shalhoob developed financial planning units first at Bank of Americaand then at Deloitte & Touche and Price Waterhouse before starting his ownfirm, Resource Management Group.  He is also a contributing author to "Tax &Financial Planning for Older Clients," issued by Practitioners Publishing Co.of Fort Worth, Texas, an affiliate of Faulkner & Gray Inc.Today Shalhoob works with CPAs, trading referrals, convinced that BigSix-sized financial planning practices are not economically sensible.  "Thisis not a business you can build on leverage," he says.  "All the service isvery personal, nothing can be delegated."  But firms are also limited in theirrange of movement.  They might be reluctant to recommend specific stocks orfinancial companies, if they are involved as auditors.  Mixing audit clientsand financial planning clients can also complicate carefully groomedrelationships.  "One bad year in the market for a CFO could blow your auditcontract," Shalhoob says.  And, with a big firm's overhead, pricing is aproblem if you can't work on commission.  "Anyone trying to do fee-onlyfinancial planning has a very difficult time making money," Shalhoob says.So, many CPA financial planners do what Ron Humeney has done.  Humeney, aSouthfield, Mich., CPA, runs two businesses-Starfire Financial, to handle taxpreparation, and Starfire Investment Advisory Sevices, to sell products andmanage assets.  If they are unfettered by CPA regulations, they might do whatEd Gerstein and Gregg Fisher have done.  Gerstein ran a Brooklyn, N.Y., taxpractice solo until two years ago when he brought nephew Gregg into thebusiness.  Today, Gerstein crunches tax returns for about 1,500 clients, whileFisher is attempting to leverage that database into a financial planningpractice.RICK TELBERG is editor of Accounting Today, also published by Faulkner & Gray.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996This Just In:  Getting Back to BusinessIf you cringe every time you hear another Congressperson say how great itwould be if only everybody paid a flat tax, it's time for you to investigateoptions in business tax preparation.  Compared to the near-universal gripingthat goes on about the 1040 individual tax, few politicians are getting muchsound bite time on the evening news if they propose axing corporation taxes.Sharpening your practice's focus on business tax clients could help save itfrom rough times in 1997.Perhaps in anticipation of greater demand for professional business taxproducts next year, software vendors are beefing up their 1065, 1120, and1120S lines with more capabilities this year.  Even if your firm already has asolid foundation of business tax clients and the software to service them, youmay want to consider where your current vendor is heading compared to othersin the industry.  We checked with them to find out what their plans are forthe software they'll be shipping this season.Alpine climbs every mountainAlpine Data is packing more features into its 1995 Tax/Pack Professionalbusiness modules.  You'll be able to access a preparer scratchpad from anyscreen, so you can take notes on a client whose return you're preparing.  Alsomore accessible will be the pop-up calculator, which you'll be able to bringup from within any field.  And a new monthly calendar utility will be poppingup as well.Alpine is also leaving room for your laser forms software.  It offers a laserfill feature that lets you view and enter data on laser forms that aren'tincluded in the Tax/Pack software.  Tax/Pack will then save the data that youtype in to a separate area from the business return data.Form 1120 customers will now be getting a full billing module.  And Alpineplans to add the billing module to its 1065 and 1120S products as well.AM wake-up callIt's morning in America, and AM Software is already enhancing its business taxsoftware for the coming season.  Whereas the AM-Tax LaserForms product was anoptional add-on last year, this year AM is including it with its 1065, 1120,and 1120S programs.  But despite bundling the laser software, AM isn'tignoring other types of printers.  It has improved its graphical printingfeatures, so you can get official-looking forms on inkjet and dot-matrixprinters without resorting to special fonts or extra software.Networked offices will now be able to enjoy network compatibility with AM-Tax,so multiple users can share data files while keeping their own systemsettings.  AM has also simplified data entry by offering convenient pick listson certain forms.  You'll be able to access them by pressing a function key,choose the entry you want, point to it, and the program will enter your choiceinto the field.Lower renewal prices will please existing customers.  They're down 20 percentto $129.  And to go along with the new network compatibility, you can addextra AM-Tax stations for only 20 percent of the original, first-computersoftware price.More pluses for AndersenArthur Andersen LLP is showing its Big 6 muscle with enhancements to its APlus business tax line.  A Plus Tax 1120 and 1065 are gaining per-returnpricing and more comprehensive calculations.  You'll also see interfaces tothe AICPA's ATB (Accountant's Trial Balance) and Andersen's own electronicworkpapers products.For 1065 users, Andersen is providing a special allocations worksheet, as wellas inter-product transfers of K-1 data.  The K-1's will automatically printwith the 1040, saving time for A Plus Tax 1040 users.  Also saving time willbe a direct interface to CD-ROM tax research products like CCH U.S.  MasterTax Guide, RIA OnPoint, and BNA Tax Practice Series.Andersen has tinkered with the A Plus interface as well, consolidating screensand improving screen and application flow.  A multimedia training course willbe available.  And on the boards for next year is a Windows version.If you're in the tax department of a large corporation or have large corporateclients, also check out the brand-new Windows-based AACTS (Arthur AndersenCorporate Tax Solutions) line.  Aimed at corporations with multiple entitiesor multiple filing responsibilities, it will handle federal and state taxcompliance, and prepare the 1120.  AACTS will integrate with other Windowsapplications, by using facilities like DDE (Dynamic Data Exchange), so it canupdate data from other Windows apps in real-time.One product in the AACTS line, DataOnDemand, will establish dynamic linksbetween an Excel spreadsheet and your corporate tax information.  Anotherproduct, AACTS Real-Time Tax, will integrate with high-end general ledgerapplications such as SAP and Oracle; it will also include support for SQL(Structured Query Language) and ODBC (Open Data Base Connectivity) standards.A third product, AACTS-International Planning, will let you build complex taxscenarios over multiple-year periods, such as calculating dividends and loansfrom foreign subsidiaries.  It's a whole new aact for Arthur Andersen.ATX enhances the spreadsheetATX Forms has enhanced its TaxSolver line of spreadsheet-based tax prepsoftware by adding a Windows-based forms program.  The result is ATX's newSaber line.  Unlike TaxSolver, which required you to combine the ATX templateswith either 1-2-3 or Excel, Saber cuts out the need for third-party softwareby including a built-in spreadsheet program.  Saber also provides an audittrail, along with the ability to create formulas and write directly on the taxforms.ATX sells its 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs in several ways.  Each return isavailable in a Basic version for $49, and a Professional version for $99.  TheBasic version includes a few of the most important supporting forms andschedules, along with extension and depreciation worksheets.  The Professionalversion provides more than 100 supporting forms and schedules, together withthe ability to create client letters and invoices.In addition, bundled packages are available for preparing the 1065, 1120, and1120S, along with other types of forms.  A basic version of this bundle,called Business Basic, sells for $149.  The Professional version costs $295.CCH proves it's a proCCH is upgrading the Windows version of its ProSystem fx 1065, 1120, and 1120Sprograms by adding interfaces to general ledger and time and billing products.Also being added to the 1120S product is an interface to CCH Tax Assistant forS Corporations, a practice management system with research, analysis, andcompliance features.Installation and printing will also be on the upswing in ProSystem fx.GoSystem keeps going and going...CLR/Fast-Tax's GoSystem 2 is really going places in both its DOS and Windowsversions.  The system now supports fast 28,800 bits per second transmissionspeeds for electronic filing, and CLR will be offering NetWare 4.1 and Windows95 support as well this season.The 1065 program for DOS and Windows will let you perform multiple partnertransfers on the same day.  And it will handle transfers with capitalcontributions and distributions while using the same locator, as well as dotransfers for more than five excluded partners.The 1120 software for DOS and Windows will offer an express consolidationfeature to speed up consolidation time.  You'll also be able to delete rentalproperties.  In addition, CLR has reorganized the rent and royalty input, andwill be enhancing the 1120 program's list of activity codes.  The program willsummarize state tax liabilities and supply a common input for stateintangibles.The Windows version alone has several enhancements.  It now offersadministrative functions that used to be found only in the DOS version.  TheView menu will include a Received Date option.  And CLR is going to beproviding a Windows version of its TaxServer product and will support aWindows Portable Organizer.Upcoming hyperlink capabilities in the Windows product will add hyperlinks tofields, as well as "direct to organizer" hyperlinks.  Workpapers will allowoverrides, DIF import and export, and hyperlinking by field.Also on the way are better navigation capabilities, including a FileManager-like expanding folder metaphor.  You'll be able to customize menuswith activity descriptions, toggle menus on or off, bring up a new "activeforms" view, and edit and format customized letters for all return types.Lots of changes are coming for GoSystem users.Digitax does graphicsCold River Software has been promoting its Windows-based 1040 software,Veritax, for the past couple of seasons.  But even its DOS-based tax product,Digitax Business Returns, is getting some graphical enhancements.  The 1065,1120, and 1120S programs will be offering graphically enhanced supportingschedules and letters.  Also going graphical are the manuals.  They'll beavailable in both printed form and in a printable, searchable Adobe Acrobatelectronic format.Cold River's also moving toward better technical support.  A 24-hour FaxBackservice is now available, as well as a home page on the Internet's World WideWeb.  Surf the Cold River rapids at http://www.cold-river.com.CPAS makes new convertsCPASoftware's business tax software is undergoing a conversion for theupcoming filing season.  You'll be able to convert entities from 1120 to1220S, or 1120S to 1120.  And CPAS is not only converting its 1120, it'sconsolidating it as well.  You'll be able to consolidate up to 10 corporationswith the 1120, as well as prepare supplementals for the first four pages ofyour consolidations, along with supplementals for applicable forms, schedules,and supplemental schedules, such as the 4562, Schedule D, and other income.In addition to conversion, salvation is at hand.  CPAS's new archivingfeatures let you save tax returns, input detail, workpapers, and other filesin a compressed format.  CPAS is passing the silver platter too by offeringaccess to CD-ROM research material.  State clicks will be another new option,allowing you to buy use of a state package one return at a time (similar tothe pay-per-return concept).Speaking of states, you'll be able to compute up to five states with a singlecompute.  New states joining the CPAS flock include Arizona, California, NewYork, and Texas for the 1120.  Entering the 1120S fold will be California, NewYork, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin, and new 1065 states for Arizona, California,New Jersey, and New York.  Only one new city return will be added to the 1065,1120, and 1120S, but it's a big one:  New York City.Creating the UltrabusinessCreative Solutions is building a better business solution for this comingseason.  It's adding 10 new states to its 1120/1120S package, UltraTax/1120,upping its coverage to 31 states for both C and S corps.  In UltraTax/1065, 13new states are joining the Union, for a grand total of 23.  These new programswill be available on the UltraTax CD-ROM and as pay-per-return options.UltraTax/1120 is also gaining a two-year comparison and calculation to supportthe IRC Section 1377 (a)(2) election for termination of a shareholderinterest.A new feature to speed data entry to the ultra-quick level will be an Index ofTax Subjects that helps you locate the proper section of the appropriate dataentry screen when you're not quite sure where to input a particular item.You'll also be able to generate custom selection lists of commonly used itemsspecific to your area, such as local banks.Drake makes goodDrake Software will let you print all its forms in either laser or dot-matrixmode this season.  You'll be able to access on-line help for almost every dataentry field, and written documentation will be improved.  Over 35 federalforms will be available.  Drake will also offer a new pay-per-return option,priced at $250 for up to 20 returns per computer, and $10 apiece foradditional returns.Dunphy does itDunphy Systems' federal 1120 program will offer support this season for Form1120-W (Estimated Tax for Corporations), with a three-page quarterlyworksheet.  And Dunphy will provide Ohio users with a new quarterly look-uptable for county personal property rates in its Ohio FT1120/FT1120S package.Michigan users too will be seeing some enhancements.  The new Michigan SingleBusiness Tax (SBT) program will support all 17 forms for that tax, includingextensions, estimates, and amended returns.  You'll also be able to importcompany and shareholder information into the Michigan SBT from other federalprograms, such as Dunphy's 1040, 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The MichiganSBT will even include laser forms software, so you can make official-lookingprintouts for your Michigan business clients.Exactax minds its businessExactax has been integrating software from the Business Tax Service of NewYork with its own system, and this season will be offering a trial balanceworksheet input system.  You'll be able to input information through a trialbalance income statement and balance sheet into the Business Tax System, soyou can complete the books and use the year-end trial balance, instead ofconverting book data into tax return format.Other enhancements will include automated multiple-state processing, alongwith new state returns for Arizona, California, Connecticut, Delaware,District of Columbia, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, NewJersey, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Virginia.  Exactaxis also making its supporting schedules and instruction letters easier toread, and its estimated tax section more comprehensive and automatic.  Theprogram will compute Section 277 Co-op Housing figures, and will offer moreflexibility when you enter detail on a Schedule K-1.Business Tax System will provide comprehensive net operating loss andcontribution carryover schedules, along with more comprehensive financialstatements, such as the statement of cash flows, interim financial statements,and sole proprietor (Schedule C) financial statements.  You'll be able togenerate a financial statement from the book data you enter to create a taxreturn.In addition, the system will automatically print the original extension formfor each return that you have on extension.  And it will handle unlimitedK-1's and rental income, as well as comprehensively report rental detail foreach K-1.  You'll be able to prepare automatic book/tax adjustments for itemssuch as depreciation, amortization, contributions, entertainment, penalties,officers life insurance, federal income tax, Section 263A, and automobilelease inclusion.  Exactax will offer expanded customer service hours, from 6am to 7 pm Pacific time (or 9 am to 10 pm Eastern time).  That should matchmany accounting firms' regular hours this tax season.Intuit pursues two marketsFor tax year 1995, Intuit is making a big push to upgrade its business taxproducts, for professional tax preparers and small-business taxpayers alike.A new Homebase feature in the professional software will provide convenientaccess to client files and main program functions (such as printing andtransferring).  You'll be able to access the entire TurboTax ProSeries linefrom the Homebase as well, and generate any number of copies you want of formsand schedules for inclusion with your clients' returns.ProSeries/1120 for Windows will offer an ACE depreciation worksheet.  Fifteennew states will join the corporate business return list:  Colorado,Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, MichiganSBT, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Texas, Virginia, andWisconsin.  Client files will be interchangeable with the DOS version.  Andpull-down pick lists will be available for certain fields, such as businesscodes and depreciation methods.ProSeries/1120S for Windows will add a shareholder's basis worksheet thatautomatically gets amounts from the Schedule K-1 worksheets.  You'll be ableto have an unlimited number of K-1's, and Intuit has improved both K-1 inputsheets and data entry.  Thirteen new states have been recruited to the 1120Steam:  Colorado, Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, NewJersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Wisconsin.Meanwhile, partnerships haven't been overlooked by Intuit.  ProSeries/1065 forWindows supports unlimited K-1's and the new K-1 input sheets, as well asinterchangeable client files with the DOS version.  Seven new partnershipstates include Florida, Georgia, Illinois, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, andPennsylvania.  Furthermore, the California Limited Liability (CA 568) companyreturn will be available this season, and it will read and transfer data fromthe 1065 program.Intuit isn't stopping there with business tax software.  As discussed in thisissue's Editor's Note, it's also bringing out TurboTax for Business.  This$79.95 product will enable small-business owners to prepare their own 1065,1120, and 1120S returns.  As with the personal version of the 1040 product,TurboTax for Business will include tax advice and tax planning suggestions.Complete IRS instructions and full-text versions of IRS publications for smallbusinesses (as well as the text of a book called "Tax Savvy for SmallBusiness" by tax attorney Fred Daily) will be available on-line, and the helpfacility will be context sensitive.TurboTax for Business will use an interview approach to take taxpayers throughthe preparation process.  It can import accounting data from QuickBooks andQuicken, and will provide automatic error checking and tax-saving tips whilepreparing a return.  Intuit will be offering 49 Windows state modules, soldseparately.  After TurboTax for Business prepares a return, it will go backand check for omissions and errors, and alert users to possible audit items.In addition, Intuit will be bundling Netscape's Navigator with the package, sotaxpayers will be able to access the new TurboTax home page on the World WideWeb (http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax) to get tech support, tax advice andinformation, and state software.  MacInTax for Business will also be availablefor Mac users.Lacerte adds upLacerte Software is adding more forms, features, and states to itsprofessional tax prep line.  New to its 1120 program, for example, is Form1120W, the Estimated Tax Worksheet.  And joining the Lacerte 1120 states willbe Delaware, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.In the Form 1120S program, you'll be able to print K-1 instructions, as wellas collated copies of Schedule K-1, the shareholder transmittal letter, andK-1 instructions.  When preparing S Corp returns, you'll have the opportunityto calculate the excess net passive income tax, and print certain electionstatements for S Corps.  New 1120S states will include Florida, Kansas,Missouri, and Utah.For the 1065 program, Lacerte will now print Schedule K-1 instructions, alongwith the contents of the client letter.  States will follow the example of thefederal program on the invoice setup; partnership states will allow forbilling per state K-1, so you'll have an additional option besides billing ina lump sum.  The Additional K-1's printing option will include a Schedule K-1collation routine, with three new global user options and three new overridecodes that you can make specific for your clients.  When you get to the end ofa return and set the Additional K-1's to generate a specific number of copies,the program will print the Schedule K-1 Transmittal Letter, federal ScheduleK-1, federal Schedule K-1 instructions, the state Schedule K-1 (or aLacerte-generated Partner Summary), and (when required) the state Schedule K-1instructions.  You can then distribute them to as many partners and members inyour firm as you please.The new Jumptopartner routine doesn't necessarily put you on the fast track topromotion in your firm.  But it does let you jump back and forth betweenpartners in all of the 1065 program's Special Allocation screens.  Even whenyou jump in this way, the cursor and line position will stay the same as inthe last entry, making it more convenient to enter special allocations.  Thisroutine won't replace other input methods; it's simply one more handy-dandyfeature provided by Lacerte.  Also new to the 1065 will be state returns forFlorida, Kansas, Missouri, and Utah.For 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs, new enhancements will include bookdepreciation schedules that let you enter and track depreciation for bookpurposes.  You'll also have the ability to print different numbers of copiesof depreciation schedules for 1995 and 1996 regular tax, AMT, and bookpurposes.  Lacerte will also let you amend prior-year returns as well asoverride "corrected" amounts.  There's power for you:  the ability to changehistory.  Also new for this coming season in all the programs are slip sheetsand filing instructions.Laser surgeryLaser Systems is powering up its TaxWorks Corporation 1120, S Corporation1120S, and Partnership 1065 Business Systems for next season.  All threeprograms will generate financial statements that are prepared on an income taxbasis.  You'll also be able to print a customizable letter to accompany thestatements.  When you update clients from last year, you'll have the option ofcarrying the ending balance sheet detail information over to the currentyear's beginning balance sheet fields.Three new options will be available to smooth out K-1 processing and printing.These will let you process, view, and print returns with or without the K-1information included.In all the Business Systems will be a new General Information screen.  AndLaser Systems has standardized the format of the date, Social Security, andEmployer Identification Number fields.In addition, Laser Systems is adding electronic filing to the 1065 System.For the 1120 System, a new Federal Net Operating Loss Worksheet and CharitableContribution Worksheet will help you keep track of NOL and charitablecontribution deduction and carryover figures.  Lastly, the 1120 System isgetting Form 1120X.  X marks the spot for TaxWorks development.Corporate reliefMicro Vision Software is integrating its 1120 and 1120S software, Tax ReliefCORP, with other vendors' software to improve these programs' productivity.  Ageneral ledger link will let you import data from major client write-up andgeneral ledger programs.  The software will also link with Microsoft Excel andTimeslips.  And the company recently purchased Summit Software, anotherbusiness tax software developer.New states for the Windows version of Tax Relief CORP will include New Jerseyand New York.  For DOS users, new states are Colorado, Delaware, Georgia,Ohio, and Texas.  Through a third-party developer, it's providing DOS userswith integrated state programs for Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, District ofColumbia, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire,New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina,Tennessee, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.For 1065 DOS users, Tax Relief PART is adding two new state programs developedby Micro Vision, California and New Jersey.  And through a strategicpartnership, DOS users will be getting access to more state programs thatintegrate with Micro Vision's own DOS-based software.  These will includeAlabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois,Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma,Oregon, S.  Carolina, W.  Virginia, and Wisconsin.For all its Tax Relief products, Micro Vision has added the ability to dialinto its bulletin board from within the program so you can downloadcorrections and get questions answered.  Client files will be fullyinterchangeable between the DOS and Windows software, and Tax Relief forWindows will also be compatible with both the DOS and Windows state modules.You'll be able to change your data path from the activate screen, and MicroVision is adding expanded fields throughout the software, along with moredetailed diagnostic messages.  Finally, Tax Relief products will be availableon CD-ROM with either an unlimited use license or on a pay-per-return basis.Pencil Pushers gets to the pointThe Damirus Corp., which makes Pencil Pushers Tax Software, is focusing mostof its development efforts on a future Windows product and on shipping its DOSproduct bug-free and on time.  In the meantime, for this tax season, it'sadding a Florida corporate return to its business tax line, along with a fewunusual business credit forms.SCS/Compute advances on both frontsSCS/Compute is enhancing both its Tax Machine and LMS Tax lines.  For TaxMachine, you'll be able to print K-1 labels for partners, shareholders, andbeneficiaries.  New state modules will include Louisiana, Mississippi, and NewMexico.  One new city module, a Philadelphia S Corporation return, will alsobe available.  Tax Machine will be released on CD-ROM, and you'll be able tolink the program to other accounting products, such as SCS's own DataWrite andthe AICPA's ATB.  Or you can use Audisys's TAXi to import accountinginformation into Tax Machine.For LMS Tax Business Programs, SCS will be offering simplified data entryscreens and input forms for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S.  You'll be able toprint mailing labels for each K-1 in the partnership and S-Corp returns.  SCSis improving LMS's link to DataWrite and ATB, and offering TAXi for importingdata from other accounting applications.TaascFORCE is up to the taskTax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TaascFORCE) is building a betterProfessional Tax System.  This coming season, it will be providing a freePractice Manager that generates specialized client lists and sorted mailinglabels.  Other new extras will include file compression, the ability to createan itemized schedule for any input field, carryforward of specified stateinformation from last year's state returns, and support for up to 999depreciable assets.New states for the 1065, 1120, and 1120S products will include Alabama,Arkansas, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Louisiana, and New Mexico.  Newforms on the roster will be 1120A (Corporation Short Form), 1120X (CorporationAmended Return), 2848 (Power of Attorney), 8271 (Tax Shelter RegistrationNumber), 8586 (Low Income Housing Credit), 8822 (Change of Address), and TD F90-22 1 (Foreign Bank Accounts).On the 1120S and 1065, TAASC has enhanced the Schedule K-1 in several ways.The software will automatically handle special allocations, let you selectwhich shareholder or partner K-1's to adjust for rounding, and printshareholder/partner numbers on each K-1.In addition, the Professional Tax System will be able to convert existing CCorp data to an S Corp return, and will add a new field where you can enterthe title of your firm's signing officer.  The transmittal letter for thepartnership state programs will offer paragraphs about the tax due andestimated tax.  And Form 4684 will now support multiple casualty dates.  Nexttax season will be less of a casualty with TAASC on the job.TaxByte does moreTaxByte will be expanding the depreciation capabilities of its TaxCommissioner business tax products, increasing depreciation capacity from 250assets to 450.  A trial balance import feature is also new, along with anenhanced direct data input system, and more automatic calculations.  TaxBytehas also added general letters and customizable, client-specific letters foreach K-1, along with an enhanced, automated invoice feature that does updatesfor time and billing.In the 1120 package, there will be a net operating loss carryforward featurefrom prior years.  Tax Commissioner will also carry over depreciation from the1040 version into the business tax products and perform conversions from oneentity to another, such as for a C Corporation that becomes an S Corp.  Lotsof transitions are underway in the business tax arena, and Tax Commissionerwill be policing them.TAX$IMPLE builds upTAX$IMPLE's 1995 Business Tax Programs are looking to 1995 and beyond.They'll include a three-year comparative summary report and will automaticallygenerate supporting schedules.  You'll be able to do year-to-year transfersfor all your balance sheets, worksheets, and supporting schedules.  TAX$IMPLEwill also support RAM drives, and will let you transfer business K-1'sdirectly into the TAX$IMPLE 1040 program.  The business programs are alsogaining Forms 851, 1120X, 1139, 4466, 8810, the 1120-A short form, Schedule H,and Schedule A for Form 1120-W.Mouse support is also on schedule for this season, along with enhancedprinting features.  You'll be able to choose specific forms and the number ofcopies per form to print, as well as print state and federal forms incombination.  Text for 22 topics will be available for your transmittal orcover letters.  You'll be able to say plenty with TAX$IMPLE.TenKey has it togetherTenKey will be offering four business tax programs in one this season.  TaxShop Entities will contain 1120, 1120S, 1065, and 1041 programs in the samepackage, together with laser software and a depreciation program.  Thesoftware will be available for Windows (with Windows 95 compatibility) thisseason, and you'll be able to transfer data from the DOS program to theWindows version.The Windows version will also include all the features in the DOS program,such as built-in electronic mail and communications.  This allows access toTenKey's on-line Problems Resolution Database, which gets updated with eachmessage received from an on-line user.Pennsylvania will be joining the entire Tax Shop Entities state roster, and tojust the 1065 software TenKey is also adding California, Illinois, and NewYork.  In addition, a third-party add-on program, TAXi Tax Import Bridge, willbe available to import data from other vendors' general ledger and clientwrite-up software into Tax Shop Entities.Growing UniversalUniversal Tax Systems is improving its TaxWise business tax software with agalaxy of new options.  You'll be able to print a mailing label with your taxreturns or from the Query Database Screen.  The program will highlightincomplete forms in red.  You'll also be able to invoke the 1120, 1120S, and1065 modules without exiting to DOS.  The program will flag estimated amounts,so you'll be able to distinguish them from your actual data.  Universal willalso let you order federal and state 1065, 1120, and 1120S programs from thesame CD-ROM platter as the 1040 and 1041.New for this season are 18 state business modules, bringing TaxWise's total to23 states:  Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia,Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, NewJersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina,Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin.  In addition, you'll have theability to print out as many blank forms as necessary for a client.New menu options will enable you to apply updates, install state software,copy master forms and macros from one user to another, batch your problemreturns together for transmission to Universal's service bureau, shell to DOS,and install soft fonts.  Universal will also be offering a conversion programfrom its 1040 product to do a prior-year carryforward of client data.In addition to these new features, Universal is enhancing some old ones.  Thebusiness modules will include customized database and diagnostic screens.Mailing labels will be able to contain phone numbers.  You'll be able to querythe database to learn the amount of a fee deposit, and access a scratchpad andcheck information when you've printed more than a single check.  The clientletter has improved to allow for multiple letters, letterhead paper,signatures, refund or balance-due amounts, and if-then logic for whichparagraphs to include.  The depreciation worksheet has also been enhanced,letting you access a new spreadsheet while TaxWise is displaying a list ofexisting assets.  It will let you compute next year's depreciation, displayit, and show a list of depreciated assets.  All in all, TaxWise seems to begetting wiser every year.Xpress train to your taxesXpress Software is improving practice management and database functions inXpress Business Returns, its 1065, 1120, and 1120S software.  The company isalso expanding the messages and diagnostics it provides for the preparationprocess.  And Xpress is developing an interface for importing data from otherprograms, along with adding state business returns for Alabama and Louisiana.Vendors like Xpress are making improvements where they can to their businesstax products.  And with the world of 1040 tax prep increasingly moving intothe hands of sophisticated, PC-equipped taxpayers, it's a good idea to beef upyour practice with the latest business tax software, so you can providewhatever services your business clients require.Michael Cohn is senior editor of Accounting Technology.For More InformationAlpine Data, Inc., 737 S.  Townsend Ave., Montrose, CO 81401, (800) 525-1040,fax (303) 249-8511, http:\\alpine@rmii.com.AM Software, PO Box 25010, Kansas City, MO 64119, (800) 858-8537, fax (816)741-1517.Arthur Andersen LLP, 2805 Fruitville Rd., Sarasota, FL 34237, (800) USA-1040,fax (813) 953-5310.CCH, Inc., Worldway Postal Center, PO Box 92938, Los Angeles, CA 90009, (800)45-PROFX, fax (310) 543-8104.CLR/Fast-Tax, 2395 Midway Rd., Carrolton, TX 75006, (800) FAST-TAX, fax (214)250-8104.Cold River Software, Inc., 4420 Varsity Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48108-2274, (800)DIGITAX, fax (313) 677-6647, http://www.-cold-river.com.CPASoftware, One Pensacola Plaza, Ste.  500, Pensacola, FL 32501, (904)434-2685, fax (904) 433-8198.Creative Solutions, 7322 Newman Blvd., Dexter, MI 48130, (800) 968-8900, fax(312) 426-5946.Drake Software, 106 Palmer St., Franklin, NC 28734, (800) 890-9500, fax (704)524-9549, http://www.1040.comDunphy Systems, Inc., 6740 Huntley Rd., Ste.103, Columbus, OH 43229, (614)431-0846, fax (614) 431-0776.Exactax, Inc., 2301 W.  Lincoln Ave., Ste.  100, Anaheim, CA 92801, (800)352-3638, fax (714) 778-2571.Intuit, Inc., 100 Juliad Ct., Ste.  107, Fredericksburg, VA 22406-1124, (800)934-1040, fax (800) 685-7036, http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax.Lacerte Software Corp., 4835 LBJ Freeway, Dallas TX 75244-6098, (800)765-7777, fax (214) 770-8955.Laser Systems, PO Box 407, Kaysville, UT 84037, (800) 230-2322, fax (801)552-8900.Micro Vision Software, Inc., 140 Fell Ct., Hauppauge, NY 11788-4360, (800)TAX-RELIEF, fax (516) 232-3481.Pencil Pushers Tax Software (division of the Damirus Corp.), 10 New EnglandExecutive Park, Burlington, MA 01803, (800) 370-2500, fax (617) 273-0575.SCS/Compute, Inc., 2252 Welsh Industrial Ct., St.  Louis, MO 63146, (800)326-1040 fax (206) 644-7372.Tax and Accounting Software Corp.  (TAASC), 6914 S.  Yorktown Ave., Tulsa, OK74136, (800) 998-9990, fax (918) 493-6189.TaxByte, Inc., 1801 6th Ave., Moline, IL 61265, (800) 245-8299, fax (309)764-0976.TAX$IMPLE, Inc., 3155 Rte.  10, Ste.  114, Denville, NJ 07834, (800) 323-2662,fax (201) 366-5877.TenKey, 5422 Carrier Dr., Ste.  201, Orlando, FL 32819, (800) 300-8244, fax(407) 351-0966, tssales@tenkey.com.Universal Tax Systems, Inc., 215 Broad St., Rome, GA 30161-3021, (800)755-9473, fax (706) 236-9168.Xpress Software, Inc., 1327 Broad River Rd., Columbia, SC 29210, (803)731-1040, fax (803) 750-4144.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Editor's Note:  Another Nail in the Coffin?I've just come out of a meeting with Intuit, and I'm both impressed anddisturbed.  You know Intuit.  It's the company that bought TurboTax a fewyears back.  TurboTax already pretty much owned the consumer tax prep market,and a great deal of the professional market as well, when Intuit boughtChipSoft.  With savvy marketing and constant improvements, the vendor has beenable to keep its position in an increasingly turbulent and voracious market.Having captured the high ground, Intuit is about to fire the opening salvo ina new war.  And if you don't react the right way, and quickly enough, youcould be one of the ones who gets winged.Taking it to the streetsWhat I found both exciting and disturbing is Intuit's announcement of consumerversions of its business tax products.  Of course, "consumer" is probably abit of a misnomer.  Perhaps the term "retail" is more accurate, though theseproducts do differ a bit in capability from the ProSeries entity products.But make no mistake about it.  If you currently prepare 1065, 1120, or 1120Sreturns for the non-Fortune 1000 set, these products will let your currentclients do a pretty good job in many cases of preparing their own returns.  Aswith the current crop of retail, consumer-oriented 1040 products, just howgood a job depends on the complexity of the business transactions andorganization, and how savvy the person trying to produce the return is.  Atthe very least, if this series of products is even half as successful asIntuit's consumer version of TurboTax 1040, it has the potential to do a lotof damage to the revenue stream in many accounting and tax prep practices.The end of the world as we know it?This move into your client base isn't totally unexpected.  After all, did youreally think that the PC had empowered just you?  You haven't been blind tothe advantages offered by computerizing, and neither will some of yourclients.  And the more work they do, the less will be left for you.But this is old news.  The accounting profession has undergone some dramaticchanges in the last decade.  And it will continue to change in the years tocome.  That's part of life.  And, to be realistic, most professions undergosimilar, if sometimes less dramatic, changes.  Just look at the practice ofmedicine.  With the advent of managed health care plans more of the burden ofthe health care process is placed on the consumer.  FDA approval of formerlyprescription medications for over-the-counter sales has accelerated thisprocess.  Think of these products as the Quickens and TurboTaxes of themedical profession.New challenges = new opportunitiesBut the availability of more options for self-care hasn't put doctors out ofbusiness.  After all, you've always had the option of forgoing the physicianand trying to go it alone.  Sometimes you can.  Unless you're in frail shape,there's not much a doctor can do for you if you're suffering from a cold orflu.  You can pretty much take care of yourself.  It's when that cold or fluturns into something more dangerous that the doctor's involvement becomes notonly desirable, but frequently critical.  You might be as good as any doctorwhen it comes to a cold, but pneumonia is another story.  That requiresmedications that aren't available to you without a doctor's say-so.  Andthere's good reason for that.  Administration of these medications requiresthat someone have the training and experience to recognize when they areappropriate, and the judgment to know which medication, and how much of it, touse.And training, experience, and judgment are really what are important in ourprofession as well.  Yes, you are going to lose business clients to computerprograms that let them prepare their own returns.  Get used to that, becauseeven if it doesn't happen this year, it is going to happen.But that doesn't mean you have to give up your tax practice, only that youhave to change with the times.  Because no matter how easy Intuit and othervendors make the tax preparation process, there are always going to bequestions that require a judgment call.  And judgment isn't something that canbe easily packaged in a computer program, artificial intelligence researchnotwithstanding.  It comes from experience, and the long application of thisexperience to real-world situations and decisions.I think that the real money isn't going to be made by the vendors of tax prepsoftware.  It's going to be made by readers like you who have the savvy, guts,and vision to be able to adapt.  To stop thinking of themselves as taxpreparers, and start thinking of themselves as tax consultants.  And who takethe initiative in marketing themselves as a solution and source of experiencedadvice for those consumers of both the personal and business tax prep productswho are willing to do the grunt work, but smart enough to understand that theywill occasionally need to turn to someone with the training and background tohelp them face those judgment calls.New challenges have a way of also creating new opportunities.  I think thepractice of our profession is going to be very different in coming years.  AndI also think that Accounting is going to be not only a lot more interesting,but for people with the right attitude, a lot more profitable as well.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Andersen BC Looks At Systems Union's SunSystems Accounting SoftwareIf you or your clients need an accounting software program with powerfulmulticurrency and foreign-language capabilities, consider SunSystems, aproduct of Great Britain-based Systems Union, Ltd., (10 Bank St., WhitePlains, NY 10606, (914) 948-7770).  This innovative program offers tools tomeet the accounting and information requirements of businesses in manycountries.  It's available in 20 languages, including French, German, Spanish,Russian, Japanese, Chinese, and Arabic.Systems Union, Ltd.  was founded in 1981 by a small team of financial andtechnical experts.  Its SunSystems product was first released in 1982 and hasbeen regularly upgraded over the years.  Today, Systems Union employs over 300people in 15 locations, with offices in North America, Europe, and PacificAsia.  Systems Union also maintains an international network ofrepresentatives.Flexible featuresSunSystems consists of seven accounting and business modules, as well asseveral utility software packages.  Accounting and business modules includeLedger Accounting (Accounts Payable, Accounts Receivable, General Ledger),Fixed Assets, Corporate Allocations, Sales Order Processing, Purchase OrderProcessing, Inventory Control, SunQuery report writer, and the SZ screenmodifier utility.It's easy to install SunSystems on a PC or network.  Loading the diskettestakes from 15 to 30 minutes.  The program requires at least a 25-MHz 386 or486 PC with 8MB RAM for the Windows version, or 540K for the DOS version.  Forthis review, we tested the Windows version of SunSystems running on a NovellLAN.  Although this review focuses on the Windows product, the DOS versionoffers similar functionality.Systems Union's software uses a single set of source code, facilitatingcustomization, a clean user interface, and high functionality.  SunSystemsalso enables you to customize information to meet your unique specifications.For instance, each SunSystems module can be configured to select and report onvarious vendor, customer, asset, and inventory information by using analysiscodes.  You can customize these codes to track and report transactions bycustomer region, customer sales territory, vendor group, item product type,and asset location.  And you can customize the chart of accounts by usingaccount analysis codes.  They provide a 60-character code block, with up to 10alphanumeric characters for the account code, plus 50 additional characters.The SZ utility, a screen modifier, lets you customize input screen labels.(However, data screens cannot be reconfigured to call additional prompts, norcan you develop new forms using existing ones.)  In addition, you may need tomodify multiple screens when you want to make changes to an input screen,since other screens use data from input screens.  Although SZ is flexible whenchanging text descriptions, field lengths, and removing unnecessary fields,you need to document all changes, since upgrades override all of SZ's changes.By and large, however, each module promotes user flexibility.  For example,the Ledger Accounting module, which consists of Accounts Receivable, AccountsPayable, and General Ledger, lets you configure journal types in which journalentries are preset and posted according to classifications such as cashreceipts, prepayments, sales invoices, and foreign currency journals.You can also configure the Sales and Purchasing modules with various types ofpredefined sales and purchasing transactions.  You'll be able to enter presetinformation for orders according to the type of order (for example, sales andpurchase order types for specific customers, vendors, countries, or items).But while the Purchasing module has been designed for flexibility, none of itsstandard reports lets you sort information by purchase order type, and only acouple allow for sorting by analysis code (analysis codes permit you toorganize information in all the modules).  The Purchasing module also lacks areport writer for customizing or designing reports, or for reporting onpurchase order information by analysis code or purchase order type.  One wayto solve this problem is to use the SunQuery report writer to customizereports.  When Systems Union releases the purchase order layout report writer,as well as a Report Definition utility for the Purchasing module, this stepwon't be necessary.Besides the problems with the Purchasing module's reports, we also haddifficulty copying multiple purchase and sales orders in the Purchasing andSales modules.  Although the copy command () successfully duplicated theprevious Header information screen, field by field, the  key could not beused for the detail screen.  This is because it only copies the detail lineabove the current detail line of the purchase order, as opposed to the lastdetail line in the previous purchase order.  This problem was solved byimplementing a macro procedure to record the information for the first PO,which allowed us to copy the same information into new purchase and salesorders.The gang of fourSunQuery, the user-defined transaction-level report writer, offers flexibledata selection, report layout, and sorting features.  Although SunQuery isfairly flexible and includes more GUI enhancements in its latest version, thefully graphical report writer that's currently under development will be anespecially welcome upgrade for Windows users.The Ledger Accounting module includes three other report writers:  FinancialAnalysis, Financial Statements, and Financial Tables.  The Financial AnalysisReport Writer provides the easiest way to report on expenditures, in summaryor detail, with flexible sorting options.  The Financial Statements ReportWriter offers enhanced reporting facilities that produce customized incomestatements, balance sheets, and other financials.  The Financial Tables ReportWriter can produce reports in a matrix format that you can consolidate frommultiple ledgers to do comparisons of companies or individual departments.Each report writer is easy to customize.The latest release of SunSystems also includes a powerful new enhancement, theData Dictionary.  The dictionary stores all the information related toSunSystems data files, including field name, length, start position,justification, and so forth, in a single location.  This feature enhances theLedger Accounting module by including a Report Definition tool that lets youcustomize the layout and content of standard SunSystems reports.  It alsoallows you to create an unlimited number of custom layouts, because the ReportDefinition tool can now read the Data Dictionary directly.Systems Union is currently developing the Report Definition for all otherSunBusiness modules as well, including Purchasing.  The Data Dictionary shouldmake it easier for outside vendors to develop and maintain links andinterfaces with SunSystems.  That will facilitate implementation of featuressuch as Form Entry and Document Imaging, enhancing SunSystems' leadershipposition in the marketplace.We were unable to alter SunSystems' reports with third-party tools because itdidn't generate reports in ASCII format.  Although the reports could bedesigned to be generated in other third-party tool formats (such as Lotus),the generated reports only included summary raw data and therefore did notinclude column headings or subtotals.  However, we plan to use the newlyreleased Data Dictionary as the link between a third-party report writer togenerate and alter the look of the reports (font types and sizes).The wide, wide world of accountingThe program's international accounting flexibility is one of its strongestselling points.  It's an excellent solution for international businesses whosebooks need to conform to the accounting conventions of a particular country.Users can access a common database in their choice of the following languages:English, French, German, or Spanish.Strong multicurrency support is another program hallmark.  You can work with,consolidate, and report in an unlimited number of currencies, as well asmaintain inventory and create multicurrency orders and invoices.  The programalso performs currency conversion during data entry, and converts foreigncurrency to base currency or vice versa.A sophisticated mapping facility offered in the program allows you to map outa chart of accounts from one database to another to satisfy country-mandatedchart of accounts and company-wide reporting standards.SunSystems offers predefined charts of accounts to accommodate varyingstatutory requirements for more than 50 countries.  The program complies withdomestic and international financial standards, such as GAAP (GenerallyAccepted Accounting Principles), FASB (US standards), CICA (Canadianstandards), SSAP (Institute of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales),and IAS (International Accounting Standards).New features have been added to address some of the European tax reportingrequirements for the Value Added Tax (VAT).  Although SunSystems allows you tocustomize VAT reports and procedures for maintaining VAT information, the newversion includes an updated Tax Listing Report and a Day Book Listing thatgenerates sequential references against transactions.Strong security and moreSunSystems Accounting Software sports strong data security features.  You canrestrict any user's or company's field access to menu options, analysis codes,or account types.  And you can set up user groups for easier maintenance andtighter reins on security.SunSystems includes drill-down capability within its Ledger Accounting module,letting you trace a journal entry back to its source.  It's designed to postonly balanced journal entries and offers the option to "put the journalon-hold" if corrections or supervisory approvals need to be made, making theproduct a real-time solution.  SunSystems also lets you post entries inseparate accounting periods, as long as the periods are "open" and you canaccess them.A powerful, flexible budget ledger feature lets you maintain up to 10 budgetledgers at either the account or project level.  This provides a great deal offlexibility for financial reports and analysis.The combined ledger is designed to present information in real time.  Allreports and inquiries paint an immediate snapshot of a company's actualposition rather than its position the last time you ran a report.An intermediate ledger, or rough book, allows all users to post completetransactions in a working ledger.  This feature, originally designed to meetItalian statutory requirements, helps reduce numerous adjusting entries.Issues and challengesSunSystems is a very flexible accounting system and can provide powerfulfunctionality if you set up the system properly.  But you'll need to invest agreat deal of time and effort into designing the system before implementingit, since an incorrect installation can lead to major modifications later, andyou may overlook key features if you implement the setup phase too hastily.The average cost of a single-user SunSystems license (for both Windows and DOSversions) ranges from $2,000 to $5,000 per module, and for a four-user licensefrom $2,500 to $10,000 per module.  Complete product support is availablethrough comprehensive manuals, a telephone hot-line, on-line system help,messages, and user defined help areas, where specific on-line assistance isprovided.  You can also direct questions regarding any SunSystems module tothe technical support staff by paying an additional support fee, whichincludes free upgrades upon request and use of technical bulletins.  A fullrange of client-server products is also available, including support for SQLServer and Oracle.The Sun will come out tomorrowWhat does the future hold for SunSystems?  Over the years Systems Union hasbecome a leader in international accounting and business applications byoffering a wide range of solutions for small to large companies.  SystemsUnion allies with many major hardware and software vendors, keeps abreast ofnew technology, and focuses research and development efforts on improving itsproduct.The company plans to continue enhancing the graphical user interface (GUI) foreach operating environment it supports.  In addition, the current MicrosoftSQL Server version of SunSystems will be ported to Sybase SQL Server 10.  Thiswill allow support for SQL technology on a number of Unix platforms, includingthe RS/6000, Sun SPARC, and HP 9000 machines, as well as SCO Unix systems.Although SunSystems is currently available in 20 languages, Systems Unionintends to add new translations over the next three years.  In addition,Systems Union plans to work with foreign-language authors to improvedocumentation and modules.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Information Services:  In Search of On-line CPAsWith various commercial on-line services (such as CompuServe, America Online,and Prodigy) and the Internet in the news so much these days, you're probablywondering if it's worth your time to check out their diverse offerings.For the average accountant, the answer is a qualified yes.  There are specificresources for accountants on CompuServe and the Internet, as well as featureson America Online and Prodigy that might appeal to the average accountant.  Inthis article, we'll review the major on-line services, as well as examineaccounting-related services on the Internet.On the one hand, the major on-line services feature a limited number ofaccounting-related subject areas.  Only CompuServe devotes entire areas todiscussions of accounting information.  On the Internet, there is a Usenetnewsgroup devoted to financial software.So what's an accountant to do?The commercial on-line world is mainly a good place for accountants to findadditional information about computing.  Most computer magazines sponsoron-line forums of some sort, ranging from ZD Net on CompuServe (which includesinformation from PC Magazine, PC Week, and more) to the varied offerings onAmerica Online's Newsstand service (representing PC World, Windows, andWordPerfect magazines).  And all three commercial services feature a wealth ofmainstream financial information, ranging from extensive market reporting onthe Prodigy CNBC area to a wide variety of investment information on theAmerica Online Personal Finance Forum (including Morningstar Mutual Fundslistings, a Tax Forum, and various magazines).Try before you buyIn addition, America Online and CompuServe feature large libraries ofshareware-software that you can try out and pay for later if you like it.While a good chunk of shareware tends to be amateurish, many useful programsare available, particularly small tools that perform specific functions.A search through the America Online software libraries, using the keyword"accounting," yields over 800 matches.  Granted, this number includes manyhome-oriented shareware packages for tasks like balancing checkbooks andcalculating mortgage payments, but some of the software may be of interest tothe accounting professional.And, of course, there's one additional reason to go with any on-line service:universal electronic mail.  If you join a commercial on-line service orprocure an Internet account, you can exchange electronic mail with any otherInternet or commercial service user.  (This doesn't extend to files, by theway; a file attached to an America Online mail message can be received only byan America Online user.)  With over 28 million e-mail users in America, youcan be sure you'll have a few clients who will appreciate the instantcommunications offered via e-mail.Who else is out there?Other specialized on-line services are available that you may find useful,depending on your needs.  Dow Jones runs an on-line business-news service thatyou can access via MCI Mail (800/444-6245) or Knight Ridder (formerly Dialog)Information Services (800/334-2564).  The DowVision service is also accessiblefrom Coopers & Lybrand's Tax News Network (800/528-5816), which providesextensive tax information of its own, in addition to the Dow Jones materialand articles from other tax research providers.  Both the LEXIS/NEXIS on-lineservice (800/227-4908) and Knight Ridder feature Dun's Financial Records Plusand Standard & Poor's Corporate Descriptions.  You can also find usefulaccounting information on Creative Solutions' bulletin board system ARNE(800/968-8900).Before you get startedTo access on-line services or the Internet, you'll need a modem-the faster,the better.  A high-speed modem is a good investment.  These days you can finddecent high-speed modems running at 28.8K bits per second for $200 or so.America Online, CompuServe, and many Internet service providers offer 28.8Kbpsaccess, while Prodigy and CompuServe top out at 14.4Kbps.America Online and Prodigy require you to use their free software to accesstheir services; you can find Prodigy starter kits in most computer stores,while America Online distributes its access software with many magazines, aswell as through direct mail solicitations and bundling deals with computermakers.  You can access CompuServe with any communications software package(such as Procomm Plus), but a graphical front-end, WinCIM, is also available.Getting on the Internet typically means using specialized software, especiallyif you want to access the World Wide Web (see "The Net Surfer" in the December'95 issue of Accounting Technology for more details).America OnlineAmerica Online combines a lot of consumer-oriented information with a slew ofon-line magazines, such as Your Money and Worth.  Most of this information isprobably of little interest to the average accountant.  Yes, there are someareas you might find useful in an eclectic practice, such as the Morningstarguide to mutual funds, but by and large these services are for generalists,not accountants.The newest version of AOL software for Windows (there is a Mac version aswell) will feature full Internet access, however, including a top-notch Webbrowser from InternetWorks.  It should be fully released by the time you readthis article.  And America Online is the cheapest commercial on-line service,making its Internet access even more financially attractive.CompuServeThe only major on-line service to feature forums specifically for accountantsis CompuServe.  The Accounting Vendor Forum offers areas run by variousaccounting software vendors (including Best!Ware, BNA, Champion BusinessSystems, Manzanita Software, NEBS, Open Systems, Outlook Software, SBTAccounting, SCALA, Solomon Software, Versatile Solutions, XP Systems, ZPAYPayroll, and others), as well as a number of general discussion groups (TheBreak Room, Ask the CPAs, Accounting Training, Tax Issues, and AccountingSoftware).While discussions in the vendor forums probably won't interest you if you'renot using the vendor's software, the general discussion areas are lively andfilled with postings.  I found one message describing a hypothetical businesstransaction, in which the author asked other members of the forum what theappropriate journal entries and taxable income and deductions would be, andwhether the transaction qualified as a royalty, commission, or sale ofintangible property rights.  This question yielded several responses fromother accountants participating in the forum.  In addition to advice anddiscussion, software libraries specifically for accountants are available onthe forum.The recently opened Accountants Forum on CompuServe is sponsored by the AICPA.It includes message areas devoted to general information and ethics;accounting; audit, compilation, and review; taxes; information technology;personal financial planning; management accounting and industry; government;CPA firms; universities and colleges; and management consulting.  Also withinthe forums, you will find separate libraries devoted to many of these samesubjects.CompuServe also allows access to the Internet (including File TransferProtocol and Telnet features, Usenet newsgroups, as well as the World Wide Webif you use CompuServe's NetLauncher software).  For any accountant, it's clearthat CompuServe is the place to begin the on-line quest, if only because ofthe existence of an Accounting Vendors Forum and the AICPA's new AccountantsForum.CompuServe's pricing plan allows access to over 3,000 Internet addresses,including e-mail.  They also offer software for DOS and Macintosh users.ProdigyAs the most consumer-oriented major on-line service, Prodigy doesn't providemuch information of direct interest to accountants.  But that doesn't meanProdigy is a total wash, only that its information tends to be general innature.Prodigy does have the most extensive financial information on-line, however.It's the official on-line service of CNBC, the cable service that devotesdaily programming to business topics.  Yes, you'll find the stock listingsoffered by all the major on-line services.  You can also buy and sell stock onProdigy and set up "track lists" to keep tabs on specific stocks in yourportfolio.  And Prodigy's CNBC area goes further by offering complete marketinformation, including Dow Jones averages, gold prices, Treasury bond yields,and a U.S.  dollar index.  It also gives you an overview of futures andmutual-fund information, with listings of over 6,000 funds.  And for financialexperts, Kiplinger's magazine is on-line.In addition, Prodigy offers full Internet access, including newsgroups, filetransfer capability, and a World Wide Web browser.  While the Internet is avast, amorphous entity, you'll find some useful resources there for anaccounting practice, and one way to reach those resources is through Prodigy.Prodigy's pricing plans are more varied, offering plans starting at $9.95 permonth, with its top plan costing $24.95 per month.  Each plan includes anumber of free access hours, with minimal charges for additional hours andminutes.  Prodigy also offers on-line software compatible with DOS andMacintosh machines, providing access for almost all computer environments.The InternetDespite the ad-hoc nature of the Internet, a surprising number of resourcesare available on the Net that your firm could find valuable.  The main trickis finding their locations.  I've done a few searches and come up with severalaccounting resources on the World Wide Web that can also serve as aspringboard to other Internet accounting treasures.With a Web browser, good places to start are the Accountants Home Page(http://www.servtech.com/re/acct.html) and the Accounting Resources on theInternet Home Page(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/internet/internet.htm).  Both sitesoffer listings for other accounting resources on the Web.  Some of theselistings are general in nature (most of you won't need to know about the NYState Assembly or care about accessing the THOMAS Web service run by theFederal Government).Some sites, however, are operated by prominent accounting organizations.  Forinstance, the Education Materials Committee of the American AccountingAssociation runs its own home page(http://www.rutgers.edu/Accounting/raw/aaa/aaa.htm), which also containspointers to other accounting-related resources on the Internet.  In addition,there's a low-traffic Usenet newsgroup calledcomp.os.ms-windows.apps.financial where you can discuss various Windows-basedfinancial applications.Load up your software and log onThe on-line world is rapidly becoming a valuable business tool in Americansociety.  While some services, such as America Online and Prodigy, still needto beef up their accounting-specific resources, there's a wealth ofinformation already available on CompuServe, the Internet, and severalspecialized services.The on-line world has a way of creeping up on you, and it won't be long beforeinformation services begin creating more content of interest to accountants.The brand new Microsoft Network, in fact, is already developing suchresources, and you'll find Accounting Technology, as well as other Faulkner &Gray accounting publications, and areas such as the Accounting Office and theCCH Business Owner's Toolkit, on-line there right now.Kevin Reichard contributes to a variety of publications and has written 15computer books for MIS:Press/M&T Books.  His electronic-mail address isreichard@mr.net.America Online America Online Inc.  8619 Westwood Center Dr.  Vienna, VA22182-2285 (800) 827-6364Price:  $9.95 per month, five free hours; extra hours cost $2.95Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGAgraphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better, mouse.The Balance SheetAssets:  Full Internet access; wide range of discussion areas.Liabilities:  No specific forums for accountants.CompuServe CompuServe 5000 Arlington Centre Blvd.  PO Box 20961 Columbus, OH43220-9910 (800) 487-9197Price:  Standard Pricing Plan is $9.95 per month for 5 hours of connect time.Extra Internet hours cost $2.95 per hour.  The Super Value Club Plan costs$24.95 per month for 20 hours of connect time.  Extra hours cost $1.95 each.Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 4MB of RAM, VGAgraphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.The Balance SheetAssets:  Specific forums for accountants; many software libraries.Liabilities:  Most expensive on-line service if you wander past the freeservices.Prodigy Prodigy Services Co.  445 Hamilton Ave.  White Plains, NY 10601 (800)PRODIGYPrice:  Basic Plan offers 5 hours of Core features for $9.95, with extra hourscosting $2.95; Value Plan offers unlimited access to Core features and 5 hoursof Plus features for $14.95, with each extra hour of Plus costing $2.95; 30/30Plan offers 30 hours for $29.95, with each extra hour costing $2.95.Requires:  Windows software needs 80386-based PC or better, 5MB of hard diskspace, 4MB of RAM, VGA graphics or better, 2,400-bps modem or better.The Balance SheetAssets:  Strong financial tracking capabilities; full Internet access.Liabilities:  Little content of direct interest to accountants.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Practice Development:  Form 5500 Follow-upIn the August 1995 issue we looked at eight pension return preparationpackages.  These ranged from simple forms-oriented programs to comprehensiveemployee benefits administration systems.  As a follow-up, this time around welooked at two additional entries in this growing field:  ATX Tax Solver 5500Benefit Plan and Shepard's Form 5500 System.ATX solves your 5500 needsOffered by ATX Forms Inc., ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan differs from theother pension software packages we've looked at in that it's spreadsheetbased.  The vendor's family of software includes modules to prepare forms inall the major income tax-filing areas, including individual, business,fiduciary, and payroll taxes.  In addition to tax preparation products, ATXalso offers a depreciation system and a tax planner.All of ATX Forms' applications are available in either 1-2-3 or Excelversions.  ATX supplied the software to us on a single 3.5-inch diskette, andwe quickly installed it by simply typing ATX at the command line prompt.  Weused the Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows edition for this review, but the softwaresupports both the DOS and Windows versions of 1-2-3.  You can also get any ofthe ATX products for the Macintosh (which work with the Mac version of Excel).And, if you'd rather not have to play with a spreadsheet at all, ATX justintroduced its Saber line of software, which doesn't require you to have aspreadsheet program installed.The 47-page user guide covers operating instructions for all of the ATXmodules, and provides information for specific modules as needed.  Thedocumentation, though not voluminous, adequately covers getting started;entering, saving, and printing tax information; menus and macros; tips andtechniques; and troubleshooting.  Instructions in the manual and on-screen aregood enough that someone not familiar with spreadsheets will be able toproduce returns.  If you already feel comfortable using a spreadsheet, you'llbe right at home with the product.Once you're in the spreadsheet program, select the main file, !OPENATX, toreveal starting instructions and a list of supported forms.  Forms included inthe package are the 5500, 5500-C/R, 5500-EZ, supporting schedules A, B, C, E,F, G, P, SSA, and forms 2848, 4506, 4571, 5558, 8453E, 8821, 8822, 945, SS4,and W9.  To process a client, check off the forms you wish to prepare, thenpress Ctrl-N.  This automatically creates a taxpayer directory, copies theforms into the directory, and opens Page 1.  The program makes good use ofspreadsheet macro facilities, including over a dozen macros that automate suchtasks as opening, updating, saving, and printing files.  You can also selectthese tasks from a pull-down menu.How many forms am I holding up?One useful feature is that you can have more than just a single form open atthe same time.  Just how many can be open simultaneously depends on the amountof memory available.  Given enough memory, you could conceivably have them allopen.  Once you open a form, you can key your data into an on-screenreproduction of the original form.  The screen is color-coded, displaying theform in black, the data in blue, and the instructions in purple.  You have achoice of using Input Mode (by pressing the Ctrl-I key combination), or youcan move around freely as in any spreadsheet.  If you choose Input Mode, theright arrow key takes you to the next input cell.  All cells not requiringinput are protected, and the program carries over standard information, suchas name, address, and identification numbers, to other forms as appropriate.ATX Tax Solver 5500 automatically performs math calculations on the financialinput areas and produces balanced statements.  However, it's still possible tohave an out-of-balance condition, since the program automatically carries thenet asset amount from the balance sheet to the income statement.When you complete one page or form, you call up the next, until you'vefinished them all.  You can easily print to an HP-compatible laser printer byusing the macros provided, and ATX also supports dot-matrix and inkjetprinters.  You have the option of selecting and printing one or all forms, andusing a batch-printing mode.  The printed forms are clear, professionallooking, and IRS approved.  No diagnostics are available to alert you toproblems or erroneous input, but you can produce a two-year comparison of theincome and expense entries to provide some troubleshooting help.To transfer client information to the next year, a macro (Ctrl-U) updates thenew forms with carryover information.  ATX Tax Solver 5500 doesn't produce aninvoice or client transmittal letter, however, and Forms 990-T and 5330 Returnof Excise Taxes Related to Employee Benefit Plans are not available in thismodule.No help for the weary?On-line help is pretty much taken for granted these days, and this is oneplace in which ATX Tax Solver 5500 is a bit weak.  If you've grown used to taxprep software that gives you explanations and advice on a line-item basis, youmay be a bit disappointed.  ATX assumes that you know what you're doing whenit comes to Form 5500 preparation.  While the standard spreadsheet helpscreens are available, neither the screen nor manual provides help on thetechnical aspects of 5500 preparation.  You also need to step throughinapplicable input boxes; since the program doesn't automatically skip them,you need to know which items require responses.ATX Tax Solver 5500 isn't the fanciest product to produce 5500s.  But for areasonable price, it supplies an efficient way to get the job done, althoughit does require you to be conversant with the Form 5500 preparation process.Should you need help, technical support is available on weekdays from 9 a.m.to 5 p.m., EST.  The back of the manual also offers some troubleshootingadvice.Does Shepard's lead the flock?Shepard's/McGraw-Hill is a well-known, venerable publisher of books andservices.  Less well-known is its expanding line of software.  One of thenewest is the Shepard's Form 5500 System reviewed here.  Other Shepard'ssoftware products include a tax forms library in addition to an integratedfamily of estate planning, preparation, and accounting programs.The software is Windows based, and you install it through the Program Managerby using the File Run command.  The install routine establishes a new programgroup, with separate icons for the 5500 and 5500-C/R.The User's Manual is a brief 11 pages, but it covers basic program operationsefficiently.  It uses screen shots to good advantage to illustrate the primarysteps.  Making up for the sparse documentation is extensive on-line help toassist you in working with the program, along with on-line IRS instructionsfor the forms and line-by-line instructions.  Particularly useful is the splitscreen option; while you input various lines on the form in the upper window,the instructions for those lines automatically appear in the lower window.Most practitioners don't produce Form 5500 all that frequently, so a nicefeature in the help function is the indexes for two Shepard's publications,ERISA Practice and Procedure and Guide to Pension and Profit Sharing Plans.Shepard's offers these books at a discount to purchasers of its 5500 software.Clicking on the program icon brings up the opening screen, consisting of Page1 of the 5500 form.  The familiar Windows menu and tool bars cross the top ofthe screen.  In addition to standard icons on the tool bar, you'll find iconsfor the six pages of the 5500 form.  You can use these icons to open one ormore of the pages at the same time.  Supporting forms are accessible from theForm pull-down menu, including Schedules A, B, C, E, F, G, P, Form 5558, andSSA.To start a new return, just begin inputting information into the on-screenPage 1.  Otherwise, open an existing file using the File menu or icon.  Inputis straightforward and easy since you're working with an accurate reproductionof the actual form.  When you enter an item, the cursor automatically moves tothe next input field, and you can use the Tab key or mouse to skip a field.The software doesn't automatically skip inapplicable entry fields, so you needto be aware of which entries are appropriate, based on what you've enteredpreviously for a client.Shepard's Form 5500 System carries over names, dates, and identificationnumbers to other forms.  It automatically totals amounts in the financial andnumerical fields, and carries over the total of net assets on the balancesheet to the income statement to show the change in net assets.  Everythingbalances fine, but be careful if you change amounts later, or the incomestatement may no longer foot.With your input complete, you're ready to print.  As with the ATX packagereviewed above, the Shepard's software provides no diagnostics to alert you topotential errors or inconsistencies.  Printing to an HP-compatible laserprinter produces crisp, clear IRS forms, however, and Shepard's includesdownloadable soft fonts.  You can print one, several, or all forms at once.This 5500 system doesn't contain client transmittal letters, invoices, orForms 5500-EZ, 5330, or 990-T, though you can obtain the forms by purchasingShepard's separate forms library package.Technical support is available at a toll-free number on weekdays from 7:00a.m.  to 5:00 p.m.  Mountain time.Shepard's Form 5500 System is easy to learn and use, letting you producehigh-quality 5500 forms in a short time.  Although it lacks some bells andwhistles of more comprehensive (and expensive) packages, it does the basictask of creating a Form 5500 very well.Gerald Herter, MBA, CPA is president of Sterman, Higashi & Herter, anaccounting firm in Tustin, CA.ATX Tax Solver 5500 Benefit Plan Price:  $99 ATX Forms Inc.  P.O.  Box 630Washburn, ME 04786 (800) 944-8883, (207) 455-4603 fax (207) 455-0963The Balance SheetAssets:  Practical, well integrated, spreadsheet-based package; producesprofessional-looking forms.Liabilities:  Lacks on-line help screens or instructions for 5500 preparation;few diagnostic or data management features.Shepard's Form 5500 System Price:  $129 Shepard's/McGraw-Hill, Inc.  555Middle Creek Pkwy.  Colorado Springs, CO 80935-3530 (800) 525-2474, (719)488-3000 fax (719) 481-7391The Balance SheetAssets:  Straightforward; easy to use; attractive Windows interface and formsoutput; good on-line help for the price.Liabilities:  Lacks diagnostics.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Newspages:  Tax Vendors for SaleAn offer you can't refuse Dept.  What would you do with a couple of billiondollars?  Illinois-based tax research publisher and tax prep softwaredeveloper CCH, Inc.  announced in late November that it had been sold toWolters Kluwer NV, an Amsterdam-based international publisher, for a cool $1.9billion.  CCH's product line includes ProSystem fx, CCH Access, and CCH TaxAssistant.According to CCH public relations manager Mary Dale Walters, the Dutch companywanted to acquire CCH's technology knowledge for use in the European market,as well as to increase its presence in the US market through technologies likethe CCH Business Owners Toolkit on the Microsoft Network.  She doesn't foreseemany immediate changes in CCH's own product line, however."There's a chance of new and better technology down the road," she says.  Thecash infusion "will give us more impetus for continued development.  We'realready aggressively pursuing on-line activities.  We can do more."Founded over 103 years ago, CCH was named Commerce Clearing House until lastyear.  Although it's a publicly traded business, the majority of stock hasbeen in the hands of the Thorne family up until now, and Oakleigh Thorne,president and CEO, will continue to manage the company.One hurdle that CCH and other vendors were working on overcoming at press timewas Congress's and the President's budget wrangling last autumn.  "Obviouslywe can't do anything until they do something," says Walters.  "At this point,we're not sure when we'll have that legislation.  There are a number ofretroactive provisions in that bill."  Although CCH began shipping apreliminary version of its tax software as early as November, the delays inthe final forms may mean that many taxpayers will have to file amendedreturns.  For extra info, you can call CCH at (800) 45-PROFX.More tax mergers Dept.  The CCH deal was preceded last autumn by another taxvendor acquisition.  This one involved RAM Software, makers of RAM 1040Professional Tax Software, which was picked up by SCS/Compute, makers of TaxMachine and LMS Tax.  Unlike SCS's purchase of Accountant's MicrosystemsInc.'s Tax Machine line several years ago, SCS won't continue development onthe RAM program."They're taking features in RAM and adding it to their own," says RAM vicepresident Frances Michelon.  "They wanted to expand their market share."RAM's head programmer Richard Michelon will be writing a program to convertRAM 1040 Professional Tax Software data to Tax Machine and LMS Tax formats.SCS is setting up special support lines to help RAM customers make it throughthe transition, according to LMS Tax product manager Lou Ann Vandemore."We're contacting each of their customers and offering them LMS Tax and TaxMachine," she says.  Future RAM-inspired enhancements to SCS's tax productsmay include its multistate processing, speed, and the way it accounted forautomobiles.  Call SCS/Compute at (800) 736-4587 for more information.New on CD-ROM dept.  The second issue of Faulkner & Gray's The ElectronicAccountant began shipping last November.  Featuring advanced multimediafunctionality, the new issue is the first out from the product's newEditor-in-Chief (and Accounting Technology Consulting Editor) Laurence K.Zuckerman, CPA, MST.The cover story, "Discomania:  The Best CD-ROMs for Accountants," includesdemonstrations of popular tax research, forms, spreadsheet, and CPE softwareproducts.  Also on the disc are war stories about malpractice insurance,pension compliance tax planning, 1040 software, installing a tape backupdrive, and the manufacturing practice niche.  For a free copy of theElectronic Accountant, call (800) 535-8403.Down with Unix Dept.  Platinum Software announced the general release ofPlatinum SQL NT 3.2 last November, a client/server accounting solution thattakes advantage of Microsoft's BackOffice suite, primarily its Windows NT andMicrosoft SQL Server components.  New modules in Platinum SQL NT include AssetManagement and Advanced General Ledger Allocations.A new financial alerts feature will send an administrator an e-mail alert if aspecified threshold is exceeded, such as a cash balance going above or below acertain level.  Queue cards will help train users through processes likeentering vouchers.The new release signals a switch in strategy for Platinum, which used tosupport the Unix market by running on top of Sybase's version of SQL Server.No longer.  Platinum is now betting on Windows NT over Unix."We have to make a choice," says Kevin Dowling, Platinum's vice president ofmarketing.  "We see more and more of our customer base have been interested inan NT and SQL Server solution.  We think Windows NT will be the dominantclient/server operating system.  We decided to focus our energies on providinga solution that's integrated and almost plug-and-play with BackOffice,reducing the risks of having all the pieces fit together."To help its Unix customers make the transition, Platinum is becoming partnerswith Microsoft and Compaq to provide the necessary software and hardware."We'll release product upgrades for a year and do product support for the yearafter that," comments Dowling.  "They can continue to use the product and willhave access to the source code at the end of 1996."  Dowling also says thatanother vendor may eventually take over Platinum's Sybase offering.  PlatinumSQL NT sells for $10,000 to $15,000 per module, plus per-user fees.Several modules for the network-based Platinum for Windows product are alsofinally in release, including two general ledger modules (standard andpremiere), along with a cash management module.  By the time you read this,accounts payable and accounts receivable should be available, and in March,Platinum plans to release order entry, purchase order, and inventory modules.For more information on these products, call Platinum at (714) 453-4000.Going vertical Dept.  Intuit's latest editions of QuickBooks move themarket-leading small-business accounting solution onto the path of verticalaccounting software.  QuickBooks 4.0 takes a small-business user through astep-by-step interview that customizes their books according to the industrythey're in and generates customized documentation for over 20 differentindustries.  The software also offers customized fields, as well as differentmethods of handling income.  Other new features include contact management,to-do lists, mail merge, and the ability to print 1099, 940, and 941 forms.This new QuickBooks line will be available in several iterations, in bothWindows ($99) and Macintosh ($119) versions on disk, and in a Windows versionon CD-ROM ($129).  QuickBooks Pro 4.0 for Windows ($189) and QuickBooks Pro4.0 for Macintosh ($189) will add time tracking, estimating, and advanced jobcosting features.The company has also announced a fix to a bug in version 3.0.  When QuickBooks3.0 was allowed to condense data, the average cost of inventory items could beaffected, causing inventory values and the cost of goods sold to be under- orover-valued.  Intuit estimates that only a few users will be affected by thiserror.  For more details, call (800) 238-4247.In other Intuit news, the company is introducing a version of its retailTurboTax and MacInTax programs designed with special business advice forcustomers who need to prepare their own Schedule C.  The product will becalled TurboTax (or MacInTax) for Business/Sole Proprietorship.  For moredetails, check out Intuit's new Web site at http://www.intuit.com/TurboTax oryou can just call them at (800) 934-1040.  Fresh fruit Dept.  The latestversion of Peachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5, began shipping inNovember.  It offers a multimedia setup feature with video and audio clipsthat take small-business users through the process of automating their books.The $129 program includes 75 business templates.Other new features provide management tools such as an events log that alertsyou when quotes expire or invoices go uncollected.  Also new are a to-do list,alert signals for when customers exceed credit limits and inventory items aredown, and additional customized reporting and drill-down capabilities.  Tolearn more, phone (800) 247-3224, or connect to the Peachtree Web site athttp://www.peach.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Quicklooks:  MAXShare and Hijaak Graphics SuiteProblem:  you have a phone, fax machine, and modem, but you only have onephone line.  Or you have several phones, modems, fax machines, and othertelecommunication devices, and more than one phone line, but still not enoughlines to go around.  Expensive solution:  add more phone lines and pay anextra $250 or so per line every year to the phone company.  Another expensivesolution:  set up a network, including a complicated network modemconfiguration.  Better solution:  make a one-time investment of about $349 inMAXShare, a new state-of-the-art line-sharing device.At approximately 6.5 by 9.5 by 1 inch, MAXShare doesn't take up a lot of deskspace.  However, it does allow you to share multiple telecom devicesautomatically.  In fact, MAXShare permits up to eight devices to share up tofour lines.MAXShare is easy-to-use hardware that works with your existing phone lines.It uses an included 9-volt power transformer that plugs into any standard ACelectric outlet.  After you plug the transformer into the back of MAXShare andyour electrical outlet, simply connect MAXShare to a standard RJ-11 phone jackand then connect your phone, fax, modem, or any other telecom device to one ofMAXShare's eight RJ-11 jack connectors.  The entire process takes onlyseconds.  There are no switches to set, no software to install, and no networkrequired.  If you do need technical support, it's available toll free, fromMonday through Friday, from 9 to 5.Automatic routingMAXShare's operation is completely transparent.  It automatically routesincoming calls to the assigned telecom devices.  In other words, MAXSharesends calls that come in on phone line 1 to telecom device 1, calls thatarrive on phone line 2 to telecom device 2, and so on, up to the unit'sfour-line maximum.There are limitations, of course.  For starters, modems connected to telecomdevice jacks 5 through 8 cannot receive incoming calls.  Perhaps moreimportant, if the telecom device associated with an incoming call is in use,MAXShare does not route the call, and the caller hears a continuous ringingsignal (there is no charge to long-distance callers when this occurs).  Thismay be inconvenient for your callers, and you certainly would not want yourprimary client phone lines to behave this way.  However, you can minimize thisproblem (for example, by using your modem after business hours).MAXShare also prevents accidental interruption of phone lines in use and isdesigned to eliminate conflicts.  For example, when a modem attempts to dialout, the modem in essence takes its "handset" off-hook, "listens" for a dialtone, then dials the number.  Enter MAXShare.  When it detects that your modemhas gone off-hook, it assigns it to any phone line that's available.  At thispoint, the modem gets the dial tone that it's waiting for and makes the call.But what if you try to access a modem when all outgoing MAXShare lines are inuse?  MAXShare will cause your modem to deliver a "No Dial Tone" message toyour communications software, which typically prompts you to try again laterwhen phone lines are available.  MAXShare will not interrupt the currentsession in progress or cause irritating or costly disconnections.Room to growMaxShare offers several advantages.  For starters, competitive line-sharingdevices, which may be less expensive than MAXShare, only work with a singlephone line.  MAXShare accommodates up to four phone lines, which gives youroom to grow.In fact, if you're considering setting up a network to share phone lines andtelecom devices, you may want to consider MAXShare as a more affordablealternative.  It makes adding extra phone lines easy and reduces the need formore network modems.  MAXShare also connects to any modem; you can use it withvirtually all PC, Macintosh, and Unix workstations.Currently, I have my telephone, fax/answering machine, and modem hooked up toMAXShare, which is connected to a single outgoing telephone line.  MAXShareworks well for my SOHO (Small Office/Home Office) setup, and this versatiledevice may be helpful for you too.-Laurence K.  Zuckerman, CPA, MSTHiJaak Graphics SuiteBoldly go where no accountant has gone before.  Instead of just using aspreadsheet program in your practice to graph data in financial statements andother reports into bar and pie charts, and a presentation graphics program todazzle clients at meetings, and a desktop publishing program to producenewsletters and related correspondence, you can use HiJaak Graphics Suite torelieve the frustration of employing separate tools for heavy-duty graphicschores.  It matches up programs and graphical data with compatible filestructures, sharpens your output, and lets you capture, modify, and enhanceimages.  The $99 Suite provides an integrated set of utilities withsophisticated graphics capabilities.Each program in the Windows-based Suite performs different functions.  You canuse them separately for simple tasks, or collectively for multi-function jobs.Browser, the desktop publishing program, manages files and organizes projects,offering easy access to the other components.  Smuggler helps you search forand import files from other applications in over 75 formats.  TouchUp turnsdull, fuzzy images into bright, crisp ones, and offers various enhancementcapabilities.  PRO is a screen capture feature that saves images in manyformats, and Draw lets you customize and modify images with 15 drawing tools.Killing two birds with one stoneIf you're comfortable using Windows, you can get started quickly, butoperating the program fully and efficiently takes some time and patience.  Myfirst encounter with the program was a few months ago while reviewing pensionsoftware packages (Accounting Technology, August 1995).  HiJaak PRO producedthe screen shots that appeared in the story.  Being short on time and long onpension packages, I ignored other features and ventured directly intocapturing the screen images.  Surprisingly, I was able to produceprofessional-looking illustrations in short order, with a quick stop over inRetouch and File Conversion.  E-mailing the images to the editors didn'taffect their quality or reduce the resolution size.  I later returned to theprogram for a closer look and discovered the extensive nature of the otherprograms within the Suite.Available on eight 3.5-inch diskettes or one CD-ROM, HiJaak loads through theWindows File Run command.  The CD-ROM version contains 3,000 additional clipart images as a bonus.  Full installation requires 40MB of hard disk space,but running the program from the CD requires only 1MB of disk space.HiJaak furnishes you with a several-hundred-page User Guide that containsscreen pictures and diagrams for each application.  The Getting Started manualincludes an overview and installation instructions, along with a four-lessontutorial that shows you how to create a flier combining text and graphics fromvarious sources.To organize the components in your project, begin with HiJaak Browser.  Hereyou catalog, view, and search for files.  A file index tree similar to theWindows File Manager appears on the left side of a split screen, allowing youto collect various files that contain pertinent data for the job at hand.  Onthe right, Browser displays "thumbnail" images of the files in the collection.You can open, copy, print, or move these images.  When you're ready to work ona thumbnail, you drag it to the appropriate icon to launch the HiJaak programyou need.For example, you may have a thumbnail of a map you want to use for a project.Just drag the thumbnail to the HiJaak PRO icon to launch that program.  Withthe thumbnail now in PRO, you set the options for how you want the imagecaptured and where to store it.  PRO takes a "snapshot" and places it in afile.  If the designated application requires the image to be in a differentformat, PRO can convert it at your direction.  PRO can capture pictures inboth Windows and DOS environments.To place the picture in your text file, first open HiJaak Smuggler.  Smugglerstays running in the background until you're ready to use it.  In Browser'sfile manager, locate the file containing your text; it will appear as athumbnail.  Clicking on the thumbnail launches the word processing app inwhich the text was written.  Smuggler will have attached itself to the titlebar of the word processor, so you just click on the icon there.  Afterindicating where you want the picture, as well as its size and resolution,Smuggler places it there.Touch up your imagesIf the image appears fuzzy or dark, you can filter it with HiJaak TouchUp.TouchUp works with color, grayscale, or black and white images in a variety offormats.  It produces an instantaneous display while you change variousfactors, so you can experiment and adjust the image as you go.  A variety ofretouch tools are at your disposal, such as color, texture, brightness,contrast, halftones, airbrush, pen, eraser, sharpening, softening, embossing,sculpting, highlighting, sizing, positioning, and more.  Even though you mayneed to consult the manual to learn each of these tools, you can intuitivelyperform many tasks on your own by simply moving various gauges and trying thetool icons.With HiJaak Draw, you can create some of your own artwork to convey aparticular message in your project.  Draw contains a vast array of drawingtools.  Whether you merely want to produce a geometric figure with some textinside, or compose a new work of art, Draw will accommodate you.  The Drawmanual is over 350 pages long and offers ample features and intricacies toserve both amateur and professional illustrators.Draw lets you organize artwork into multiple layers and pages.  Twenty-threedrawing methods extend the versatility of its 15 drawing tools for creatinglines, boxes, circles, and other objects.  For example, it offers sevenmethods for drawing a rectangle, such as corner-to-corner andcenter-to-corner.Your freehand drawing can be natural, or you can set tolerance limits thatsmooth out irregularities in your lines and shapes.  You can also program yourtext in many fonts and shapes, so they can flow straight or curve aroundobjects at your command.  Additional tools help you position, shape,transform, and arrange these objects.  They can be painted with a choice ofseveral color models, each with seemingly endless colors and gradations.Draw sets up and manages various clipart libraries, letting you easily importand export images.  Numerous print options accommodate your specifications.For instance, if the finished product exceeds your paper size, Draw can tilethe picture onto several sheets if you want a large image, or scale it down toa single sheet.  And if you're sending artwork to a printing press, you canproduce the work in color-separated format.How suite it is!When you incorporate the five HiJaak modules into the HiJaak Graphics Suite,the result is a comprehensive, integrated solution to your graphics needs.You'll be impressed with all you can do graphically to enhance clientpresentations and proposals with relatively little expertise, with the help ofthis useful, time-saving software.  l-Gerald Herter, CPAMAXShare Price:  $459 MAXBase, Inc.  668 American Legion Dr.  P.O.  Box 2127Teaneck, NJ 07666 (800) 631-1121The Balance SheetAssets:  Effective telecommunication device; easy to set up; accommodates upto four phone lines.Liabilities:  Lines in use do not produce a busy signal-rather a continousring.HiJaak Graphics Suite Price:  $99 Inset Systems Inc.  71 Commerce Dr.Brookfield, CT 06804 (203) 740-2400Requires:  IBM PC or compatible, 386 or better, 4MB RAM (8MB recommended),Windows 3.1 or later, 40MB hard disk space for full installation or CD-ROMplus 1MB disk space.The Balance SheetAssets:  Powerful, comprehensive set of graphics utilities, functional in awide variety of formats.Liabilities:  None significant.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Creative Uses of Life Insurance Abound"One of the last great tax shelters," said Charles Ratner, a principal inErnst & Young's Cleveland office and the firm's national director of personalinsurance counseling, when describing life insurance.  He explained the reasonis that life insurance's cash value builds up tax-free and can be accessedduring the insured's lifetime through tax-free withdrawals and loans and thereis an income tax-free death benefit.Whole or variable life insurance is usually favored because of the substantialcash value that can be built up.  Also, second-to-die policies areincreasingly being used when the marital deduction can insulate the firstspouse's estate from estate tax.Tax-Wise Moves.  If you don't want the policy proceeds to be included in aninsured estate, then you must make sure that the insured was never the policyowner or the insured must have transferred ownership more then three yearsbefore death.A common way of making sure that the insured doesn't own the policy is throughthe creation of an irrevocable life insurance trust (ILIT).  The insurednormally transfers cash annually to the ILIT to pay the premiums.  Ifpossible, the trust takes out the policy so the above three-year rule doesn'tcome into play.  In order for the cash contributions to qualify for the gifttax annual exclusion, the ILIT normally gives the trust beneficiaries aCrummey withdrawal power.In setting up an ILIT, a financial planner must be aware of whether ageneration skipping transfer (GST) tax can apply.  Because life insurance is aleverage vehicle, the amount that can eventually be subject to the GST tax canbe quite substantial.  Accordingly, there is a strategy that can allocate partof the GST $1 million exemption to amounts being transferred to the trust.ILITs are also being used in conjunction with lifetime charitable transfers.Bill Fleming, director of personal financial planning in the Hartford, Conn.office of Coopers & Lybrand, noted that wealth transferred to charity is oftenreplaced by using the savings on income taxes from the charitable transfers topurchase life insurance that is owned by a ILIT.  "This technique worksparticularly well if the individual is in their 50s, rather than their 60s,"added Fleming.Split Dollar.  Many of the more creative uses of life insurance involvesplit-dollar insurance being used as compensation.  A split-dollar arrangementbasically allows the insured to pay the lower term value of a policy while theemployer pays for the cash-value part of the much higher premium.  Whatusually happens is that the company pays the entire premium and then reportsincome to the insured.  The amount reportable as income is based on tables(PS-58 for individual policies and PS-38 for survivorship policies) or theterm equivalents provided by the insurance company.  No deduction is allowedfor the employer.  The net result is that the insured owns the policy and owesthe company the amount that it paid as cash-value premiums.  Normally, at alater date (or at the insured's death) the company is paid back.A split-dollar arrangement can be used for an owner of the closely heldbusiness or for a key employee.  The cash value is growing tax-free and,usually on retirement, if desired, the insured can withdraw premiums and eventake a loan against the policy.  As long as the policy is not surrendered, theinsured is getting a tax-free stream of income.  (Note:  The same tax-freestream is available with normal respect to whole or variable life.)  Upondeath, the payout will be reduced by the amounts owed on the policy.  Flemingsaid that split-dollar insurance is particularly attractive to transfer to anILIT "because the value of the gift subject to the annual exclusion is thelower PS-58, PS-38 or term premium value."Tom McCaskill, president of McCaskill & Associate, a family businessconsulting firm in Wichita, Kansas, widely uses a variable split-dollarinsurance policy as the funding mechanism to pass the business to youngergenerations when a business owner is alive.  He pointed out that a variablepolicy allows the business to fluctuate the insurance premiums to a prescribedmaximum and also allows the insured to make the investment decisions withrespect to the policy.Split-dollar arrangements are also used by large shareholders of publiclytraded corporations so that there are sufficient funds to pay estate taxes,according to James Hodge, chairman of The Eyrie Group based in Danville,California, a consulting company to first-generation business owners.  Hodgemakes an important point about all split-dollar arrangements that you want toeventually rollout the company (end its premium payments).  He said that asthe insured gets older, the imputed income that the insured will haveincreases if the company is paying the entire premium.Life insurance is also widely used in cross-purchase agreements.  That is whenowners of closely held business purchase individual policies on each of theother co-owners.  The problem is if there are five business owners, then eachowner has to buy four policies.  According to Fleming, many business ownersnow use an escrow or partnership arrangement whereby only five (rather than20) policies are purchased and the surviving owners each receive a portion ofthe insurance proceeds, which are used to purchase the deceased businessowner's stock.Bigger Hazards.  Although the benefits of life insurance are substantial, therisks are also substantial from a tax standpoint.  McCaskill says there arenumerous pitfalls along the way that can trip up the plan.  One is that youcan overfund the premiums so that the IRS will say it is not an insurancepolicy building up tax-free.  Also, there will be problems if the insurancecompany imposes a penalty for a partial surrender or if a surrender isconsidered by the IRS to be a complete surrender of the policy with a hugeincome tax liability being imposed.McCaskill said that a common problem he sees with split-dollar is that thecompany and individual don't follow through and make a formal split-dollararrangement.Ratner warned that you must particularly watch out for inflated expectationsabout the rate of return of investments in variable life policies.  He addedthat the amount of premium selected should be able to sustain the deathbenefit even against poor performance of the investment.  He summed up hisconcerns this way, "You don't want to make today's solution tomorrow'sproblem."HOWARD W.  WOLOSKY, J.D., LL.  M., is executive editor of The PracticalAccountant.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-22IA059-000325-B021-6http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi115.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003054 text/html 201154HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:27:08 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:57 GMTContent-length: 200964Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi115.html Sample Issue Copyright ACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PEOPLE (1756 words) BRIEFS (652 words) Thomson adds SCS/Compute to Menzies' growing stable (469 words) FORECAST &REVIEW: By the numbers: The top 10 news events of 1995 (1185 words) Letters (2431 words) TECHNOLOGY: TECH BRIEFS (547 words) CONSULTING INSIGHTS: Microsoft dominance leads tech trends for '96 (979 words) FASB rules on nonprofits' investments (177 words) Pentagon battles $20 billion in bad accounting (627 words) 5 New Standards Highlight FASB's 1995 Accomplishments (956 words) NEW PRODUCTS (1215 words) FASB faces 2 departures, rushes to finish projects (828 words) PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM: For better recruits, target professors, survey says (1172 words) HOT TIPS (575 words) CompuServe campaign colors Block 2Q results (262 words) TAXING ISSUES (536 words) J.D. Edwards looks to find resellers for Genesis line (396 words) With more low-end releases, vendors eye reseller programs (1063 words) ACTION IDEA: How to have a successful seminar (150 words) Budget worries kill workload relief bill (560 words) Congress passes tort reform bill with veto override (703 words) TAX PRACTICE: Former Navy CPO sails into friendly tax prep waters (1881 words) Study finds employers liable for $95B error on non-exempt employees (360 words) AICPA, AT&T cite businesses (99 words) Expect the unexpected: Trends to watch (1173 words) Quotables, 1995 (440 words) THE BEST OF FOOTNOTES 1995 (617 words) Rogue AAA 'Club' demands change (293 words) Get real, AICPA tells flat taxers (963 words) Geo. S. Olive acquires local health care consulting firm (829 words) IRS tells how workers can declare 'independence' (516 words) Audit & Accounting: Change Of Auditors (2566 words) SOFTWARE REVIEW: Budgetary moves add steam to fund accounting (3056 words) COMING EVENTS (593 words) CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PEOPLEARIZONADave Stocking, partner-in-charge of Eide Helmeke's Phoenix office, has beenelected chairman of the firm's management committee.  The management committeefunctions as the firm's board of directors and sets firms policy.CALIFORNIAGreg Garrison has been appointed chairman of Price Waterhouse's entertainment,media and communications group and managing partner of the firm's SouthernCalifornia practice based in Los Angeles.  Garrison has been with the firm for19 years, previously serving as manager of the products industry practice inSt.  Louis.  Chuck Bauer, former chairman of the firm's EMC practice, has beennamed co-chairman of the firm's products division.  ...  Susan K.  Screen hasbeen named shareholder of Stonefield Josephson in San Francisco.  Screenprovides litigation support services and income tax and financial planningadvice.  ...  Robert E.  Wacker, of R.E.  Wacker Associates in San LuisObispo, has been elected to serve on the board of governors of the CertifiedFinanical Planner Board of Standards.  Wacker has been a CFP licensee since1988.CONNECTICUTMark A.  Semmelrock has joined Cole, Frago, Cusick, Chestler & Co.  inWethersfield as manager of computer systems and consulting, as a result of thefirm's merger with MAS Associates.  Sarah Murach has joined the firm assupervisor of computer systems and consulting, and Dawn Pfeffer has joined asa staff accountant.DELAWARECarl Turner has been named to the board of directors of Wilmington-basedSiegfried Schieffer & Seitz.  Turner will serve as adviser to firm presidentRobert L.  Siegfried Jr.  Turner formerly served as vice president in chargeof General Electric's semiconductor business, advanced technology and computersystems.GEORGIAClarence E.  David III has been named a shareholder of Atlanta-based Habif,Arogeti & Wynne.  David performs financial statement examinations and taxcompliance and planning.  He joined the firm in 1987.  ...  Donna G.  Barwick,partner with the law firm Lefkoff, Duncan, Miller, Grimes, Miller & Barwick ofAtlanta, has been elected chair of the Certified Financial Planner Board ofStandards board of governors for a two-year term.ILLINOISNora Gile has been admitted as manager of the tax department of Nykiel Carlin& Co.  in Schaumburg.  Gile formerly served as supervisor of the taxdepartment of Skokie-based Michael Silver & Co.  ...  Chicago-basedBrook+Weiner+Sered+Kreger+Weinberg has elected Gordon Johnson to member of the firm.  Johnson hasbeen with the firm for the past 15 years and was promoted to manager in 1988.Sheldon Weiner and Robert J.  Krawitz, both members of the firm, havesuccessfully completed the examination to become certified business valuationanalysts.KENTUCKYJohn A.  Switzer has been named managing partner in the Louisville office ofKPMG Peat Marwick.  Switzer had previously served as managing partner of thefirm's Lexington office.MASSACHUSETTSVitale, Caturano and Co.  in Boston has made new additions to its staff.Gordon Earle has been appointed director of the firm's technology consultinggroup, Deborah Cafarella has been named network specialist and Steven Brownhas been admitted as groupware engineer.  ...  David J.  Underwood has joinedJones, Camp & Associates in Worcester as a supervisor.  He formerly workedwith O'Brien & O'Brien.  Peggy A.  Thieriot has been admitted as a staffaccountant.  Richard G.  Howarth Jr.  has been promoted from an experiencedaccountant to a senior accountant.  Joseph P.  Furnari has passed the CPA examand has been promoted to in-charge accountant.  Cassandra A.  Camp, partner ofthe firm, has been re-appointed as the New England representative to thetechnical issues committee of the Private Companies Practice Section of theAmerican Institute of CPAs.MARYLANDWalpert, Smullian & Blumenthal in Baltimore has elected David S.  Leibowitzand Deborah O.  Schultz principals of the firm.  Leibowitz works primarilywith retail automobile clients.  Schultz specializes in profit improvement andfinancial consulting for privately owned wholesale distributors andmanufacturers.  Linda K.  Diehl has joined the firm's legal servicesconsulting group.  Prior to joining WS&B, Diehl worked for eight years as aconsultant for Altman Weil Pensa in Newtown Square, Pa.  ...  Warfield,Garrett & Associates in Baltimore has been accepted for membership toCPAConnect, a network of CPA firms.MICHIGANFremont-based Gerbers Products Co.  has appointed Stan VanderRoest corporatecontroller.  Prior to joining Gerber in 1989, VanderRoest worked for Coopers &Lybrand.MINNESOTAThe St.  Paul office of McGladrey & Pullen has promoted James M.  Parks andRick D.  Rodenbeck to partners.  Parks provides consulting services in theareas of employee benefits and qualified retirement plans for the firm'sbusiness clients.  He has developed and leads the upper Midwest regionretirement plan administrative and consulting group.  Rodenbeck specializes inproviding tax planning and consulting services to clients in the financialservices industry.  With his promotion, he assumes the role of regionalcoordinator of tax services for financial institutions.  In the Minneapolisoffice, Peter Rasmussen has been promoted to partner and Alan W.  Lusk hasbeen promoted to senior manager and information technology group practiceleader.  Rasmussen provides assistance in business financing and operationalissues for the firm's clients.  Todd Anderson has been promoted to seniormanager in the Bloomington office.MISSOURIMichael C.  Abfall has been promoted to manager and Stephanie D.  Czeschin hasbeen promoted to senior in the controllership services department of St.Louis-based Grace & Co.NEW YORKPhilip R.  Rotner has been named general counsel of Deloitte & Touche upon theretirement of Howard J.  Krongard.  Rotner, who is based in the New Yorkoffice, previously served as a partner in the San Francisco law firmMcCutchen, Doyle, Brown & Enersen.  ...  Goldstein Golub Kessler & Co.  in NewYork has admitted Eric S.  Holzberg, Christopher S.  Reed, Jill Zelenko andStuart B.  Zlotolow partners.  Charles J.  Riess has been admitted asprincipal.  Riess is responsible for the management and development of thebusiness services and solutions group.  Debra J.  Feiger, a senior staffmember in the tax department and personal finance group, has been designated acertified financial planner by the Certified Financial Planner Board.  ...Russell T.  Glazer has joined Hauppauge-based Peare & Heller as a shareholderafter merging his practice, formerly part of Kutzin & Glazer in Mellville,with P&H.  ...  Erick L.  Avni joined Valley Stream-based Biscotti, Toback &Co.  as a junior accountant.  ...  Craig Morris & Co.  in Syosset has admittedRoberta Bos Hill to assume responsibilities for the firm's audit services.Hill worked in the New York and Melville offices of Touche Ross and Co.  from1975 to 1979.  ...  Frank W.  Sluter has been named partner of Satty, Hollis &Ciacco in Roslyn.  He has been with the firm for the past 10 years andspecializes in working with nonprofit clients.  ...  Senior tax partner AlanE.  Weiner of Melville-based Holtz Rubenstein & Co.  has been admitted torepresent clients before the U.S.  Supreme Court.  ...  Lisa Haynie, anaccountant with Marcum & Kliegman in Syosset, has been elected president ofthe Long Island Chapter of the American Society of Women Accountants.NORTH DAKOTAGary Ness, tax partner of Eide Helmeke's Fargo office, has been elected vicechairman of the firm's management committee.  Ness joined the firm in 1978,becoming partner in 1984.  Jim Thompson is a newly elected member of themanagement committee.  He has served as partner-in-charge of the Minot officesince 1987.OHIOMichael P.  Bohan has been appointed managing director of professional andtechnical services by the Institute of Management Accountants.  Bohanpreviously served as corporate controller of BP America Inc.  in Cleveland.He also worked as an audit partner at Deloitte & Touche in New York, servingas director of accounting standards.  ...  Saltz, Shamis & Goldfarb hasseveral new hires.  Mary M.  Kulak, formerly with Hausser & Taylor for morethan seven years, has been named firm administrator in the Cleveland office.Bruce E.  Manes has been admitted as a senior associate of the tax departmentand Maria V.  Martino is an administrative assistant in the employee benefitsdepartment.  Both are in the Akron office.  ...  Tom Bialota has joinedHausser + Taylor's Canton office as a tax supervisor.  Prior to this position,Bialota spent more than 30 years with the Internal Revenue Service, holding avariety of positions including tax auditor, internal revenue agent, computeraudit specialist and group manager.  ...  James T.  Martin, former presidentand CEO of Meaden & Moore in Cleveland, has been elected vice chairman of theAccountancy Board of Ohio.  Martin was appointed to the board two years ago byGov.  George V.  Voinovich.SOUTH CAROLINAIrvine T.  Welling, managing partner of Elliott Davis & Co.  of Greenville,has been elected chairman-elect of Moore Stephens North America.  He succeedsStephen B.  Humphries.SOUTH DAKOTABob Wiedeman has been re-elected to the management committee of Eide Helmeke.He serves as partner-in-charge of the Sioux Falls office.  Wiedeman has beenwith the firm since 1979 and was admitted to the partnership in 1981.WISCONSINWipfli Ullrich Bertelson has hired Greg Freeman as director of tax services inthe Appleton office.  Freeman has more than 11 years' experience in theindividual and corporate tax service area.CFP board elects new membersDENVER - The Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards has elected newmembers to sit on the 1996 Boards of Ethics and Professional Review, Examinersand Practice Standards.In other news, Loyola University in Chicago has been registered with theCertified Financial Planner Board of Standards.  Students completing theuniversity's financial planning program will be eligible to sit for thenational CFP exam.Appointed to the Board of Ethics and Professional Review are Lewis M.Wallensky of Lewis Wallensky Associates Inc., of Los Angeles; L.  MartinMiller, managing partner of Cogen Sklar of Bala Cynwyd, Pa.; and KatherineVessenes, president of Vestment Consultant Inc., of Bloomington, Minn.Mark J.  Smith, president of M.J.  Smith & Associates, Aurora, Colo., has beenappointed to serve on the 1996 CFP Board of Examiners.James L.  Budros, principal of Budros & Ruhlin Inc., of Columbus, Ohio,Herbert K.  Daroff, senior partner of Capital Analysts of New England inQuincy, Mass., and Patricia P.  Houlihan, partner of Cavill and Co.  inOakton, Va., have been selected to serve on the CFP Board of PracticeStandards.The CFP Board is a nonprofit professional regulatory organization founded toenforce education, experience and ethics requirements for CFP licensees.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996BRIEFSIIA rips internal audit outsourcingORLANDO, FLA.  - Terming the move by CPA firms into internal auditing "athreat to the objectivity and independence of the audit process," theInstitute of Internal Auditors is calling on federal regulators to impose newmandates on outsourced internal audits.Companies should be forced to disclose the practice in their annual reports,said IIA president William G.  Bishop in a letter to Securities and ExchangeCommission chief accountant Michael Sutton."If a public accounting firm performs all the internal auditing activities onan outsourced basis, it becomes, at the very least, an indirect advocate ofmanagement's assertion" over its internal control structure, said Bishop."An organization's external auditor cannot assume significant responsibilitiesfor performing internal auditing and, at the same time, retain itsindependence in both fact and appearance," the IIA said in a new positionpaper.Coopers fees up 7% to $1.9 billionNEW YORK - Coopers & Lybrand said its United States revenue for the year endedin September gained 7 percent from 1994, to $1.905 billion.  Overallconsulting revenue gained 15 percent, led by a 45 percent growth in fees frominformation and communications industry clients.  Business assurance servicesgained 5 percent and the tax practice expanded 12 percent.  Worldwide, thefirm reported a 13 percent sales advance, to $6.2 billion.U.S.  fee growth was led by a 30 percent gain in the firm's pharmaceuticalsand chemicals sector, 29 percent in media and entertainment, 20 percent eachin insurance and health care, and 15 percent in high tech.  The firm's humanresources advisory line grew 16 percent, to become one of the top five suchconsulting practices in the nation, Coopers said.Moss Adams acquires Kimball DixonSEATTLE - Regional firm Moss Adams has acquired local Medford, Wash., firmKimball, Dixon & Co., bolstering its West Coast presence.The $59 million Moss Adams now has 17 offices from Canada to Mexico, with aconcentration in Oregon, said managing partner Bob Bunting.  "We're filling inthat I-5 corridor, growing geographically," he said.  "We've done very wellpositioning ourselves as a dominant firm in small markets."The six partners and 16 employees of the $2 million Kimball Dixon join MossAdams, said managing partner Ron Dixon, who initiated the merger talks twoyears ago.CLR buys PW tax softwareCARROLLTON, TEXAS - Computer Language Research took another step to makeitself the dominant player in corporate taxation with the purchase of PriceWaterhouse's tax software line.CLR acquired Price's TMS software for about $15 million.  The price includes$11 million for the software and the remainder for accrued support liability.CLR is also planning to hire from 125 to 135 Price employees.  By comparison,CLR had 947 employees when it issued its annual report earlier this year.Price Waterhouse has 1,200 TMS users, according to Price spokesperson JanButler.  But that number includes licenses, which several individuals couldhave access to at a particular site.  Butler declined to discuss TMS revenue.Price also agreed that CLR's GoSystem 2 will be its exclusive in-housepreparation line.  CLR has a similar arrangement with KPMG Peat Marwick.  Aspart of the extended transition, Price will dedicate the services of threepartners involved in TMS for the next four or five years.Corrections"Homes boggle flat tax planners," (Dec.  11-31, 1995) incorrectly saidtaxpayers annually deduct mortgage interest worth $58 million, charitablecontributions of $17 million, state and local taxes of $26 million, and realestate taxes of $14 million.  In fact, the figures should have been renderedin billions, not millions."Automatic Software puts Big Business on market," Tech Briefs, (Nov.  20-Dec.10, 1995) reported incorrectly the company's location and phone number.Automatic Software is based in Los Altos, Calif., (415) 919-2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Thomson adds SCS/Compute to Menzies' growing stableby Robert W.  ScottST.  LOUIS - Looking for resources to compete more effectively in aconsolidating market, SCS/Compute will be acquired by giant Thomson Corp.  ina deal valued at just over $30 million.The acquisition is the latest in a number of notable deals announced in recentweeks that signal increasing consolidation.  Others include the purchase ofCCH Inc.  by Dutch publishing giant Wolters Kluwer and Computer LanguageResearch's purchase of the TMS corporate tax business from Price Waterhouse.SCS/Compute's own financial position in an increasingly competitive market wasclearly a factor in its decision.  "We've been strapped for resources," saidRobert Nolan, SCS/Compute's founder, chairman, president and chief executiveofficer.Nolan, who plans to remain president and chief executive, said all softwarecompanies were facing strains from high- fixed costs.  "I think that is goingto be exacerbated by Windows development," said Nolan.Thomson is assigning SCS/Compute to the Research Institute of America Group,which includes Warren Gorham & Lamont and Practitioners Publishing Co., and isheaded by president Euan Menzies.  Thomson also owns Accounting Today througha separate subsidiary.RIA is getting an opportunity to develop a broad line of tax and accountingproducts.  SCS/Compute has two tax software packages, LMS/Tax and Tax Machine;a write-up package, Datawrite; and a growing number of client software titles.Nolan agreed to sell his 1.1 million shares to Thomson U.S.  Holdings, adivision of Thomson Corp.  of Toronto.  Thomson has launched a tender offerfor another 1.5 million shares outstanding - all at a price of $6.75 a share,up from recent trading at $2.375.The deal will cost Thomson more than just the stock price of $17.5 million.It must also redeem preferred stock and long-term debt owed to SCS/Compute'smajor lender.While growth in the tax preparation market has clearly reached a plateau,Menzies said he sees opportunity.  "We are confident we can take market shareaway from other companies," he said.But RIA is not getting a market leader in SCS/Compute.Industry sources rank SCS/Compute at about seventh place in terms of overallmarket share.But Nolan cited Thomson's deep pockets as an important aspect of the deal.Harvey Stein, executive vice president of Pencil Pushers Software ofBurlington, Mass., agreed, saying "it gives them a base to acquire othercompanies."During the last year, SCS/Compute had made three acquisitions, to mixedreviews.  SCS/Compute picked up, for example, In-the-Black software, a low-endpackage it was forced to rewrite.  In the last quarter, SCS/Compute acquiredSaltWare, a sales tax line, for$130,000 and stock now worth $54,000.  SCS/Compute also agreed in the lastquarter to buy RAM Software, a tax preparation line with 400 users, for about$500,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FORECAST &REVIEW:  By the numbers:  The top 10 news events of 1995Death and taxes.  The two constants made plenty of appearances in 1995'saccounting news.Death claimed an independent Kenneth Leventhal and a logical way to accountfor stock options.  Taxes - and what needs to be changed about them - werediscussed everywhere from executives' roundtables to kitchen tables.Sometimes death and taxes came together, as in the cancellation of last year'staxpayer compliance measurement program.But all wasn't gloomy.  Experiments, such as KPMG Peat Marwick's Baymark, andexpansion, such as American Express Tax and Business Services' (dreaded, tosome) growth, breathed fresh air into this year's news.Through it all, the American Institute of CPAs is undergoing a transformationthat should help members cope with all the issues raised by Accounting Today'sTop 10 stories of 1995.1.  "Melancon rattles top ranks of AICPA":  When Barry Melancon replacedlong-time AICPA president Philip B.  Chenok July 1, he pledged to reducebloat, break down bureaucratic fiefdoms and modernize the institute'soperations.  But he surprised even his closest supporters in October when hebegan a massive restructuring with a shake-up of top management ranks.  Hetrimmed the number of executive staff positions and directors.  Additionallayoffs of from 5 to 10 percent were expected late last year.  The changeswere made, Melancon said, to focus on an area he targeted as important sincehis nomination - delivering products and services members want.  The new andimproved AICPA also launched an advertising campaign aimed at making chiefexecutives and other decision makers in large companies think of CPAs asbusiness advisers.  An Accounting Today survey found that not only do CPAssupport advertising that would enhance their image, they would be willing tospend more than the $3 million the AICPA budgeted for the program.  2."Overhaul or not, big changes loom":  If you can't guess what this headlinereferred to, you were on a year's vacation.  Yes, alternative income taxsystems - especially the flat tax - were debated ad nauseam in 1995.  Inaddition to a flat tax bill proposed by Rep.  Dick Armey, R-Texas, anUnlimited Savings Allowance plan was proposed by Sens.  Sam Nunn, D-Ga., andPete V.  Domenici, R-N.M.  Others in Congress called for a national sales tax.Whatever the philosophy, the message is clear:  The tax system must bereformed.  And the experts say we're as close as we've ever been to a changein the current income tax system.  Look for the issue to figure in this year'spresidential campaign.  3.  "Texas board sues American Express":  The TexasState Board of Public Accountancy joined Florida in its crusade to stopAmerican Express Tax and Business Services Inc., formerly known as IDSFinancial Services Inc.  The board wants a Texas state court to forbidAmerican Express from signing its name to any financial statement that impliesthat it is an accountant.  The statements also may not contain any wordingindicating it has expert knowledge in accounting unless it complies with thePublic Accountancy Act.  Under the act, the only business entity that can do acompilation is a CPA firm.  American Express claims that the case is "allabout competition."  4.  "Tort reform leaps hurdle in Congress":  Theaccounting profession - and the AICPA - were poised to win the battle forlitigation reform.  The bill would have reduced the financial liability ofaccountants for fraud by their corporate clients and limited investors'ability to collect damages from accountants and others with deep pockets.Unfortunately, President Clinton vetoed the bill late last month.  5.  "Fewmourn as IRS kills TCMP audits":  A collective sigh of relief could be heardfrom tax practitioners across the country in late October, when the InternalRevenue Service announced it was going to indefinitely delay last year's roundof taxpayer compliance measurement program audits.  The IRS had planned toselect 153,000 tax returns and subject their owners to rigorous checkups, butbacked out after Congress refused to fund its entire $8.2 billion proposedbudget.  The IRS conducts the TCMP audits to gauge both the level of voluntarycompliance and the best methods for selecting tax returns for future audits.The AICPA had been troubled by the IRS' plan to subject all individual TCMPvictims to a "financial status" test or "economic reality" check.  During afinancial status audit, taxpayers are quizzed to find unreported income.  Theso-called "economic reality" checks also caused headaches as practitioners sawclients answering IRS inquiries about cash on hand at home, in a safe depositbox or "hidden somewhere."  6.  "'Filing season from hell':  House panel rakesIRS chief over coals":  The tax world was abuzz and aghast last tax season asmeasures used by the IRS to detect fraud were holding up refunds and tryingtaxpayer's patience from coast to coast.  Taxpayers claiming the earned incometax credit didn't receive their cash credit until the IRS double-checkedtaxpayers' and dependents' Social Security numbers.  Former H&R Blockpresident Harry Buckley called last year "without a doubt the most difficulttax season" when it came to customer dissatisfaction.  Buckley blamed thecomplaints on the "IRS' inability to effectively communicate the proceduralchanges."  Taxpayers who paid extra to have their returns electronically filedwere especially aggravated at having to wait for their refunds.  7.  "Politicskills FASB stock options plan":  After more than a decade of study and morethan two years of increasingly acrimonious opposition, the FinancialAccounting Standards Board dropped its plan to force companies to chargeexecutive stock options against earnings.  The FASB backed down only after itbecame clear that pursuing its plan could prompt the Republican-controlledCongress to seize accounting rule-making from accountants and place it undergovernment authority.  Constituencies in industry, especially high-techinterests, claimed the change would have devastated "the fastest growingsegment of the economy.  In the end, the FASB voted to seek only footnotedisclosure."  8.  "Leventhal deal firms up Ernst's real estate muscle":  In adeal that joined two real estate giants, Ernst & Young acquired KennethLeventhal & Co.  Los Angeles-based Leventhal's operations, once the 11thlargest U.S.  accounting firm, are run as a business unit within Ernst &Young.  Leventhal's departure left only three second-tier firms:  GrantThornton, McGladrey & Pullen and BDO Seidman.  9.  "With $1.9B sale, CCH gainsDutch uncle":  CCH Inc., the nation's largest tax publisher, was acquired for$1.9 billion by Netherlands-based Wolters Kluwer NV, a European giant, in atransaction announced late last year.  The deal ended the 103-year reign ofthe Thorne family over a business that now generates $600 million in revenue.10.  "Peat makes grab for Wall St.  fees with franchise deal":  KPMG PeatMarwick blazed a financial services trail when it launched an investmentbanking unit, called KPMG Baymark, with a group of veteran Wall Streetinvestment bankers.  The unit is providing private placement debt and equityfinancing to Peat's middle-market corporate finance clients.  While Peatdreamed of the millions of dollars in fees Baymark could generate, some CPAsquestioned whether the firm could maintain its independence with clients whohave signed on to Baymark.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996LettersEthics dilemma has two sidesThis is in response to your story ("FBI douses report it wants CPAs to squealon clients," Aug.  21-Sept.  10) which refers to a USA Today article,"Accountants should turn in crooked clients."From these articles it is assumed that all three entities involved in thisdispute believe that CPAs have few ethical standards.  Your article alsosuggests that CPAs are not turning in clients unless the behavior is "soegregious" that in order for the CPA to avoid being tainted by it, he or shecontact the authorities.According to the American Institute of CPAs Standards Rule 102 ammended May20, 1991, "a member ...  shall not knowingly misrepresent facts or subordinatehis or her judgment on others."  Yet, they are following standards by notinforming the Federal Bureau of Investigation about clients because a membercannot "disclose any confidential client information without the consent ofthe client."  CPAs also fear the consequences of whistleblowing, such aslosing the confidence of their clients or, worse, getting fired by the firm.One of the questions not answered in your article is, what reward is the FBIwilling to offer to CPAs if they do turn in their clients?  If CPAs aregreatly involved in a crime, they would also be prosecuted.  If prosecuted,these CPAs would be terminated as members of the AICPA.  Arguments from bothsides should be presented in the same article.Every time CPAs take on new clients, they should use their integrity to decidewhether to get involved with "dirty clients."  CPAs are obliged to protecttheir clients, yet they cannot knowingly misrepresent facts.  If theyunderstand and remain objective, they should be able to control the problem.Perhaps this issue could be resolved within the AICPA rather than byoutsiders, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission.  However, asethical and professional behavior will always be, this issue will remaindebatable.Amy R.  Barrie Moscow, IdahoYour report on Linda Pappajohn's recent speech at the AICPA PracticeManagement Conference ("Clarity, ranges keys to compensation policies," Nov.6-19, 1995) included some solid advice on salary issues and compensationpolicies.  However, I want to share my surprise at the sample salary ranges inthe article, specifically for marketing directors, which range from a low of$21,317 to a high of $28,778.A quick call to Linda informed me that the salary ranges in the chart wereprovided to her by the Minn-Dak chapter of the Association for AccountingAdministration.  During our conversation, Linda thought that the low rangesmay reflect the salaries of secretaries with little background in marketingwho have been promoted.I don't know of a seasoned marketing director who will work within thosesalary ranges.  In fact, according to a Gallop & Robinson poll, the averageannual salary for marketing directors in all industries is $80,478.  A looserule of thumb among marketing directors in various industries:  You should bepaid 1 percent of a company's gross.Marketing directors in accounting firms often take on two other roles:director of public relations - average annual salary $55,500, according to thePublic Relations Society of America - and director of advertising - averageannual salary $61,611, according to Gallop.  Even studies within our ownaccounting industry, specifically the Pencor Report, publish that 17 percentof full-time marketing professionals earn between $50,000 and $75,000annually.If there is any validity to the Minn-Dak ranges, it's no wonder that LeeBerton of The Wall Street Journal reported recently that midsized firms arehaving problems competing with the Big Six.  (Incidentally, Boulay, Heutmaker,Zibell & Co.  is noted in Berton's article as a firm that is prospering byfighting the Big Six on our own turf with advertising, promotional videos andclient satisfaction programs.)Regardless of statistics, the truth is accounting firms need marketingdirectors who will work as partners with firm management, challenging them toincrease business, market share, opportunities and awareness with marketingprograms and strategic plans.  And believe me, no marketing director of thatcaliber will consider working for the salary ranges listed in the Minn-Dakchart.If accounting firms are settling for marketing directors with little, if anyexperience, and basically leading them by the nose, they will get what theypay for - small results within their comfort zone.  My advice to accountingfirms, especially since they usually hire one marketing professional and not awhole department, is to hire the best you can afford.  In this age of fiercecompetition, it's breakthrough marketing led by seasoned marketing pros thatwill set apart the winners from the losers.Lyne P.  Manescalchi, director of marketing, Boulay, Heutmaker, Zibell & Co.MinneapolisBoards must address unfair competitionThe letter to the editor by Bernard Kiely, of New Jersey, ("State boards needmore power," Oct.  9-22) misses the major issue- the unfair competition thatpurchasers such as American Express Business Services inherently have.They are only buying accounting write-up and tax practices to ultimately sellfinancial products to their clients.  That is why they can charge far lessthan a CPA, who is prohibited by most state boards from doing the same thing.The Federal Trade Commission was thinking along the same lines when it ruled afew years ago that CPAs could sell financial products, with full disclosure,to clients for whom they don't provide audit or review services.Most state boards are like ostriches with their heads in the sand, living inthe regulated past, and will only be forced to go along with the FTC whenlitigated to do so.This is an issue that affects all CPAs, large and small.Kevin A.  Lawrence, CPA Los AngelesMesonic thanks you for mentioning our Windows 95 Financial Accounting Softwarein Tech Briefs ("Mesonic offers Windows 95 accounting," Sept.  11-24).  Thiswas the first mention in your publication of an accounting software vendorshipping a Windows 95 accounting software package.You can imagine our suprise when the next issue of Accounting Today reportedthat another vendor claimed to have the first approved Windows 95 accountingsoftware ("SourceMate claims win with first Windows 95 accounting," Oct.9-22).  Mesonic would like to challenge this claim.  Mesonic's Windows 95version has been available since the beta days of Windows 95.A stringent testing procedure must be successfully completed and verifiedprior to a product being awarded the use of the "Designed for Windows 95"logo.  This testing establishes whether or not a program is eligible to besubmitted to Microsoft for the Windows 95 logo.  Mesonic's software packageWINLine 95 passed this test Sept.  13, 1995.  Furthermore, this same articlestates that, "SourceMate is field testing its Visual AccountMate with severalaccounts ...  The product is scheduled to have several modules shipping inNovember."WINLine 95 is currently shipping 20 modules, several of which are availablewithout any wait.  Because WINLine 95 was derived from our NT version, whichhas been on the market since 1993, your readers can be assured of a reliableprogram and not a first-level release.WINLine 95 accounting software by Mesonic is truly the "first Windows 95accounting system" to both pass testing and to be available on the market.Jeffrey Green, director of reseller support, Mesonic Oakdale, Pa.AmEx KOs Fla.  board in CPA title boutby Sandy HockTALLAHASSEE, FLA.  -- In a decision that's expected to sweep the country, afederal judge ruled that an American Express Tax and Business Services Inc.manager could call himself a CPA even though he works for a non-CPA-ownedcompany.In doing so, Chief Judge Maurice M.  Paul of the U.S.  District Court for theNorthern District of Florida struck down Florida statutes that prohibit a CPAemployed by a nonlicensed accounting firm and performing only non-attestbusiness services from telling clients that he or she is a CPA."This decision will affect most states," said Sarah McKenzie, nationaldirector of firm development and government affairs for Minneapolis-basedAmerican Express Tax and Business Services.  "That's why we brought it tofederal court.  It was a constitutional issue."In the wake of the decision, American Express was reportedly readying amassive new expansion program.  The company finished fiscal 1995 in June with$40 million in fees from about 341 professionals in 55 offices.  High-rankingAmEx strategists were said to be formulating a plan to reach $200 million inrevenue by the end of the decade.Chief Judge Paul ruled that the Florida regulation infringed on CPA StephenMiller's freedom of speech.Miller, senior managing director of American Express' Tampa office and leadplaintiff in the case, expressed relief that his 18-month court battle wasover."It's been a real tough year," Miller said after the judgment was handed downlast month.  "Everyone asks if I'm a CPA and I have to give them a lot ofexplanation about the legalities of what I can tell them.  It puts a lot ofcaution in their minds."The Florida Board of Accountancy will vote on whether to appeal the decisionto the U.S.  Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta at its meetingthis week, said John J.  Rimes III, a Florida assistant attorney general."Obviously, the state isn't happy," Rimes said about the Miller case.  "We'redisappointed in the outcome."Even with the Florida ruling, CPAs working for non-CPA firms should be carefulabout how they refer to themselves, Rimes warned.  The U.S.  Court of Appealsfor the Ninth Circuit in California ruled in September that the CaliforniaState Board of Accountancy could discipline a CPA affiliated with H.D.  Vestinvestment securities for advertising his CPA credentials while also acceptingcommissions.  Similar litigation also is pending in Texas and Louisiana, whilea preliminary investigation is underway in Arizona, Rimes said."It means there's some confusion out there," Rimes noted.  "There's noquestion about that."If the board doesn't appeal the decision, it could impose a disclaimer forCPAs who work for firms that aren't regulated by the state, Rimes said.If the Miller decision holds, it marks the third time in three years that theFlorida board lost a major case.  In June 1994, the U.S.  Supreme Court struckdown a Florida regulation forbidding attorney-CPAs from advertising their CPAand certified financial planner credentials.  In 1993, the highest courtabolished the board's rule that forbade CPAs from such solicitation activitiesas cold calling.While conceding that fighting such issues as solicitation was an outdatedposition, Florida Institute of CPAs executive director Lloyd "Buddy" Turmaninsisted that CPAs are dead set in favor of the fight against American Expresson the Miller matter.And the FICPA maintains that the issue involved is not simply allowing a CPAto call himself one.  It goes deeper- to the very structure of firms - and theprofession."What you end up with is a noncorporate entity being able to provide serviceswithout facing any consequences, except being sued," Turman said.  "Firms willhave a tendency to shuffle licensees in and out of a practice.  If a CPA getssued and his license gets revoked for substandard work, you just fire them.There's no discipline that can be taken against the corporation."This case, Turman said, "allows you to say you're a CPA, but you don't have toact like a CPA."Imagine, he said, a CPA in business who puts together real estate deals withreal estate professionals.  The CPA could take advantage of the "public'strust for CPAs" by saying he is one, but not perform any of the workassociated with them.For Miller, however, his case is about his freedom of speech."I should have been able to tell the truth," he asserted.  "It was alwaysawkward.  I'd have to say technically, I've earned my certificate, but thefirm I work for is not a CPA firm.  Unless you ask me, I can't tell you."Miller, a former Big Six staffer and sole practitioner, began his long,strange trip against the Florida board three years ago after the boardinformed him it didn't like the language his American Express office had usedin a compilation report.  The state then came back jointly against AmericanExpress, which at the time was still called IDS Tax and Business Services.The action against Miller led American Express to file a suit against theFlorida board in state court in March 1994, charging that the boarddiscriminated against American Express by holding that its CPA employees couldnot prepare third-party statements.  American Express claimed that sinceFlorida law allows anyone to prepare such statements, it was being unfairlysingled out.  American Express dropped its suit in September 1994 when theboard agreed to allow its CPAs to prepare third-party statements.American Express renewed its legal efforts in November 1994 when, with Milleras the lead plaintiff, it decided to test the constitutionality of Florida'sholding-out rule.American Express had concluded that the June 1994 U.S.  Supreme Court decisionthat allowed Orlando attorney-CPA Silvia Ibanez to publicly call herself a CPAin turn gave American Express employees the right to hold themselves out.Florida, on the other hand, maintained that the Ibanez case did not clarifythe holding out issue.  That attitude pushed American Express to refile thesuit.Miller admits that American Express, even though it has only 18 CPAs and atotal of 40 employees in Florida, scares many CPAs in the Sunshine State - andthe rest of the country."It's what we represent," Miller explained.  "We're a big corporation withmoney behind us.  We have the marketing and operations know-how that localaccounting firms don't.  They think that it gives us an unfair advantage."In fact, since his legal tussles began, Miller has fielded many telephonecalls from CPAs interested in the American Express system and in hooking upwith the company.  A CPA Miller thought was "interested in joining the fold"invited Miller and a staff member to visit his office."He was antagonistic from the start," Miller recalled.  "I said, 'Why did youinvite us over.' He said, 'You guys are the devil incarnate.  I wanted to knowsomething about the other side.'"Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TECHNOLOGY:  TECH BRIEFSGREAT PLAINS RELEASES DYNAMICS C/S+ FOR SQL SERVER 6.0:  Great Plains Softwareof Fargo, N.D., was scheduled to begin controlled release of its Dynamics C/S+for SQL Server 6.0 this month.  The controlled release includes the Report andSystem Manager and General Ledger.  The line is designed to enable midrangecompanies to migrate financial applications to Microsoft's BackOfficeenvironment.  For further information, call (800) 456-0025.MICRO VISION EXPANDS SUITE PRICING OPTIONS:  Micro Vision of Commack, N.Y.,has implemented new pricing for its Accounting Professional Suite.  PresidentChandra Bhansali said the company offered options because it found users oftenhad one or more components of the five-package suite, which is sold for $995.Now, Micro Vision offers its Tax Relief software and any two components for$795, and $895 with three other components.  For more information, call (800)829-7354.SBT LINKS PAYROLL TO THE NET:  SBT Accounting Systems of San Rafael, Calif.,has designed Pro Series Payroll with WebPay to enable users to interacton-line with a national clearinghouse that manages direct deposits to or fromany bank.  The software is designed to handle payroll for up to 10,000employees.  WebPay is part of of an expanding line of InterNet products thatworks with the Pro Series.  For more information, call (415) 703-0400, ext.225.TELEMAGIC TARGETS ACCOUNTANTS:  TeleMagic of Dallas has introduced theTeleMagic Professional Accountants Edition of its contact management software.The program contains templates for small to midsized accounting firms andincludes the book, "Build Your Practice."  Special screens have been designedfor sole practitioners and firms.  The price is $299.  For furtherinformation, call (214) 733-4292 ext.  2865.MACOLA ENTERS BTRIEVE AGREEMENT:  Macola Software of Marion, Ohio, will ship ashrink-wrapped client/server package using Scalable SQL or Btrieve databaseengines with Macola's Progression and Horizon Series software.  Macola can usethe Server Edition of Btrieve Technologies' Scalable SQL for NetWare, Btrievefor NetWare and Btrieve for Windows NT.  The two companies will have jointmarketing.  Technical support will be provided by Macola.  For information,call (800) 468-0834, ext.  297.CREATIVE SOLUTIONS FIELDS OIL & GAS MODULE:  Creative Solutions of Dexter,Mich., has introduced the Ultra Tax/Oil & Gas module, which offers fouroptions for calculating percentage of depletion.  It also works with bothUltraTax/1040 and 1065 and the built-in depreciation capabilities as well asUltraTax state programs, even for states not following federal oil and gas taxregulations.  For more information, call (800) 968-8900.SOLOMON RELEASES SOLOMON IV FOR WINDOWS NT:  Solomon Software of Findlay,Ohio, is shipping Solomon IV (Server Edition) for Windows NT.  Previously, theproduct was available only for NetWare.  A three-user license is priced at$1,295 per module; $2,795 per module for six users; and $5,095 per module for25 users.  A conversion utility is available for those using the NetWareversion.  For more information, call (800) 4SOLOMON.ABACUS DEBUTS 32-BIT PACKAGE:  Abacus Accounting Systems of Edmonton, Alberta,will release an accounting line based on the R:base SQL engine in the secondquarter.  The new line will be paired with Abacus' Web Order Taker, which willcapture order information on the Internet.  In March, Abacus acquired MicrorimSoftware, which developed the R:base database system.  For more information,call (800) 665-6657.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CONSULTING INSIGHTS:  Microsoft dominance leads tech trends for '96Crystal balls are cloudy.  But one part of the technology horizon for 1996remains clear:  it's a Microsoft (desktop) world.There are technology trends that accountants should consider, such as theevolution of color laser printing and imaging.  There are market trends,particularly the continuing consolidation of vendors, that will have morepractitioners buying more software from fewer suppliers.  But in operatingsystems and general desktop applications, there's little choice but Microsoft.Particularly among smaller firms, 1996 is the year to choose whether to moveto Windows 3.1 or to Windows 95.  There's no reason to stick with DOS unlessyou are using a computer you should replace, because both Windows 3.1 andWindows 95 will run DOS applications (Windows 95 runs them very well).If you are happy with Windows 3.1, stick with it.  There's no compellingreason for buying 95, although its long file names and improved memorymanagement are nice, just not critical.For larger firms, corporate America, consultants and resellers, the choice isbetween moving to Windows 95 and Windows NT.  The latter offers stability,robustness and security- pretty compelling reasons for making a businessdecision.  Once Windows NT gets the Windows 95 interface later this year, it'slikely to be the product of choice for heavy- duty users and some consumers.On the general application side, only in the accounting market is 1-2-3 stillking of the spreadsheet world, and that's not going to last.  Everybody elseuses Excel.  Anybody who attended shows such as PC Expo has got to wonderabout Lotus' (now IBM's) commitment to 1-2-3.  Both the product and name wereinvisible in a sea of Notes signs.And with Novell trying to sell WordPerfect, how many users want to bet on thatproduct's future in word processing?  The other choice:  WordPro, part ofSmart Suite.  Will that be Microsoft Word or Microsoft Word that your firmbuys?The major question left in operating systems is whether Microsoft's NT Servertruly will displace Novell's NetWare.  It looks like 1996 will still be a yearof NetWare dominance, with strong gains by NT and the grudging co-existence ofthe two products.The one possible chink in the Microsoft armor:  on-line services.  TheMicrosoft Network hasn't taken off yet and for professionals, CompuServe isstill a better service because there are more accountants to talk to on it.On the Internet, Microsoft would like to repeat its dominance, but here it maybe cut off at the pass by Sun Microsystems and Netscape, both of which supportthe Java programming language, an emerging standard.Market consolidationThere will be more tax and accounting vendors failing or being purchased, withtax preparation vendors particularly vulnerable.  The need to develop both DOSand Windows products will simply prove too much for some smaller players.  Addon likely tax law changes and some companies will simply count their cash andgo home.Consolidation is not just about changing the number of players.  It's changinghow practitioners buy software.  Instead of buying from many small vendors, itwill be possible to buy a complete tax and accounting line from one source.Look for the big to get bigger.  Intuit has been flexing its muscles withdevelopment of programs and services such as the Intuit Financial ProfessionalProgram for its Pro Series users.  That's the kind of power that one-productcompanies will find hard to match over the long haul.Movement towards suites will continue.  There is not a true accounting suiteon the market yet.  Micro Vision's Accounting Professional Suite is more of abundle of products with different pricing options.  However, true suites, withbuild-in interfaces between products, are on the way.Look for Computer Language Research, CCH Inc., Research Institute of America,and perhaps Arthur Andersen with its new VantageSource unit, as well as anumber of smaller players, to join this race over the next two years.The "I" wordEverybody is taking about the Internet.  Surprisingly, it isn't all hype.But, it remains tough to sell and market most products on the Internet, unlessyou are selling a specialty item.However, the Internet appears to have a bright future in support, distributionof upgrades and bug fixes, as well as good, old-fashioned electronic mail.One of the companies pointing to the potential here is SBT Accounting Systems.It accepts orders via its WebTrader, but since it sells on terms, it doesn'thave to worry about credit card security.More important, SBT pioneered what founder Robert Davies calls "the poor man'sEDI" (Electronic Data Interchange) and hopes to use the Internet to seriouslycut product returns.That combination of cost cutting and customer service represents the potentialfor 1996.  And many tax preparation vendors are also recognizing the backoffice/support potential.  Internet support is going to augment, if notreplace, some conventional bulletin board-based support systems.Technologies to consider:* Imaging.  Accountants are only now waking up to the cost of storingdocuments.  Imaging is beginning to make an impact at smaller firms which arethe early adopters of technology.  * Video conferencing.  This has been a hottopic in the broader computer market.  Pricing just hasn't come down enough.In 1996, it's not quite there yet for smaller businesses and firms.  *Hand-held computers.  If you didn't need them in 1995, you won't need them in1996.  * Color laser printing.  The price is not yet low enough to make colorindispensable.  But it's getting close.  It won't be long before we all wonderwhat anybody is doing with just a plain black ink printer.  * Wide areanetworking.  Any firm with more than one office should at least look atalternatives to plain old telephone service.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FASB rules on nonprofits' investmentsNORWALK, CONN.  - The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued a newrule on how not-for-profit organizations should account for certaininvestments.Statement 124, "Accounting for Certain Investments Held by Not-for-ProfitOrganizations," is effective for fiscal years beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.The statement is the fourth to result from the FASB's project to resolve areasof inconsistency in accounting and reporting by not-for-profits.Statement 124 requires not-for-profit organizations to report at fair valueinvestments in equity securities with readily determinable fair values and alldebt securities, with gains and losses reflected in a statement of activities.The statement also establishes standards for reporting losses on investmentsheld under a donor's stipulation to invest a gift in perpetuity or for aspecified term."Although a significant number of not-for-profit organizations currentlyreport all investments at fair value, inconsistencies exist because existingguidance permitted alternatives," said FASB project manager Susan Weiss.  "Theboard believes that fair value more accurately measures the resources anot-for-profit organization has available to provide its mission-relatedservices."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Pentagon battles $20 billion in bad accountingWASHINGTON - Financial record keeping at the Department of Defense is in suchdisarray that the Pentagon can't account for more than $20 billion in militaryexpenditures.But that's the good news, Defense financial officers told Congress.  Asrecently as June 1993 the military had nearly $50 billion in "problemdisbursements" - payments which could not be matched with any obligations -and dramatic progress has been made since then, they said.As evidence, Pentagon officials noted that the department expects to overpaydefense contractors by "only" $270 million in FY 1995.  Two years ago,military overpayments to contractors were approaching $800 million annually,Defense Comptroller John J.  Hamre said in a letter to Congress.For their part, however, members of the House government reform subcommitteeexpressed little appreciation for the recent improvements in the department'saccounting systems.  Subcommittee Chairman Steve Horn, R-Calif., who summoneda parade of military accountants to explain the Pentagon's chronically mangledbooks, told Defense financial officers that in the private sector theirsubstandard accounting practices wouldn't pass muster even for "Mom and Pop"businesses.Democrat Carolyn Maloney of New York offered an even harsher appraisal,calling the department's bookkeeping practices "a disgrace to Americanfighting men and women."Military financial officers acknowledge the extent of these problems, but saythey date back to before their watch."When I arrived, I learned that the department had serious problems inmatching obligations and disbursements," Hamre said, but these difficulties"go back 50 years to the founding of the department."Defense Inspector General Eleanor J.  Hill traced the Pentagon's bookkeepingtroubles back even further, noting that during the Revolutionary War, Armyquartermasters balked at financial record keeping on grounds that the militarycould not be run like the "plain business of a common storekeeper."Now "here we are 216 years later in the computer age and we still cannotsupply Congress with an acceptable accounting of expenditures," she said.Further complicating the situation are the "flawed business practices thathave built up over the past 40 years" within the department's patchwork ofinternal accounting systems.When the department was created at the end of World War II there were morethan 250 major accounting systems in operation throughout the military.  Eventoday, those systems remain "largely incompatible" with one another, and onlythree of them comply with the Comptroller General's accounting principles andstandards, General Accounting Office assistant comptroller general Gene Dodarotestified.To make matters worse, the Pentagon adopted a policy authorizing any one ofthe department's 300 financial offices to write checks on behalf of anyoneelse in the department - a procedure that created a "cross-disbursing"nightmare throughout the military.As a result, checks were written without first verifying whether there was "aclear path back to the accounting record in one of those 250 accountingsystems," Hamre explained.  "The result was a business practice [and aculture] of 'pay now, account for it later,'" he said.Despite these problems, department's comptroller disputed allegations that"the department's finance and accounting systems are so flawed that you can'ttrust the budget we have submitted to you."Department officials also flatly deny suggestions that the military'sfinancial reporting mess is the result of any widespread fraud or misconduct.Although GAO's Dodaro told Congress that CFO Act audits have revealedcontinuing "breakdowns in the department's ability to protect its assets fromfraud, waste and abuse," Hamre disputed allegations of sinister intent."The bulk of our problems are the product of innocent mistakes inside a verycomplex system where typographical errors produce thousands of mismatchedrecords that require subsequent research," he said in his letter to Congress.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 19965 New Standards Highlight FASB's 1995 Accomplishmentsby Glenn CheneyNORWALK, CONN.  - In 1995, the Financial Accounting Standards Board rode outthe turbulent wake of its stock compensation project and went on to pound outfive new standards and move several other projects into the public forum."All things considered, we made good progress this year," declares Dennis R.Beresford, chairman of the board.He has good reason for feeling satisfied.  In the first half of the year, theboard issued three new statements that would go into effect for fiscal yearsbeginning after Dec.  15, 1995.  Statement 120 established rules on theaccounting and reporting by mutual life insurance enterprises.  Statement 121established the accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets.  Statement122 deals with mortgage servicing rights.By the end of the year, two more standards would be issued, and a number ofproposed standards would be released for comment.Despite the progress, it was the stock compensation furor that attracted themost attention.  Until the standard was issued in October as Statement No.123, many companies, public accounting firms, certain commissioners of theSecurities and Exchange Commission and even the U.S.  Senate complained thatthe proposed standard was unfair.  The original proposal would have requiredcompanies to recognize stock option compensation as an expense.  The eventualcompromise required only a disclosure of the effects of such compensation.According to Beresford, however, the fundamental issue was not the recognitionof stock compensation but the recognition of the sanctity of setting standardsin the private sector, a process that should not be influenced by politics oreconomic effects."The question now is whether we are going to be commended for listening towhat a large majority said," he says, "or whether we will be condemned forbowing to pressure and encouraging future efforts to get around theprivate-sector standard-setting process."Once stock compensation was out of the way, the board approved its last finalstatement of the year.  It was a third standard in a series on not-for-profitorganizations.  Statement No.  124 requires reporting at fair value certaininvestments in equity securities and all debt securities.  The new standardwent into effect for fiscal years beginning after Dec.  15, 1995.Big October harvestIn October the board reaped much of what it had sown over previous months.  Afew days before issuing the stock compensation standard, the board issued anexposure draft on consolidated financial statements.  If adopted as proposed,the standard will prescribe when entities should be consolidated and howconsolidated financial statements should be prepared.A few days later, the board released a special report on hedge accounting andderivatives.  While it resolves none of the thorny issues that have hinderedprogress on this project, it pulls together and analyzes many of theprinciples and problems involved.  The board hopes to issue an exposure drafton this important topic by the middle of 1996.Then, within a week, the board issued an exposure draft of a proposedstatement on transfers of financial assets.  It resolves long-standingquestions about whether transactions should be accounted for as securedborrowings or as sales.Comments on the consolidation and transfers of assets proposals are due inmid-January.On a roll, the board issued an Implementation Guide on Statement 115,"Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities," inNovember and planned a draft on the decommissioning of long-lived assets bythe end of the year.  Originally the project had been dedicated to nuclearpower plants specifically, but in 1995 the scope was expanded to includesimilar costs, such as those involved at mining or oil drilling sites.International outlookIn 1995 the board continued to expand its efforts to shed international lighton FASB projects."Every project that we work on now has some significant interchange with ourcounterparts in other countries," says Beresford.  "This is no longersomething that happens every few years.  It happens constantly."The board ended the year with two exposure drafts of international scope thatare ready to go but on hold to keep them in step with offshorestandard-setters.  One, a proposed binational statement on disaggregateddisclosures, will not be issued until the board's Canadian counterpart isready to issue a parallel document.  The second, a proposed statement onearnings per share, is ready but waiting for the International AccountingStandards Committee to release a proposal on the same issue.In the third quarter of the year the board tackled a key new project oncomprehensive income.  Deliberations have just begun, but the board is alreadyconsidering working with standard-setters in other countries to work toward astandard with international compatibility.An important document still out for comment deals with the effectiveness ofdisclosures.  The board has been torn by conflicting complaints of burdensomedisclosure requirements and a perceived need for more information among theusers of financial information.The board is also issuing an Invitation to Comment which addresses issuesraised in reports produced by the Association for Investment and ManagementResearch and the Jenkins Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.Comments will do much to determine which projects end up on the board's agendain future years."We think there are some awfully interesting ideas in both of these reports,"says Beresford.  "But there are so many ideas that we need to do some seriousprioritization."At year's end, Beresford concluded that 1995 had been productive and had setthe stage for rapid output early in 1996.  Public response to the variousexposure drafts work will do much to guide the board through the new year.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NEW PRODUCTSSOFTWAREPeachtree Accounting for WindowsPeachtree Accounting for Windows, Release 3.5 features a multimedia setuproutine that includes video and audio clips.  By watching, listening andanswering the appropriate questions when prompted, small businesses canautomate their books quickly.  Over 75 sample business templates providedetailed examples of successful small business models.  Release 3.5 features agraphical forms designer, LIFO and FIFO costing and five pricing levels foreach product.Price:  $129.  Existing Release 3.0 users can upgrade for a $9.95 shippingcharge.  Other Peachtree users can upgrade for $99.Peachtree Software(800) 247-3224SBT's WebTrader 2.0SBT Accounting Systems' WebTrader 2.0 enables instant, secure sales processingdirectly on the World Wide Web.  The program lets businesses post order formsfor products or services on the Web and then automatically processes them andsends a customer confirmation via e-mail.  WebTrader initiates and completesthe sales process by providing a connection between vendor and customer.Price:  $1,295.SBT Accounting Systems Inc.(415) 703-0400PowerSolutions' PLANMakerPLANMaker Version 2.0 for Windows allows the user to create dynamic businessplans for businesses of all sizes whether start-up or existing.  PLANMaker isalso used by consultants to prepare professional business plans for clients.The software guides the user step-by-step, providing the best formats andnarrative in easy-to-use modules that may be tailored to a wide range ofenterprises.  Complete financial forecasts are also included.Price:  $129.PowerSolutions(800) 955-3337Mirasoft ForFUND/Govt Accounting for WindowsMirasoft's Release 2.0 of ForFUND/Govt Accounting for Windows adds full 32-bitsupport for Windows 95 and Windows NT.  The product includes general ledger,budgeting, project/grant management, cash receipts, bank reconciliation,accounts payable, purchase orders, accounts receivable, fixed assets, payroll,utility billing and business licenses.  The software is written for use by anysize not-for-profit organization.  ForFUND is developed in Microsoft VisualFoxPro database language.  The software includes 19 user-definable fields foreasy query and report generation; budget import/export; utility billing cashreceipt fast fill; automatic reversing of posted journal entries; accountspayable select/de-select process; enhanced print-preview and print-to-file.Price:  Starts at $2,500 per module.  Upgrades are provided at no charge forexisting Mirasoft users.Mirasoft Inc.(800) 414-FUNDTKR Time & Billing for WindowsTKR for Windows utilizes Microsoft Access, which allows access to data fromprograms such as Microsoft's Access, Word, Excel and other Windows-basedreport writers.  Features include built-in security levels; operator-specificdefaults for data entry; no month-end processing; standard text for invoices;bills that can be created and saved for review before being posted; automatedpreparation of "customized" statements, fixed fee invoices and regularinvoices; extensive management and profitability reporting; and CPE tracking.Price:  $395 single user version (one to five staff).E.  F.  Haskell Software(800) 732-3688Time & Profit 1.0 for WindowsBytePro's Time & Profit for Windows automates all time and billing recordkeeping requirements - clients, calendar, time, billing and accounting.  Theuser enters his or her schedule in the calendar register.  Time & Profit takesthis schedule and processes it all the way through billing, then places allnecessary entries into the accounting system.  All billing for the day, weekor month can be accomplished instantaneously.Price:  $269.BytePro Corp.(714) 622-0884Yardi's Real Estate Asset Management for WindowsThe Yardi Asset Management System, a suite of five integrated softwareproducts for asset managers, allows real estate asset managers to captureperformance, portfolio, analytical and operational data.  The system'sholdings reports consolidate financial and occupancy data in one entirelycustomizable report.  The product also provides full NCREIF reporting.Price:  $2,000 and up.Yardi Systems(800) 866-1144HARDWARETroy MICR Font and Toner KitsTroy MICR Font and Toner Kits provide "on demand" check printing capabilityfor users of LaserJet printers.  The kits include Troy's MICR toner cartridgeand Troy font single in-line memory module (SIMM) with MICR and other securityfonts.Price:  $399, HP LaserJet 4 and 4 Plus MICR SIMM and Toner Kit; $499, HPLaserJet 4 and 4 Plus MICR Cartridge and Toner Kit; $399, HP LaserJet 4si MICRSIMM and Toner Kit; $499, HP LaserJet 4si MICR Cartridge and Toner Kit.Troy(800) 944-6757Best Data Voice and Data ModemsThe Smart One Professional series, 288DSVD digital simultaneous voice and data(DSVD) modems support V.34 data and V.17 fax communications.  The 288DSVD hasvoice mail/audio capabilities and a duplex speakerphone.  The 288DSVDalternately sends and receives voice and data, allowing users to talk on thephone while sending files, a fax or receiving data.Price:  $349.Best Data Products(800) 632-2378Micro Express' MicroFLEX-686/133The MicroFLEX-686/133 , based on the Cyrix 6x86-P133 chip, performs comparablyto a 133-MHz Pentium, while running at 100 MHz.  The computer includes 16MBRAM, a 4X CD-ROM drive, 1GB hard disk drive, high-density 3.5-in.  floppy diskdrive, mouse and 15-in.  monitor.Price:  $2,499.Micro Express(800) 989-9900PUBLICATIONSEncyclopedic Dictionary of Business TermsPrentice Hall's Encyclopedic Dictionary of Business Terms (cloth, 542 pages)by Wilbur Cross provides up-to-date information on words, phrases and meaningsto over 500 business and industry-related subject areas.  The guide is aone-volume source of information on business topics, from historical andtraditional language to the latest terminology in technical communications.Readers will also find lists of associations, logos, periodicals, demographicsas well as financial and legal information.Price:  $29.95.Prentice Hall(201) 592-2000Tulane Tax Institute on Video from TotaltapeTotaltape Publishing Co., in cooperation with the 45th annual Tulane TaxInstitute, lets you attend one of the country's most prestigious andlongest-running tax planning conferences.  Totaltape offers eight hours ofcommercial broadcast quality video; all CD-ROM programs are multimedia andfeature video or audio - 18 hours of digitally recorded conference lecturesthat are fully edited.Price:  $649 (complete tooling).Totaltape Publishing Co.(800) 874-7877CCH Entity PlusCCH Entity Plus has three publications - the Limited Liability Company Guide,S Corporations Guide and Partnership Tax Planning and Practice Reports.  TheCD-ROM disc also has an integrated research module, the Entity OptionsSummary, for both broad comparative coverage of the major issues faced bythose considering and comparing business entities and a gateway to in-depthtreatment of each type of entity.Price:  From $395 to $888 for a one-year subscription.CCH Inc.(800) TELL-CCH, Dept.  4819PPC's Accounting and Auditing CD-ROM LibraryPractitioners Publishing Co.'s A&A CD-ROM Library includes 13 of the company'spractice guides, which can be accessed in any combination.  Each CD alsocontains PPC's GuideWare software, which permits the user to customize andedit the guides' practice aids to fit each engagement.Price:  Dependent upon the number of guides selected.  PPC book owners pay $45per title.  New customers pay from $121 to $175 per title.Practitioners Publishing Co.(800) 323-8724Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FASB faces 2 departures, rushes to finish projectsNORWALK, CONN.  - After a busy season late in 1995, the Financial AccountingStandards Board is planning to wrap up as many projects as possible by Juneand then size up its future direction according to what needs to be done rightaway and what ought to be done over the next several years.June is a key month because two of FASB's seven board members will becompleting their terms at that time.  Who their replacements will be and wherethey stand on various issues is at this point quite unknown.  The board,therefore, is hurrying to complete most of its current projects whileforestalling work on anything new.One of the two departing board members, Robert N.  Northcutt, has served as avoice of experience in corporate accounting.  The other, Robert J.  Swieringa,comes from an academic background.  The trustees of the Financial AccountingFoundation are striving to find replacements from those same backgrounds."We're trying very hard to finish several of our most important projectsbefore the two Bobs leave so we don't lose all of the effort they've put in,"says FASB chairman Dennis R.  Beresford.  "In particular, we'd like to issuefinal standards on consolidation policy and procedures, and on transfers ofassets and servicing arrangements.  We also hope to issue an exposure draft onhedging and derivatives."A bit further into the future is the leave-taking of chairman Beresford, whoseterm expires in mid-1997.  If Beresford has any pet projects he'd like toescort through the long due-process of setting standards, he'll have to beginearly in 1996.The board has recently been dedicating itself to strategic planning, somethingthat was difficult to do during the last decade of responding to the immediateneeds of accountancy."We're pretty far along in our strategic plan," Beresford says.  "Over time,we expect to be more proactive in deciding where financial reporting should beheading, as opposed to what has primarily been a reactive process.  We'd liketo focus more on tomorrow's problems and less on yesterday's and today's."One aspect of the board's strategic thought is that the demand for and theimportance of financial reports seems to be declining."It has been suggested that instead of looking at nitty-gritty accountingissues we should be looking at where the financial information package isgoing and what part we should play in that," Beresford muses.  "I hope thatover the next year we will be able to develop our game plan for the next fiveor 10 years."Public guidance will come into play in the second half of the year as commentscome in on an Invitation to Comment.  The invitation is a report on actionthat has been recommended by the Association of Investment Management andResearch and the Jenkins Committee of the American Institute of CPAs.  Theinvitation asks commentators to prioritize possible projects that the FASBmight add to its agenda.Six months of palpable progressBetween New Year's Day and the Fourth of July, the board hopes to makepalpable progress on a number of important projects.The comment period for an exposure draft on consolidations policy andprocedures ends Jan.  15.  Public hearings are scheduled for Feb.  20 and Feb.21, with a final statement possible in the second quarter.The exposure draft of a statement on transfers of financial assets andextinguishments of liabilities seeks comments by Jan.  22.  Public hearingsare scheduled for Feb.  26 and Feb.  27.  If all goes well, a final statementmay be issued by the middle of the year.The board is hoping that an exposure draft on the closure and removal oflong-lived assets - formerly the project on nuclear decommissioning - alsomight be finalized in June.  But, like all other projects, that depends on thenature of comments received.By June, the board also hopes to hammer out a long-awaited exposure draft onhedging and derivatives.The board plans to release two exposure drafts in January in conjunction withother standard setters.A proposed statement on disaggregated disclosures will be released inconjunction with the Accounting Standards Board of Canada, and a proposedstatement on Earnings Per Share will be released at the same time as aparallel document coming from the International Accounting StandardsCommittee.The FASB's project on comprehensive income was added late in 1995 and theboard has barely begun to grapple with the issues involved.  Nevertheless, anexposure draft could be issued fairly early this year because the issues arerelatively limited.The direction of the board in the second half of the year, then, should proveinteresting.  Two new board members will assume seats at the big table inNorwalk, Conn., and some strategic thinking may have begun to congeal by then.July 1, then, just might be springtime at the FASB.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  For better recruits, target professors, surveysaysAcross dozens of campuses nationwide, the battle for tomorrow's businessleaders has intensified.  Recruiting top talent has become more aggressivethan ever and the Big Six have recognized the need to bolster their marketingefforts.A consistent presence and favorable reputation with students is fundamental,but, in this competitive market for superstars, not enough.  To gain an evengreater edge on campus, firms need to strategically target not only thestudents, but their professors.Although the Big Six routinely spend millions of dollars on faculty relationsprograms each year, they are receiving a limited return on their investment.With the exception of Arthur Andersen, which has consistently fostered strongfaculty relations, and Coopers & Lybrand with its recent faculty initiatives,professors are not impressed.A new study that measures the effectiveness of these programs reveals thatonly a few firms are making a considerable impact.  These firms are spendingtheir dollars wisely and, in doing so, are positioning themselves to be thefirms of the future.Until recently, the only method the Big Six had of measuring their reputationamong faculty was through surveys that polled accounting faculty at a largenumber of schools.  This method ignores the changes in campus recruiting andthe concentration of resources.Instead of casting a wide net across hundreds of campuses, many firms arefocusing their recruiting efforts on selected top schools.  In 1986, forexample, one Big Six firm reported hiring just 16 percent of its incomingclass from these top schools.By 1990, it had hired 26 percent, and now it hires more than 45 percent of newrecruits from its focus schools.  Due to the Big Six's recent, morespecialized recruiting focus at key schools, the sweeping overview of datacollected in past surveys has become extraneous.In addition, the manner in which the data is collected has caused some firmsto question the survey's accuracy.  To reflect the focused concentration ofcampus recruiting and faculty relations, our firm conducted one-on-onetelephone surveys with 150 professors at 59 of the country's top accountingschools.  The sample included schools such as the University of Chicago, theUniversity of Illinois, Harvard University, the University of Pennsylvania andthe University of Texas.To measure the faculty's perceptions of the Big Six, interviewers askedstraightforward questions such as, "which firm has the best relationship withstudents and faculty on campus, which firm offers the best advancementopportunities, and which firm is most successful in growing its practice?"The study was first conducted in 1993 and repeated in 1995 with 70 percent ofthe respondents participating in both.Distinct tiers have developedAlthough the faculty considered all the Big Six firms to be highly reputableand, at times, difficult to differentiate, they regard Arthur Andersen as thetop firm overall.  Coopers & Lybrand solidified its second place ranking in1995 by more than doubling its overall score compared to 1993.  Deloitte &Touche also improved its overall score to place third, while Price Waterhouse,Ernst & Young and KPMG Peat Marwick all lost votes in 1995.Arthur Andersen's and Coopers & Lybrand's high rankings were no great surprisegiven the tremendous energy and resources both firms devote to campusrecruiting and faculty relations.  Faculty members noted that Coopers &Lybrand, especially, has increased their efforts to court professors.  Coopers& Lybrand was ranked as the firm with the best relationship with faculty.  Asa whole, the faculty commented that they appreciated Coopers & Lybrand'srecent efforts to keep them apprised of new technical information.Arthur Andersen was consistently regarded as the firm with the bestrelationship with students.  Faculty perceived that the strength of the firm'srelationship with their students was in direct correlation to the highoffer/accept rate among their candidates.  KPMG Peat Marwick's ranking droppedsignificantly compared to 1993, a reflection of their recent reduced campushirings.In the categories of "growing its practice" and "technical reputation,"faculty ranked Arthur Andersen as the top firm.  Some faculty connected thegrowth of Andersen Consulting to Arthur Andersen diversifying its practice.Faculty ranked Ernst & Young second in growing its practice, commentingfavorably on its May 1995 merger with Kenneth Leventhal & Co.  In terms oftechnical reputation, Price Waterhouse slipped in overall votes compared to1993, but still held its second place ranking.Ranking brands of milkFor the firms that do not have an overwhelming presence or reputation, thenews is somewhat encouraging.  Because the faculty viewed all the Big Six asreputable operations, they had some difficulty in rating the firms in areassuch as "best demonstrates technical expertise on accounting topics" or"offers best advancement opportunities."One professor commented that distinguishing between the firms in these areaswas comparable to "selecting their favorite brand of milk."In other areas such as "best use of technology," professors felt that they didnot have sufficient information on which to base an opinion.  From the facultypoint of view in these areas, the field is still level and wide open.  Forfirms willing to make investments in educating the faculty in these areas,their reputation on campus may see a considerable jump.The courtship of faculty is critical to building a firm's reputation andtalent pool for several reasons.  Fostering strong one-on-one relationshipswith faculty provides an alternative pathway for firms to communicate with topstudents.Including the faculty in an overall recruiting program provides firms withadditional campus visibility as well as a means to educate faculty aboutaspects of their firms.  When approached by students, professors will then beable to offer valued and well-informed opinions about the career opportunitiesavailable within any particular firm.Professors with strategic ties to a firm tend to incorporate its data andresearch more readily into not only their own personal research, but alsotheir curriculum.  Classroom exposure brings the firm to life and providesstudents - a firm's future managers or potential clients - with in-depthexamples of a firm's capabilities and specializations.In addition to financially supporting the accounting department, facultysuggested other key components to building strong faculty relationships.These include consistently recruiting and retaining their students, providingtechnical information to assist in faculty projects, inviting professors toparticipate in faculty-only symposiums, sharing leading-edge information andfostering individual relationships over informal lunches.  Faculty commentedthat a closer, working relationship allows for a more thorough flow of companyand recruiting information.To reap a strategic advantage on campus, Big Six firms need to take anaggressive approach in their faculty relationships.  Well-planned investmentswill, in the long run, be money well spent.  With greater visibility andreputation on campus, firms will be able to attract their future businessleaders and impress potential future clients.Thomas Oh is senior researcher at Hanigan Consulting Group, a New York-basedmanagement consulting firm that specializes in assessment and strategy designof campus recruiting programs.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996HOT TIPSSO GET SOME NEW MAGAZINES FOR THE WAITING ROOM:  For every complaint a medicalpractice receives, 26 others go unreported, Dunbar, Cook & Shepard is tellingclients.And according to the White House Office of Consumer Affairs, six of those 26complaints are serious, the Indianapolis firm says.  As if that isn't badenough, each of those 26 unhappy patients will complain to about 10 otherpotential patients.TO OUTSOURCE OR NOT TO OUTSOURCE:  While outsourcing may be an easy road tolower expenses and improved administrative methods, in the long run quality ofwork, confidentiality and staff morale may suffer, Duitch, Franklin & Co.  iswarning its law firm clients.Carefully weigh the benefits against possible drawbacks before decidingwhether to outsource, the Los Angeles firm advises.  Some issues to take intoconsideration include:* Credibility.  Any forthcoming vendor or freelancer will be happy to supplyyour firm with references from other clients.  Check them, and talk to otherprofessionals.  But above all else, trust your instincts, and if you areuncomfortable with a candidate keep the work in house until you find arelationship you are comfortable with.  * Contract and pricing.  Make sureyour firm can get out of a contract, especially if the vendor's work isunsatisfactory.  Review pricing structure - if it seems too good to be true,it probably is.  * Staff morale.  Taking work away from a staff member simplybecause he or she seems overworked may prompt fear rather than relief.  Firsttalk to the staff to see if any other alternatives may be more appropriatethan outsourcing.  At some firms, legal secretaries and administrativeassistants have banded together to form an "assistant pool" to help outoverworked coworkers in a pinch.  * Confidentiality.  Review your clientroster and caseload, and check off those clients who might object to theirwork being outsourced and those matters that are too sensitive for outsideeyes.  * Damage control.  No one source is perfect - consider how well thefirm can rebound should an outside vendor suffer a major equipment or businessfailure.  Determine the cost of salvaging an incomplete project.DON'T TRUST THAT CRAZY UNCLE LOU:  While forming trusts can steer you out ofsome sticky financial situations, naming a trustee can be tricky business,Gikow Bierman & Talesnick is warning clients.  The Roseland, N.J., firm offersa list of items to consider when choosing a trustee.* Name more than one trustee, including a professional adviser.  While afamily member or close friend provides sensitivity to the beneficiaries'needs, the professional adviser can provide financial accountability.  * Don'tword a trust agreement so that an individual trustee doesn't have to retain abond.  While waiving a bond may save the trust money, a bond is the onlyprotection against embezzlement or misuse of funds.  * Name a "trustprotector" - often a family friend - who can discharge a trustee under somecircumstances or veto some of the trustee's decisions.  * Allow for a changeof trustee in case beneficiaries move out of state.  For example, if thebeneficiaries move to a state that does not have income tax, they may stillhave to pay state income taxes if the trustee lives in a state with incometax.  * Write performance guidelines into your trust, allowing beneficiariesto change trustees if they fail to meet a reasonable performance standard.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996CompuServe campaign colors Block 2Q resultsKANSAS CITY, MO.  - Marketing and expansion costs contributed to H&R BlockInc.'s higher than expected loss of $8.3 million, or 8 cents a share, onrecord revenues of $223.9 million for the second quarter ending Oct.  31,1995.That compares to a loss of $1.3 million, or 1 cent a share, on revenues of$172.9 million for the second quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.The company had announced in August 1995 that it had launched a full-throttleexpansion of CompuServe, its computer services subsidiary."CompuServe's recent decision to lead the market in offering low-cost Internetsoftware and access and its agreement to become the exclusive on-line serviceoutlet for Time magazine are good examples of our aggressive focus," saidRichard H.  Brown, H&R Block Inc.'s president and chief executive officer."Our goal is to have nearly 5 million subscribers worldwide by summer."CompuServe's revenues for the second quarter increased 37.9 percent to arecord $188.4 million, compared to the prior year's second-quarter figures of$136.6 million.  The division's pretax earnings were $22 million, compared to$34.3 million for the quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.In the second quarter, H&R Block Tax Services reported a pretax loss of $34.4million, compared to $35.1 million for the quarter ending Oct.  31, 1994.Revenues declined 0.5 percent to $27.6 million because of decreased enrollmentin the division's tuition tax school.  Brown noted that due to the seasonalityof the tax business, second quarter results are not indicative of the expectedresults for the entire fiscal year.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TAXING ISSUESIRS DISCUSSES LIFE IN A POST-TCMP WORLD:  Lou Carlow, Internal Revenue ServiceAssistant Commissioner (Examination) updated a Dec.  5 meeting of the AmericanInstitute of CPA's Tax Division on the IRS' plans for establishing auditselection criteria in light of the agency's decision to cancel its taxpayercompliance measurement program audits.  Carlow indicated that the IRScurrently has an internal task force"attempting to come up with a new system."Meanwhile, Carlow said, the IRS will continue to rely on three sources foridentifying returns for potential audit:(1) existing DIF(discriminatefunction) scores- derived from the last TCMP cycle in 1988; (2) informationfrom district and national office research projects; and (3) its emergingmarket segment specialization program activities.IRS FLIRTS WITH TAXABILITY OF FREQUENT FLYER MILES:  The IRS recently forayedinto the sensitive issue of whether the use of airline frequent flyer milesconsitutes the receipt of taxable income.  In a recent technical advicememorandum, the IRS concluded that an employer's air travel expensereimbursement plan didn't qualify as an "accountable plan" because itaffirmatively permitted employees to keep their miles.  Without "accountableplan" status, expense reimbursements are included in an employee's income,subject to withholding, and claimed by itemizers on Schedule A as amiscellaneous deduction subject to the 2 percent floor.  It is worth notingthat the plan in question specifically stated that employees were permitted tokeep the miles they accrued on business travel.  The TAM generatedconsiderable public and media attention, and subsequent to its release, IRScommissioner Margaret Milner Richardson is reported to have told a group ofpractitioners that the national office currently has no projects in the"frequent flyer" area.  (TAM 9547001)401(K) FRAUD TARGETED:  Labor Secretary Robert Reich announced a campaign bythe Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration to crack down on fraud in401(k) plans.  The anti-fraud effort includes both 300 pending investigationsand a consumer education program targeted against employer misuse of 401(k)funds.  Some of the "10 warning signs" contained in the consumer educationcampaign:late 401(k) statements, former employees having trouble gettingbenefits paid and contributions held by an employer for more than 90 days.FINAL PT PREGS ISSUED:  The IRS has released final regulations under CodeSection 7704 applicable to publicly traded partnerships (PTPs) that define"established securities market" and a "secondary market or its substantialequivalent."  The regulations also modify and extend existing safe harborsfrom PTP treatment.  The final regulations largely follow earlier proposedones.  The preamble to the final regulations also indicates that the IRS isconsidering guidance on definitions relating to the PTP exception for certainpartnerships with passive income, and has asked for public input on what theproposed guidance should look like.  (T.D.  8629)IRS DELAYS '96 WITHHOLDING FORMS:  The IRS has announced that it is delayingthe issuance of the 1996 Form W-4 due to the possibility of tax law changes inthe pending budget bill that may have an impact on an employee's withholding.The IRS is asking taxpayers to continue using, and employers to continueaccepting, 1995 forms.  The IRS said that it plans to issue new forms as soonas possible once legislation is finalized.  (Ann.  95-104)Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996J.D.  Edwards looks to find resellers for Genesis lineDENVER - J.D.  Edwards, which specializes in AS/400 software, has joined theranks of companies seeking resellers for its financial line.Earlier this year the company released Genesis for companies with annualrevenue of $10 million to $100 million."It's relatively price competitive with PC-LAN [accounting software]," saidRick Byrne, director of Genesis operations.Genesis marks a departure for J.D.  Edwards, which had previously concentratedon selling enterprise-wide systems on the AS/400.  But it is in line with themovement of other higher-priced accounting packages into what is referred toas the middle market.  That market is roughly defined as companies withrevenue of from $10 million to $500 million.Genesis includes financial, distribution and manufacturing software that canbe sold as a suite.  The manufacturing suite includes distribution andfinancials.  Distribution software includes financials.  Byrne said a 20-userdistribution system would cost more than $50,000.Although many accounting consultants make sales in that price range, many arenot experienced in AS/400 software.  However, there are a few firms which willbe able to play in that arena."To play, you've got to have familiarity with that system and have grown upwith the System/34 and 36 world," said Jim Metzler, partner and consultant atGaines, Metzler and Kriner, of Buffalo, N.Y.  System/34 and 36 are the olderIBM minicomputers which IBM largely replaced with its AS/400.Metzler said only a handful of firms do AS/400 consulting, including his.Metzler's firm also sells the hardware.  He said that the AS/400 is "easierfrom a complexity perspective than many networks," but that historical pricepoints scare away firms.  He views the AS/400 as more cost-effective thanPC-LAN networks, especially for "clients who need multi-tasking and minimalcare and feeding."Metzler's firm resells and installs software from Daily & Wolcott, acompetitor of J.D.  Edwards.Genesis supports Windows clients and is Windows 95 compliant, Byrne said.  Thesoftware will operate in both PC and terminal environments.More recently, J.D.  Edwards introduced the OneWorld line, a follow-up to itsWorld software.  OneWorld is a client/server package, which expands support ofhardware to work stations running Microsoft NT Server.More expensive than Genesis, OneWorld is likely to be streamlined in the nextyear to 18 months for a version that will also be available to resellers.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996With more low-end releases, vendors eye reseller programsSanta Claus left a bundle of new low-end accounting software packages underthe tree and visions of new programs for accountants danced in vendors' headsthrough the New Year.In time to welcome 1996, Intuit, Peachtree, BestWare, New England BusinessService, Computer Associates and DacEasy all introduced new versions of theirsmall business accounting packages.And those vendors who don't actively recruit CPA firms as resellers orrecommenders were eyeing how to structure programs in order to involve firms."We're working on a formal recommender program," said Drew Paxton, Intuit'sInternational Project Manager, Business Products Group.Similarly, David Dalton, director of marketing for 4Home Productions, said hiscompany will investigate a CPA program for its Simply Money.It's very clear what's at stake.  As NEBS introduced its One-Write PlusVersion 5.0 for Windows, it said that 50 percent of One-Write users say anaccountant recommended the purchase.  One-Write has been particularly strongin this group in supporting a consulting program.BestWare of Rockaway, N.J., already had an active channel program for itsM.Y.O.B.  Accounting software, but recently appointed its first ConsultantProgram manager.  DacEasy has about 300 certified consultants, many of whomresell.Rob Hartlage, a CPA who operates Asystants, a Sellersburg, Ind.-basedconsulting firm, said many accountants don't understand the opportunitieslow-end consulting offers."They [accountants] wonder why someone would pay $99 for a package and thenspend $500 to $1,000 to help use it," said Hartlage.  "They will."Hartlage consults for DacEasy software and does some limited work with Quickenand One-Write Plus.  He said despite all the effort to make accountingsoftware easier to use, clients need someone to help them get started.Paxton's comments came as Intuit introduced new versions of its line withQuickBooks 4.0 and QuickBooks Pro 4.0.  There's one change, though- Intuit hasdropped its claim that QuickBooks is bookkeeping software and now aggressivelytouts it as accounting software.Although Intuit claims more accountants recommend QuickBooks than any othersoftware, the company has not formally enrolled firms in the process.That's likely to change.  Intuit has already established its Intuit FinancialPartner Program, which seeks to give referrals to CPAs.  The first year was abit slim:  10,000 firms signed up, but Intuit only got 7,000 referrals.  Thecompany hopes to triple referrals this year.4Home Productions, the small-business, consumer software arm of ComputerAssociates, is also looking at establishing a consulting or recommenderprogram or both, according to David Dalton, director of marketing.Low-end accounting software is getting more robust, particularly morecustomizable, and supposedly easier to use.  But forays into vertical marketsby these vendors may offer accountants more chances to develop consultingopportunities.Most of these products allow the user to modify fields in reports or entryscreens or both and to pick from sample charts of accountants from differingtypes of businesses, which can be used as templates.  Particularly popular isthe ability to reorder or hide fields.Drag and drop editing of fields is increasingly popular.  Simply Accountingfor Windows 4.0 from 4Home productions use drag and drop on the home screen.M.Y.O.B.  6.0 from BestWare supports drag and drop modification of reportfields while DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95 offers the capability for forms.This is one of the few areas where the competitors are ahead of QuickBooks,which requires the use of a dialogue box to rename fields.Easier setup is also a common goal.  With the Windows version of One-WritePlus, users set up companies through an interview process.  Intuit of MenloPark, Calif.  also has adopted the interview form with QuickBooks andQuickBooks Pro, while Peachtree Software of Norcross, Ga., carried theinterview setup into the world of multimedia with video and audio clips.BestWare has used the interview approach since version 4.0 of M.Y.O.B.In DacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95, DacEasy of Dallas, takes a page fromWindows in offering the Easy Setup Wizard.QuickBooks Pro is trying to claim unique customization abilities to allowusers to tailor documentation and features for more than 20 differentindustries.Users, said Paxton, "are looking for something that can be made specific totheir businesses."  While other packages provide charts of accounts that canbe used as templates, QuickBooks offers custom documentation for niches, suchas construction.To a certain extent, 4Home is simply trying to keep pace.  Dalton admitted hiscompany fell behind its development cycle.  But he added, "I think we'll comeback strong."Simply Accounting adds the ability to store both prior and current year'sfiscal data and print comparative financial reports.Besides its customization features and set-up interview, Nebs expanded on-linehelp and provided expert definitions of financial and accounting concepts.DacEasy lays claim to being the first of the group to design its system forWindows 95.  It offers 100 business templates and offers report customizationthrough a Report Wizard.  Like QuickBooks, the latest DacEasy software alsoincludes time and billing and contact management features.M.Y.O.B.'s report customization is similar in offering more than 100 templatesand enabling drill-down analysis.  It provides time and billing informationless directly, offering the Timeslips Accounting link to pull time and billingdata from Timeslips.  M.Y.O.B.  has also added the ability to import data fromQuicken.Low-end accounting softwareDacEasy Accounting & Payroll 95Price:  $109DacEasy Inc.Dallas(800) 322-3279M.Y.O.B.  Version 6.0Price:  $79.95 to $139.95 depending on platform and payroll option.BestWareRockaway, N.J.(201) 586-8986One-Write Plus Version 5.0 for WindowsPrice:  $69.95New England Business Service Inc.Nashua, N.H.(603) 880-5100Peachtree Accounting for Windows Release 3.5Price:  $129Peachtree SoftwareNorcross, Ga.(800) 228-0068QuickBooks 4.0 and QuickBooks Pro 4.0Price:  QuickBooks 4.0 3.5-in.  disk, $99, CD-ROM, $129 (Windows); $119(Macintosh)QuickBooks Pro:  3.5-in.  and CD-ROM, $189, all versions.IntuitMenlo Park, Calif.(415) 329-6926Simply Accounting Version 4.0 for WindowsPrice:  $69.954Home Productions(Computer Associates International)Islandia, N.Y.(800) 773-5445Note:  All prices reflect estimated retail prices.Source:Accounting TodayBack to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ACTION IDEA:  How to have a successful seminarEven if you've managed to attract half the business community to your seminar,your efforts are far from finished.  Not only do you want the attendees toenjoy the session, but enjoy it enough to attend another one.  Here are sometips:* The place - The room should have no distracting elements, and shouldaccommodate your guests when seated as well as gathered on breaks.  Arrangeseating so attendees participate.  Lighting must be adequate.  Offerrefreshments.  * The program - Distribute handouts so the audience can followalong.  Humor goes a long way toward holding interest; so does audienceinteraction.  Schedule regular breaks, about every 45 minutes.  * The followup - Distribute and collect evaluation forms, and respond personally to anyextremely positive or negative evaluations.  Make sure all attendees in yourmarketing database receive firm correspondence.Source:  Rex Meighen &Co., Tampa, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Budget worries kill workload relief billWASHINGTON - The chance that workload compression relief will come to smallCPA firms soon is slim.A provision that would have allowed partnerships and S corporations to choosetheir own fiscal year didn't survive the final conference budget bill Congresshanded to President Clinton."It was a major disappointment," said Gerald W.  Padwe, vice president of taxfor the American Institute of CPAs.The AICPA had been the major backer of the provision, which would have allowedthe pass-through entities to make quarterly estimated tax payments on behalfof their owners.  The owners would be relieved of quarterly payments if theircompanies paid for them.While the proposal was included in the House of Representatives version of thebudget, its price tag probably forced it to be dropped during conference billdiscussion.  According to Padwe, the AICPA was told the provision would havecost $335 million through five years.  Another estimate quoted by Lindy Paull,majority staff director of the Senate Finance Committee, said the bill wouldcost $355 million over seven years.Either way, it's not a phenomenal total when you consider the size of thebudget.  But it was worth enough to be used as part of the budget bargainingbonanza.  Padwe speculated that the provision was axed when Rep.  Bill Archer,R-Texas and chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, had to find ways to payfor making the proposed capital gains tax cut retroactive to Jan.  1, 1995.Rep.  E.  Clay Shaw, R-Fla., the original sponsor of the provision, has toldAICPA leaders he'll try to get the proposal reinstated if they can devise away to make the workload compression plan revenue neutral.  Padwe, however,takes a fatalist's view on Shaw's chances."We would love to see it come back," Padwe said, "but as a practical matter,they say when something has fallen out of a bill it's hard to get it back in."Although the AICPA's outside economist projected that the workload compressionproposal wouldn't drain tax dollars from the system, the Joint Tax Committee'sprognosticators came up with the $355 million mark.  The reason?  According tothe terms of the current provision, the quarterly estimated tax payments wouldbe made at the 34 percent level.  If a taxpayer owns all the shares of an Scorporation and is in the 31 percent bracket, why would he want to make thepayments?  On the other hand, if the same taxpayer were in the 39.6 percentbracket, he would be more than happy to pay the 34 percent."He'd say, 'I'm getting the use of that money until next April,'" Padwe said.That's what ends up costing the government those millions.  (The AICPA is nowproposing to increase the tax to 35 percent.)Padwe still hasn't given up hope.  This year the 104th Congress is still incontrol, so the AICPA doesn't need to find another champion for the bill.Unfortunately a presidential election year isn't the best time to find a taxbill, which is the typical vehicle to attach this provision to."It's not a bill you'd expect to stand alone," Padwe said.  "It's going to behard to find 500 congressmen to say, 'This is the most exciting thing I'veever seen.  Quick, let's pass it.'"Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Congress passes tort reform bill with veto overrideWASHINGTON -- Much to the relief of the American Institute of CPAs, Congressvoted to overturn President Clinton's veto of securities litigation reform.The president had vetoed the legislation, which shields independentaccountants from abusive liability damage awards.  The veto shocked billsupporters, including the AICPA.The bill sailed through Congress last month as the House and Senate raced toadjourn the 1995 legislative session.  Final passage of the bill - a toplobbying priority for the Big Six accounting firms during each of the past twoCongresses - was "testament to the widely held belief that the tide offrivolous securities litigation in this country must be stopped," AICPAofficials said.A key provision of the bill for the accounting profession places newrestrictions on the ability of plaintiffs to use the "joint and several"standard of liability for extracting huge damage awards from CPAs when otherdefendants in the case are unable to pay their portion of the damages.Instead, the legislation establishes a system of "proportionate liability"under which accountants and other peripheral defendants will be expected topay only their fair share of a judgment.That proportionate liability shield isn't completely bullet-proof, however.Small investors will continue to be allowed to sue based on the "joint andseveral" liability standard, and accountants who knowingly participate in asecurities fraud will remain subject to full "joint and several" liability.Additionally, even in the proportionate liability cases, CPAs would berequired to pay up to 150 percent of their proportionate share of damages whenanother defendant is insolvent.At the same time, the legislation also contains a number of provisions toensure that accountants and other business advisers are held accountable incases where they knowingly permit their clients to engage in securities fraud.The final version passed by Congress amends portions of the U.S.  SupremeCourt's controversial 1994 Central Bank decision to restore Securities andExchange Commission authority to bring "aiding and abetting" cases againstCPAs for knowingly violating federal securities law.A separate provision of the bill codifies a key recommendation byinvestigators of the savings and loan crisis that would require outsideauditors to disclose suspected client fraud to the appropriate enforcementagency.For his part, AICPA President Barry Melancon called the final bill "a fairbalance between the rights of truly defrauded investors and those start-upcompanies and outside professionals who have become victims of a small groupof entrepreneurial lawyers abusing the legal system."Passage of the legislation drew a sharply different reaction from critics oflitigation reform.Consumer Federation of America Chairman Howard Metzenbaum attackedcongressional supporters of the bill for "carrying the ball for some veryspecial interests who only have a selfish financial interest to protect."The securities industry, accountants and corporate insiders are far less inneed of protection than is the small investor in the marketplace," he said.In contrast, congressional advocates of the litigation reform measurecontended that the legislation would have increased investor control of classaction securities suits "so that settlements benefit the plaintiffs and notjust the plaintiffs' attorneys."According to representatives of Sen.  Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., the bill'schief sponsor, under the current system "investors generally receive only 7 to14 cents per dollar of loss, and only after the plaintiffs attorneys taketheir fee off the top."To address this problem, the bill eliminates the "lodestar" approach tocalculating fees, under which "attorneys get to skim right off the top of asettlement award," they said.  Instead, lawyers will be allowed to pocket only"a reasonable percentage of the award they obtain for their clients."In addition, the legislation includes provisions to:* create a uniform pleading standard by adopting guidelines established by theU.S.  Second Circuit Court of Appeals; * restrict the use of "professionalplaintiffs" in class action securities lawsuits; * require more completedisclosure of settlement arrangements to enable plaintiffs in class actionsuits to make informed decisions about attorney's fees; and * encourage moremeaningful corporate financial projections by establishing a new SEC-supported"safe harbor" for forward looking financial statements.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996TAX PRACTICE:  Former Navy CPO sails into friendly tax prep watersRICHMOND, VA.  - Rob Stepp went from looking for submarines to searching fortax deductions.The former Navy chief petty officer bought one Jackson Hewitt Tax Servicesfranchise and purchased the rights to open four more offices in the Richmondarea five years ago.  He's also planning to open a kiosk at his local Wal-Martthis tax season and to add two more storefronts by next tax season.After a decade in the Navy as a sonar technician, Stepp found that hisenthusiasm for accounting hadn't waned."All my life, I've loved numbers," Stepp said.  "Math was my favorite subjectin school.  I never used a calculator."Stepp was still in the Navy, stationed in Virginia Beach, Va., when he wasinducted into the Jackson Hewitt system.  Because he received computertraining in the military, a friend in town asked if Stepp could help iron outa few technology bugs at her tax practice.  His assignment was supposed tolast a few days, but ended up growing into a part-time job.Stepp caught tax preparation fever, which led him and his wife, Helen, toacquire the existing Richmond office and open four new locations in nearbyneighborhoods."We wanted these surrounding territories because they had no competition foryears," Stepp said.  "There were only H&R Block, CPAs and accountants.  Theaverage taxpayer doesn't need a CPA or accountant to do his taxes."But the Navy didn't equip Stepp with the practical skills needed to run abusiness."You get into the military and you've got a sure paycheck," Stepp noted.  "Youwon't get laid off.  The biggest thing you have to do is show up."The hardest part was hiring a staff, Stepp recalled.  Finding qualifiedcandidates and going through the interview process was a chore.  Anddetermining a salary scale was a nightmare."If they had experience working at H&R Block, it wasn't fair to pay thembeginners' wages," Stepp said.  "In the military you don't have that.  You'repaid according to your rank."The first months were tough.  At the time, some of Stepp's more than 60employees had a lot of experience, some had "just basic training" and some hadtax knowledge, but no computer training."It was quite a year," Stepp said of his May 1991 to early 1992 adventure."I'm glad it's over."In retrospect, Stepp said he should have taken more time to expand hisbusiness, which now employs 90 workers in tax season and eight after May 15.Stepp's offices handled 5,800 clients during the 1995 tax season.His advice to first-time business owners:  Find someone experienced who canwork as an assistant.  He also suggests that novice business owners advertisein their local newspaper.Stepp credits his practice's success - he won Jackson Hewitt's annual customerservice award - to the cheerful atmosphere in his offices."We hire happy, upbeat receptionists," he said.  "If you get a bad reception,you can forget about seeing that client."In the interest of customer satisfaction, Stepp and his staff spent lastsummer calling all their clients to ask if they had any problems with thepractice's service during the 1995 tax season.  Nationwide, taxpayers sufferedthrough refund delays because of fraud checks involving the earned income taxcredit and Social Security numbers.Those who said they had a problem were asked for suggestions on how theservice could be improved.  The clients also received a certificate for thefree preparation of one tax return."People were angry at all tax preparers," Stepp said about the 1995 taxseason.  "Once they found out that we didn't know that the Internal RevenueService kept these procedures under wraps, they were OK.  Their biggestcomplaint is, 'I want a bigger refund.'" Even the Navy couldn't help customerswith that one.Dealing with customers also was new territory for Stepp to explore when heleft the Navy.  And while he succeeded in civilian life, Stepp concedes thatit's not always easy for those leaving the military to find a fulfillingsecond career."The real work is difficult to handle," Stepp said.  "In the Navy, someone wasalways there to tell you what to do."Editorial:Flunking the testThe CPA exam needs reformThe night before accounting school grads take the CPA exam, they should prayfor one of two things:  acute accounting knowledge or the luck to take thetest with a pack of boneheads.Either way, they'll do fine.  That's because the American Institute of CPAs,which administers the Uniform CPA Examination, uses a quota system to rate CPAcandidates.  First, those scoring 75 percent correctly on the test areautomatically in the CPA club.  But, if those scoring 75 and above are notequal to 30 percent of the test takers, grades often in the 60s are simplyrounded up to 75 to meet the 30 percent quota.It sounds like a strange way to introduce a new crop of young adults into aprofession that prides itself on precision and integrity.  The exact mechanicsof it all even escapes the comprehension of two out of three state regulatorssurveyed by the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy.But the results of the May 1995 exam have sent the issue to the front andcenter for many state regulators.  In last spring's exam, grades were adjustedto make 62 the pass point on two sections of the test, but no adjustments weremade for candidates who scored less than 75 on two others.  By one estimate,6,000 of the 61,650 candidates who might have passed the test were flunked sothe AICPA could make its 30 percent target.The South Dakota board complained that it is only a matter of time before alegal challenge is made to this procedure.  The board is right.  It would betough to explain to a candidate that he or she flunked just because he or sheis smarter than only 69 percent of those taking the test.It's time that NASBA and the AICPA put an end to the quota system.  Bothgroups should work together to create a new system involving, first, a testthat reliably measures proficiency year after year, and second, a definitivepassing score that requires no curving to meet an arbitrary, monopoly-imposedquota.Every candidate must be assured of a fair test.LETTERS FROM EXAM CANDIDATES:Exam results 'tough to swallow'Thank you for the shocking revelation about the CPA exam ("Fight over CPA examtests the testers," Nov.  20-Dec.  10, 1995).  I was greatly disturbed anddeeply saddened after reading your report, because I could have been one ofthe 6,000 candidates who otherwise would have passed the test with gradeadjustment.  I scored 67 on the May 1995 Financial Accounting Section - mylast paper to pass, on which, according to your report, 66 was the passingpoint after grade adjustment.Despite the fact that I hit 68 a few times in other papers, I never questionedthe grading system.  I forced myself to admit that somebody did better than I,therefore, I did not deserve to pass and had to study harder.The May 1995 result was very tough to swallow, even more so after I read yourarticle last night.  I feel most sorry for my wife and two children, for allthe sacrifices, understanding and encouragement they put in for me.David P.  Sin Scarborough, OntarioI was a November 1995 candidate for the Uniform CPA Examination.This was my ninth time taking the exam due to the fact that I have been out ofcollege for more than 10 years.  However, through studying for and by retakingthe exam, my scores have shown a certain degree of improvement toward the 75percent passing score.My reason for contacting you is that I have become very concerned about thegrading process which is used to determine the actual percentage that isdeemed passing or failing on the exam and how that percentage is determined.Most CPA review course admininstrators tell their students that a 67 through69 score is graded upward to a passing 75 percent, yet, on the May 1995 exam,I received a score of 69 on the Business Law section.In a recent special report in Accounting Today, (Fight over CPA exam tests thetesters," Nov.  20-Dec.  10, 1995) the following points were brought to myattention as a CPA exam candidate:* It is stated that "if less than 30 percent of the candidates score 75percent, the failing grades are curved upward to assure that at least 30percent pass."  * A 65 might be a passing grade in one year but not in thenext.  * On the 1993 exam, candidates answering only 65 percent of thequestions correctly on the Accounting Theory exam were given grades which werecurved upward to a passing 75 percent.  * On the 1992 exam, a 52 score wascurved upward to a passing 75 percent.  * On the May 1995 exam the grades wereadjusted to a make the passing grades 62 on the Accounting and Reportingsections and 66 on the Business Law and Auditing Sections.  Thirty-fivepercent were allowed to pass on this exam.With reference to this article, on the May 1992 exam, I scored over 52 onthree sections of the exam.I would like to know what criteria is used to determine which candidates areto be included in the 30 or 35 percent passing rate and how the subjects inwhich they are allowed to pass are determined.I have become very concerned about the grading procedures due to the fact thatmy grades have only increased by a very small margin in six of the nine timesin which I have taken the exam.  In at least three instances, my grades werealmost exactly the same.  I was a little concerned at this point.After receiving my scores for the May 1995 exam, and also after reading thearticle, I became very disturbed that only a percentage of candidates areallowed to pass the exam, even if a 69 through 74 score is obtained.  I amsure this is also very disturbing to other candidates who have scored in thisrange.What is even more alarming is that no one knows how, in any given year, thepass point is determined.  Personally, it makes me feel as though I amshooting in the dark, yet never hitting anything.As important as this exam is to accountants and to entry into the profession,I feel that as a CPA candidate and, certainly, one who has studied in order tomaster this area of learning, there needs to be a better understanding of thegrading system which is used to determine our career paths.Marlene Parham-Murphy ChicagoEditor's Note:  A copy of this letter was sent ot the National Association ofState Boards of Accountancy.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Study finds employers liable for $95B error on non-exempt employeesWASHINGTON - A new study suggests that the potential annual private sectorovertime liability for misclassification of exempt status under the Fair LaborStandards Act is $1.8 billion per week, or $95 billion annually.The Employment Policy Foundation's study is based on Census Bureau wage andhour data and assumes that all white collar employees now classified as exemptwere in fact non-exempt.Kenneth L.  Deavers, the author of the study and the conservative group'schief economist, notes that such an outcome might be considered to be extreme,"but was seriously considered by the Minimum Wage Study Commission in its 1981report."In a more immediate and consequential sense, the study shows that potentialemployer liability for overtime pay could be substantial, the group said.Because employers found to have misclassified non-exempt employees as exemptare liable for two years back pay under the FLSA, the liability for back paycould be $1.9 billion for each 1 percent of the white collar workforce foundto be non-exempt.  And, if the violations were found to be willful, the backpay liability extends to three years and the award is doubled.Deavers describes the existing Department of Labor definitions and tests fordetermining exempt status as "so arcane and subjective they lend themselves toemployer misunderstanding and possible administrative manipulation."Deavers goes on to say that "if firms incorrectly categorize employees asexempt, or in some other way disqualify employees from exemption, they areliable for back pay for overtime and, in some cases, punitive damages.  It isthese potential costs that motivate firms to push for clear-cut rulesdetermining exempt status under the FLSA.""The definitions used to determine who is an exempt employee have not changedfor nearly 50 years, despite the revolutionary changes in the workplace,"according to Edward Potter, the group's president.  "Under the present systemof subjective definitions, an employer never knows whether it has properlyclassified employees until after an administrative review lawsuit.  Clearly,the FLSA exemption should reflect the characteristics of modern-day work:increasingly knowledge based, requiring independent judgment on the part ofthe workers."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996AICPA, AT&T cite businessesDETROIT - The American Institute of CPAs and AT&T Capital have awarded $50,000in grants to three local entrepreneurs to help finance their businesses.The Partners for Growth grants were given to a new basketball facility forinner-city teenagers, the owner of a bookstore and coffee house dedicated toincreasing cultural awareness within the African-American community, and tothe president of a minority-owned environmental chemistry consulting firm.Partners for Growth, which began in 1994 as a pilot program in Houston andPhiladelphia, provides financial assistance to new businesses that demonstratea positive social impact.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Expect the unexpected:  Trends to watchHang on.  1996 is going to be bumpy ride.  Start with a late-to-press tax codeand finish with a presidential election.  In between, add management-by-chaosat the American Institute of CPAs and wild card court decisions on CPAregulation.  And 1996 is sure to be wild and unpredictable.But that hasn't deterred Accounting Today's fearless prognosticators.  Herethen are the top trends to watch in 1996:Inroads by non-CPAs:  Four of the top 10 fastest-growing tax and accountingfirms are hardly your traditional, CPA-owned businesses.  They includefranchises like Jackson Hewitt or conglomerates like American Express.  EvenCPA insiders say the days of CPA-owned monopolies are numbered.But beyond direct threats, look for new competition from unexpected sources:Baby Bells are offering start-up business services.  Consumers and smallbusiness are buying new business and accounting software at a blistering pace.Bankers are end-running accountants with consumer-like matrices for businessloans and on-line record keeping services.CPE gets a makeover:  Some leaders of the profession are openly questioningthe value and purpose of mandated continuing professional education.  But moreimportant, computer-based training using multimedia programs, on-line chatsessions and just-in-time delivery could radically reshape how CPAs choose,use and pay for CPE.  Some of the products that will point the way arescheduled for 1996.Tax system overhaul:  If the flat tax started to loom seriously for the firsttime in 1995, then the 1996 presidential election year seems sure to keep italive.  No matter who's elected, the next president will have run on aplatform of tax reform.CPA advertising:  With the American Institute of CPA's $10 million adcampaign, even tradition-bound, rank-and-file local CPA firms are testing themedia waters for the first time.AICPA/state society coordination:  Under attack to consolidate services andcut duplicative costs, AICPA chief executive Barry Melancon is leading a drivefor the profession's trade groups to end hostile rivalries.  Look for advancesin CPE and health insurance.Value billing:  With clients becoming increasingly cost conscious andtechnology reshaping the underlying economics of traditional hourly billing,tax and accounting practitioners are increasingly turning to alternativepricing policies, for instance:  Tax prep priced by the form, consultingengagements priced by the percentage of savings, standard accounting servicespriced as part of a bundle of products.  Hot books on the subject:  Lastyear's "Innovative Billing and Collection Methods That Work" by Charles andJoseph Larson, published by Irwin Professional Publishing; this year's"Breaking the Paradigm" by August Aquila, from the AICPA.New work place solutions:  In this new era of diminished expectations, a newgeneration of professional is striking a fresh balance between career andpersonal fulfillment.  Large firms like Ernst & Young are 'hoteling' staffers- providing home office workspace only when needed.  Midsized firm CliftonGunderson is offering partner-level flextime.  Local firms are going virtual -like CPA Janet Caswell in Bloomfield, Mich., who sent her staffers to work athome with laptops, e-mail systems and an 800 phone number.Trade show power shift:  The AICPA and state societies have long held a lockon the pace-setting conferences in the CPA business.  But declining attendancerevenue and increasing vendor competition are adding a new element ofcommercialization to the conference schedule.  As the accounting professiongets increasingly technology-driven, watch for technology vendors to take moreactive and visible roles.  For instance:  This year the AICPA will launch thePractitioner's Symposium, consolidating three old conferences and makingvendors an integral part.  The National Society of Public Accountants isconsidering a technology show.  Microsoft is investigating a number of ways ofestablishing its own conference presence.  And Tom Davis, a CPA consultant andAccounting Today software reviewer, is planning a software show for AmeliaIsland, Ga.  The SoftEx show, long aimed at big companies, will be adding asmall-business focus this year.Consulting takes the driver's seat:  After a year of tremendous double-digitpercentage gains in management advisory services, consulting has clearlyemerged as the driving force at the Big Six.  Ernst & Young could be garneringhalf its fees from consulting by 1999.Financial planning:  With tax work becoming more of a commodity andmarginalized, an increasing number of tax professionals are turning topersonal financial planning.  Membership in the AICPA's financial planningdivision has surged with the recognition of the rival certified financialplanner designation.  The number of registered advisers is booming.  And witha flat tax, planning could be all that's left.Outsourcing:  Re-engineering and rightsizing are driving staff andadministrative functions into the waiting arms of accountants and businessadvisors.  Over the next three years, outsourced assignments could jump from26 percent of the world's 300 largest corporations to 42 percent, according toArthur Andersen, one of the most aggressive information technology providers.Even the level of controversial internal audit outsourcing could more thandouble.CPA firm diversification:  KPMG Peat Marwick's creation of Baymark, a captiveinvestment bank, was just the tip of the iceberg as firms grapple for newsources of income.  Ernst & Young is aiming to become a major player inhospital administration.Related trend - Expansion goes vertical:  Firms are acquiring skills andpractices in strategically important niches.  Among smaller firms, forexample, Yergen & Meyer in Portland, Ore., has acquired TGS, a local boutiquefirm with Pacific Rim connections.IRS hunkers down:  With much of the momentum for a flat tax fueled by simplehatred at the IRS, the agency can be expected to pull in its horns.  Withoutthe taxpayer compliance measurement project, for example, watch for the IRS topick new audit targets using computerized statistical techniques.Related trend - Go ELF yourself:  By going on-line as much as possible, theIRS could soon be circumventing established electronic filing services.Non-financial performance measures:  With the traditional audit in decline,expect a slew of ideas for providing new assurance services.  KPMG PeatMarwick is rolling out its Business Measurement Process to augment the audit.The AICPA has a committee developing more.Related trend 1 - CPAs create new system of product development:  But evenmore important, the profession could be forging a totally new system ofcreating CPA-only services.  Instead of writing cookbooks detailing every stepof the new process, standard-setters might only mandate results, leaving themethodologies to innovators in the CPA marketplace.Related trend 2 - Plain-paper financial statements:  Whether the AICPAapproves so-called assembly statements or not, clearly many CPAs believesmall-business clients are clamoring for simplified reports.  Watch for CPAsto find products to compete with low-end or non-CPA competitors.Windows sets the standard:  Although the accounting market may lag behind therest of the world, it is inevitable that Microsoft's Windows will become thestandard software platform.  The expenses of rewriting DOS software coulddrive many smaller software vendors out of the business.Related trend - Intuit, armed with TurboTax, becomes a standard of its own inelectronic commerce.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Quotables, 1995"An accused mass murderer has more rights than a taxpayer fingered by the IRS.Jeffrey Dahmer was considered innocent until proven guilty, but Mom and Popsmall business owners ...  are not afforded this protection."- Rep.  James Traficant, D-Ohio,leader of the charge for new "taxpayer rights"legislation to a House Ways and Means subcommittee."It's been a brutal year.  We have had 10 times the number of threats.  It's akill-the-messenger mentality."- John Hewitt, president of Jackson Hewitt, a Virginia Beach, Va.-based taxpreparation chain, on the delayed refunds during the filing season from hell."Looking for logic in the IRS code is kind of like looking for love in asingles bar.  You may find a little bit of it somewhere, but it's unlikely."- Paula Cozzi Goedert, tax attorney with Chicago's Jenner & Block, on the IRScrackdown on unreported income for nonprofits."There's no such thing as an economic reality audit.  They don't exist."- IRS deputy commissioner Michael Dolan, responding to the National Society ofPublic Accountant's concerns.Buckley simply "decided he didn't want to do it anymore.  He just wasn'thaving fun."- H&R Block spokesman on chief executive Harry Buckley's retirement."Sometimes the attitude is, 'Well, we're Peat Marwick, and this is the waywe've always done it.' Then you have to answer, 'Well, who bought who, baby?'- Curt Mingle, senior executive partner of Clifton Gunderson & Co., at anAICPA conference, referring to a Big Six mentality that would occasionallycrop up in the three offices Clifton had acquired from Peat."During my confirmation hearing, I was surprised at how few people knew how wewent about our business."- IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson, when warning a new Congress notto make laws that are impossible to administer.The taxpayer compliance program "is my definition of mixed emotions.  I feelbad for the client, but the fees are pretty good."- Jeffrey Raymon, member of the AICPA small business taxation committee, onthe since-killed TCMP audits."You know how they say it ain't over till the fat lady sings?  Well, the fatlady hasn't even gotten on stage yet."- Real estate consultant and CPA Stephen Roulac, on his pending charges offraud and request for punitive damages in a suit against Deloitte & Toucheclaiming breach of fiduciary duty and breach of contract.  Roulac had alreadybeen awarded $1.25 million in damages.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996THE BEST OF FOOTNOTES 1995BARRY WHO?  - "Barry Melancon, please," said the caller to the AmericanInstitute of CPA's New York office."Who?"  asked the receptionist.  "I'm sorry, I don't have that name in thedirectory.""But he's the new president of the AICPA," the caller said."Oh, you mean Me-lahn-KON?  He won't really be here until, like, July.""Ok, thank you.  I guess I'll try him in Louisiana."TV NEWS SHREDS CPAS BECAUSE CPAS DIDN'T - A bevy of Chicago accountants werecaught red-faced on the 11 o'clock news for failing to shred many confidentialclient documents before trashing them.A local television station news crew from WMAQ unearthed all sorts ofinteresting records by going through the dumpsters of major CPA firms andfinancial institutions.Unused checkbooks, bank statements and tax returns were just a few of theitems dug up.WE WOULDN'T TOUCH THAT WITH A 10-FOOT POLL - San Diego CPAs felt the bite ofAmerican Express Tax & Business Services after sending a survey to members ofthe local chapter of the California Society of CPAs.The survey asked if CPAs thought American Express reps were "snakes in thegrass who have no business being a part of our meetings."  AmEx didn't taketoo kindly to being compared to reptiles.  "To be referred to as snakes seemsmean-spirited at best and defamatory at worst," wrote AmEx counsel SarahMcKenzie to San Diego chapter president Doug Obenshain.  Obenshain apologized,but that wasn't good enough for McKenzie, who requested he either retract thecomments or publish his letter of apology in the next chapter newsletter.I JUST WANNA SHOP - All it took was a Hindu monk and a good accountant tostraighten out the Yin and Yang of singer Gino Vanelli's life.Vanelli became an overnight sensation in 1978 when his hit record "I JustWanna Stop" sold a million copies, making him a multimillionaire.But apparently a million dollars doesn't go as far as it used to, and Vanelliquickly racked up quite a debt, supporting friends and relatives and buyingnew homes.Vanelli began a spiritual journey, seeking direction from a world ofphilosophies.  He spoke with Benedictine monks in Big Sur, Calif., Incapriests in Peru and Zen priests in Japan, finally meeting a Hindu monk nearMalibu, Calif.The monk closed his eyes, opened them and gazed far into the sky.  After amoment of silence he said the words that would bring about Vanelli's financialsalvation:  "What you really need is a good accountant."LIFE IS LIKE A BOX OF LAWSUITS - Paramount Pictures Corp.  has resolved itsfinancial differences with "Forrest Gump" author Winston Groom.The studio had claimed it hasn't cleared any "net profits" for the blockbustermovie, and gave Groom only $250,000 for his work.  The movie reportedlygrossed $341 million in the United States.The settlement came soon after Groom retained attorney Pierce O'Donnel, thesame lawyer who represented writer Art Buchwald in a similar dispute againstParamount regarding the Eddie Murphy movie "Coming to America."In addition, Paramount agreed to buy the sequel.  This time Groom got anundisclosed seven-figure sum.FROM THE HOME OFFICE - Concerned about his viewers' finances, CBS "Late Show"host David Letterman offered a few signs that you've hired a bad accountant.Among them were:* You hear him on the phone saying, "Have I ever let you down, Leona?"  * His"short form" looks suspiciously like a cocktail napkin.  * He used to be somekind of financial big shot in Orange County.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Rogue AAA 'Club' demands changeSARASOTA, FLA.  - A small but influential group within the American AccountingAssociation has officially challenged the governance of the organization,claiming unfair representation and poor management.Informally calling themselves "The Reform Club," the disgruntled college anduniversity faculty have gained enough support to propose threenear-revolutionary bylaw changes and bring them to a vote before themembership of less than 10,000.Although even the reformers doubt they'll win, the battle is rocking anotherwise staid association of college and university faculty.  It is alsoposing a first challenge to new executive director Craig Polhemus.  He tookover from Paul Gerhardt, who retired after two decades of service last summer.The proposals would open up the executive committee to a broader nominatingprocess, encourage the proliferation of sections within the organization, andallow members to receive one of the section journals as part of membershipdues.Critics of The Reform Club reject the charge that the organization isundemocratic or that its highest echelons are closed to small-school faculty.They criticize the club's proposals as vague, with the potential to fragmentthe association.Describing the AAA's executive committee as dominated by 10 or 12 doctoraldegree-granting schools, Paul Williams, a professor at North Carolina StateUniversity, said the panel has ignored member needs."Most members are at schools like N.C.  State, and the AAA is not responsiveto the types of problems we encounter," Williams says.  "Our primary job is toteach and only in the last couple of years have we had a teaching section.'The Reform Club' agenda1.  Open ruling executive committee to nominations.  2.  Foster new andsmaller special-interest sections.  3.  Impose market discipline on journalpublishing.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Get real, AICPA tells flat taxersby Sandy HockCORONADO, CALIF.  - As an American Institute of CPAs committee prepares torelease a 225-page report on alternative income tax systems, the committee'schair challenged those touting reform to get real."You're dealing with theoretical rhetoric and missing the realities that weaccountants tend to revel in," said Byrle M.  Abbin, chair of the AICPA'sconsumption tax task force.Economists from all sides "are so far apart that I don't trust either end ofthe spectrum," Abbin, a retired partner from Arthur Andersen & Co., told the420 conferees at the AICPA Fall Tax Division meeting here last month.Abbin's committee report, scheduled to be released this week, is not intendedto be a policy statement on each reform proposal.  Abbin said, however, thatthe AICPA doubts that substituting a flat tax, the most talked about taxreform proposition, would "appreciably simplify" the system for manytaxpayers.Since 70 percent of individual filers use the standard deductions, Abbin wrotein the back-up material provided for the conference, the loss of itemizeddeductions does not change their situation.Further, whether standard or itemized deductions are used, any individual withtaxable income of less than $100,000 can get his or her tax liability fromForm 1040 instructions."For them, the effect is the same as having one flat rate, at least withregard to the complexity of calculating the tax," Abbin wrote.And the flat tax was just one of the areas touched on when Abbin moderated analternative tax panel discussion that featured a member of former RepublicanCongressman Jack Kemp's Tax Reform Commission and a Democrat offering theparty's response to the commission's work.Speaking for the Kemp commission, Loretta H.  Adams, a San Diego businessowner, said the current level of tax complexity "is more than just a hassleand drag on the economy."  In fact, Adams said U.S.  companies spent $127billion and individuals spent another $65 billion complying with tax laws.Losing that $192 billion to tax compliance and preparation is the equivalentof "taking General Motors' output and dumping it in the ocean."After attending public hearings in eight cities and hearing from 125witnesses, the Kemp panel came away with one message:  The current tax systemshould be replaced.  The commission drew up six principles tax reform shouldpromote:  simplicity, stability, neutrality, visibility, economic growth andfairness; taxes shouldn't be hidden.While Adams said the Kemp committee will release its report early this year,John Buckley, the minority chief tax counsel for the House Ways and MeansCommittee, is already speculating that the commission will back a flat tax."It may be the flat tax as proposed by [Rep.  Dick] Armey would be what isrecommended," Buckley said.  "If it is, I think I can say the Democrats willoppose it."In short, Armey, a Texas Republican, calls for a flat tax rate of from 17 to20 percent.  It's known as the proposal that will allow taxpayers to filetheir returns on a postcard.Buckley argued that calling the Armey plan a flat tax is "misleading."  Forindividuals, the flat income tax would be levied on wages and retirementdistributions.  Dividends, on the other hand, would be exempt."There would be a substantial shift of tax burden down the income scale,"Buckley maintained.A flat tax would repeal the earned income tax credit, which would contributeto increasing taxes on the lowest 20 percent of working Americans, he added.Self-employed individuals would not be entitled to a standard deduction sothey would be paying the 17 to 20 percent rate "from dollar one," Buckleysaid.  And since the Armey plan would allow employers to deduct wages, but notemployees' fringe benefits, it would give companies an incentive to drophealth insurance in favor of salary increases.In addressing the other tax proposals bandied about, such as the nationalretail sales tax plan endorsed by Sen.  Richard G.  Lugar, R-Ind., Buckley wasequally lukewarm."Retail taxes are a small part of the economy," he said.  And only threestates have tried to tax services, which is a large segment of the economy, headded.Abbin gave a thumbnail sketch of each of the major tax proposals.  Heexplained that the plan furthest along in the thought process is the unlimitedsavings allowance proposed by Sens.  Sam Nunn, D-Ga., and Pete Domenici,R-N.M.  That bipartisan plan favors savings and taxes consumption.  Armey'sproposal is a five-page bill that extracts certain segments of the InternalRevenue Code, Abbin said."It leaves a lot of questions," he added.And all that is concrete about the plans of Rep.  Bill Archer, R-Texas, todismantle the Internal Revenue Service and overhaul the tax system areinterviews with the press.But he did offer some opinions about the proposals.  Here are a few snippets:National retail sales tax:  "They'd have to control cascading [taxes on top oftaxes].  ...  [The plan's backers] want a killing off of the IRS.  I call themthe tax militia.  They think Republicans who favor the flat tax orNunn/Domenici are ultra-liberal."Flat tax:  "The key element is for international trade.  Everything made inthe United States is taxed, even if it is exported.  If there's no taxation onoperations outside the United States the whole nature of international taxplanning goes out the window."USA plan:  "Exports will have border relief, but exports will be taxed."Value-added tax:  "A credit invoice system will never happen here.Politicians don't like that obvious nature."  In other words, taxpayers wouldsee how much their government costs them.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Geo.  S.  Olive acquires local health care consulting firmINDIANAPOLIS - In a move that doubles its fees in the health care niche andestablishes a consulting arm, regional firm Geo.  S.  Olive & Co.  hasacquired local boutique Kimmerling, Myers & Co.Now the largest health care practice in the state, GSO is poised for evenfurther expansion in the niche, managing partner John Harris said."Our effort is to become part of the health care industry, not just to serveit," Harris said, adding that the firm will become more involved with tradeassociations and seminars, and will even develop some products - such asbenchmarking statistics - useful to the industry.  "Our goal is to become thelargest health care consulting firm in the Midwest."GSO's $2 million health care practice had consisted mainly of compliance work,while the $2 million Kimmerling, Myers is virtually all consulting.  GSO,which ended fiscal year May 1995 at $43 million, expects to jump to $50million by May 1996, Harris said."They were servicing clients we didn't have access to," Harris said.  "Wedidn't have the consulting experience.""GSO had physician clients, while Kimmerling, Myers served facility clients,"said Jeff Kimmerling, managing partner of Kimmerling, Myers.  "It made senseto put our work together.  We expect to double the health care practice in twoyears."GSO's health care practice will operate out of Kimmerling, Myer's Indianapolisoffice under the name Olive Health Care Consulting.  The division will beheaded by Kimmerling, who joins GSO as a partner along with James Myers,Michael Merkel and Michael Craig.  KM's 20 staff members also joins GSO.With 10 offices throughout Indiana and Illinois, GSO now has 70 partners andmore than 600 staff.  The few people comprising GSO's existing health carepractice will move into the Olive Health Care Consulting office, Harris said.Ten new hires have been made to supplement that office, Harris added.PRACTICE MANAGEMENT:  AICPA woos college students with interactive CD-ROMNEW YORK - It may not stir quite as much interest as a keg party, but theAmerican Institute of CPAs has created a funky-yet-informative CD-ROM aimed atencouraging college students to become CPAs.The second phase of the AICPA's two-level campaign to encourage new recruitsto the profession, "Room Zoom:  The CPA SourceDisc," offers students a varietyof windows into a CPA's world.  The interactive CD contains about 20 minutesof video, audio and still photos, plus a large body of text and plenty ofgraphics."We needed the proper medium," said John Daidone, AICPA manager of recruitingprograms.  "CD-ROM offers the best approach to illustrate the CPA professionas being technically proficient."The AICPA has produced 5,000 CDs which will be sent to the state societies,the recruiting contacts at larger firms and several colleges and universitiesacross the nation, Daidone said.  The state societies are encouraged todistribute the CDs directly to local colleges as well.  Additional copies ofthe CD will cost $5 each, with discounts if more than 10 are ordered.  TheAICPA spent $300,000 on the production and distribution of the CDs and theaccompanying posters.The CD opens with a young resident of a home office welcoming her "guest."The user is told to make herself at home while the host runs out for a minute.As the user moves the mouse across the screen, different cartoon-like bubblesappear, displaying one of the gateways that provide more information.  Forinstance, when moving the mouse to the bookshelf, the user is offered theoption of investigating library resources.  Choose the safe and learn aboutsalaries; a calendar leads to "a day in the life."  Other gateways include"career opportunities," "ladder of success," "human resources," "tools of thetrade" and "organizations."The career opportunities gateway features CPAs in various segments of theprofession offering insights on their career successes.  Human resources shedslight on key issues such as balancing personal and professional life andcareer opportunities for women and minorities.  The library featuresinformation on the Uniform CPA Examination and a directory of more than 800institutions across the United States that offer accounting programs.The AICPA stepped up its recruiting efforts after a 1990 poll found studentsunimpressed with the role of accountants.  "That's why we made this effort,"Daidone said.  "In general we found that a lot of negative stereotypes aboutaccountants came out in the survey.  They thought accountants were boringnumber crunchers who worked alone."The first phase of the recruitment effort was aimed at high school and earlycollege students.  A video produced in 1993 introduced viewers to theaccounting profession."The first phase of the program, 'Accounting:  One degree with 360 degrees ofpossibilities,' was designed to attract students to the study of accounting,"Daidone said.  "In this second phase we're taking it up one more level andtrying to attract students to become CPAs."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996IRS tells how workers can declare 'independence'by Ken RankinWASHINGTON - Responding to criticism that some Internal Revenue Serviceregions are conducting a witch hunt against businesses that classify workersas independent contractors, top tax service officials are preparing newinstructions to discourage such heavy handed enforcement tactics.According to IRS Commissioner Margaret Milner Richardson, new trainingmaterials under development for IRS examiners will "emphasize the principlethat using independent contractors can be a legitimate business practice thatwill not be challenged by the service."A new headquarters policy embodied in the training materials will requirefaster resolution of worker classification disputes and uniform standards fordefining independent contractors throughout the country.Testifying before Congress late last year, Richardson said she hoped to havethe new worker classification materials finalized in time to permit retrainingof all IRS examiners by the end of this month.The new training aids are the latest in a series of moves by the IRS to defusemounting criticism from accountants and small businesses that the agency'scrackdown on the use of independent contractors is improper and abusive.Adding to the concerns are the stiff penalties for businesses charged withviolating the current standards.Employers accused of incorrectly classifying W-2 workers as independentcontractors can be required to pay 100 percent of both the employer's and theemployee's share of Social Security and Medicare payroll taxes, plus all ofthe federal income taxes that would have been withheld had the contractor beenclassified as a salaried employee.If the IRS declares the classification error to be intentional - a finding theagency is not required to prove - the business can be hit with an additional100 percent penalty, plus interest for previous years.Delegates to this summer's White House Conference on Small Business identifiedreform of IRS independent contractor ground rules as their No.  1 priority,and during subsequent House hearings on the problem, CPAs from across thecountry called for legislation to set simpler rules governing workerclassification.Shaken by the backlash against the agency's current enforcement strategy, IRSofficials placed much of the blame on overzealous field examiners.To ensure uniform treatment of all businesses under investigation forindependent contractor violations, the IRS adopted new procedures requiringregional and local personnel to secure approval from the national office inWashington before undertaking any large worker classification projects.The program will be based on the following series of principles whichRichardson said would govern future IRS policy in worker classification cases:* Worker classification issues should be resolved as quickly and as early inthe administrative process as possible.  * Worker classification issues shouldbe resolved uniformly throughout the country.  * Resolution of workerclassification issues should take into account a taxpayer's past compliancewith section 530, as well as the common law standard (governing workerclassification).  * The IRS compliance programs should encourage correctclassification and correct reporting of payments to workers.  *Reclassification of workers who have legitimately been treated as independentcontractors must be avoided.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Audit & Accounting:  Change Of AuditorsUS 1 SHIFTS FROM DELOITTE TO COOPERS:  Deloitte & Touche was dismissed asindependent accountant for US 1 Industries after helping the client correct aseries of internal control problems ranging from unrecorded transactions toinadequate computerized accounting systems.Over a year ago, Deloitte informed officials at the Gary, Ind.  company thatUS 1's management was "unable to close the accounting records and producereliable financial statements within the time frames required for publiccompanies.""Significant transactions had occurred that had not been recorded on the booksand records of the company, including sales of property, repossession ofequipment, and contingencies related to broken lease commitments and othercontractual agreements," the client told the Securities and ExchangeCommission.In addition, "supporting documentation for a significant number of sales, costof sales, cash receipts and other general ledger journal entries could not belocated."Although accountants at Deloitte concluded that the company had adequatelyaddressed each of these issues, US 1 elected to replace that firm with Coopers& Lybrand.CANADIAN ACCOUNTANTS SOUR ON WINCANTON FOLLOWING QUESTIONABLE DEALS:  Canadianaccountants at KPMG Peat Marwick Thorne resigned as auditor for Reno,Nev.-based Wincanton Corp.  after informing the client that they were"unwilling to be associated with the financial statements prepared bymanagement."KPMG's concerns were stirred by a series of recent transactions, including thesale of stock in the company's Tradesman Industries subsidiary to WorkRecovery Inc.  for shares of that corporation valued at some $2.5 million.The accountants also raised questions about a $9.6 million consulting fee paidto Work Recovery in connection with the sale of cargo bed and tailgate systemstechnology to that company.In disassociating themselves from the client's financial statements, theVancouver-based accountants said they couldn't obtain sufficient appropriateaudit evidence on the propriety of these transactions.Form 8-K filingsAll For a Dollar (Springfield, Mass.), from Coopers & Lybrand.American Bancshares Inc.  (Bradenton, Fla.), from Varnadore, Tyler &Hawthorne, P.A.  to Coopers & Lybrand.Avant!  Corp.  (Sunnyvale, Calif.), from Coopers & Lybrand to KPMG PeatMarwick.Assisted Living Concepts Inc.  (Portland, Ore.), from Price Waterhouse to KPMGPeat Marwick.Chicago Miniature Lamp Inc.  (Canton, Mass.), from Arthur Andersen to Ernst &Young.Electro-Kinetic Systems Inc.  (Pennsauken, N.J.), from Axelrod & Co.Four Seasons Fund II L.P.  (Manakin-Sabot, Va.), from Deloitte & Touche toArthur Andersen.Franklin Ophthalmic Instruments Co., Inc.  (Romeoville, Ill.), from Marinelli& Scott to BDO Seidman.Gaming World International Ltd.  (Ellwood City, Pa.), from Grant Thornton toS.R.  Snodgrass, A.C.Global Telemedia International, Inc.  (Atlanta), from Kaufman, Rossin & Co.to Tauber & Balser, P.C.Innovative Shipping Systems Inc.  (Sarasota, Fla.), from Natherson & Co., P.A.to Bobbitt, Pittenger & Co., P.A.Interactive Technologies Corp., Inc.  (Melbourne, Fla.), from Lumsden & Co.to Turner, Stone & Co.Just Toys Inc.  (New York), from Richard A.  Eisner & Co.  to Ernst & Young.Laser Photonics Inc.  (Orlando, Fla.), from Coopers & Lybrand to Corbin &Wertz.Lucor Inc.  (Boca Raton, Fla.), from Goldstein Lewin & Co.  to KPMG PeatMarwick.Magnivision Corp.  (Wall, N.J.), from Lawson, Rescinio, Schibell & Assoc.,P.C.Medmarco, Inc.  (Salt Lake City), from Bradshaw, Smith & Co.  to ArthurAndersen.Microelectronic Packaging Inc.  (San Diego), from Price Waterhouse to BDOSeidman.Micro One Direct Information Services Inc.  (Beaverton, Ore.), from PriceWaterhouse to Deloitte & Touche.MSB Bancorp, Inc.  (Goshen, N.Y.), from Nugent & Haeussler, P.C.  to KPMG PeatMarwick.The New World Power Corp.  (Lime Rock, Conn.), from KPMG Peat Marwick to PriceWaterhouse.Nth Canada Inc.  (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), from Madgett, Roberts,Marlow, Hurren & Partners to Ernst & Young.NuOasis Gaming Inc.  (Irvine, Calif.), from C.  Williams & Associates, P.C.to Raimondo, Petit & Glassman.N-Viro International Corp.  (Toledo, Ohio), from Ernst & Young.OncoRx Inc.  (New Haven, Conn.), from Richard A.  Eisner to Ernst & Young.Porter McLeod National Retail Inc.  (Denver), from Lehman, Butterwick & Co.,P.C.  to Ehrhardt Keefe Steiner & Hottman, P.C.Sentech EAS Corp.  (formerly Lorry, Bay & Co.)  (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), fromSobel & Co.  to Spear, Safer, Harmon & Co., P.A.Seventh Generation Inc.  (Colchester, Vt.), from KPMG Peat Marwick to Coopers& Lybrand.The Singing Machine Co.  Inc.  (Pompano Beach, Fla.), from Ernst & Young toMillward & Co.Vicom Inc.  (Eden Prairie, Minn.), from Misukanis & Dodge to Lurie, Besikof,Lapidus & Co.Wahlco Environmental Systems, Inc.  (Santa Ana, Calif.), from Ernst & Young toArthur Andersen.Wincanton Corp.  (Reno, Nev.), from KPMG Peat Marwick ThorneUS 1 Industries Inc.  (Gary, Ind.), from Deloitte & Touche to Coopers &Lybrand.Source:  Securities and Exchange CommissionBig Six ScoreboardReported Auditor Changes at Public Companies in the Last 12 WeeksClient Gains Client LossesArthur Andersen 1 10Coopers & Lybrand 5 5Deloitte & Touche 7 24Ernst & Young 10 14KPMGPeat Marwick 6 2Price Waterhouse 3 5Others 17 19Total 49 79Note:  Form 8-K filings as reported in Accounting Today from Oct.  9, 1995 topresent.PRACTICE MANAGEMENT FORUM:  Looking ahead to the year 2001:  A sales odysseyWANTED SALES MANAGER FOR BIG 4 FIRMLocal office of Big Four firm seeks experienced sales manager for midsizedoffice.  Must have CPA and at least three years sales management experience ata large CPA firm.  Responsibilities will include oversight and development ofexperienced staff of three client-relators as well as penetration ofnon-client accounts.  Send resume to Box 1234.This ad was spotted in the Feb.  9, 2001, edition of The Wall Street Journal.Surprised?  You shouldn't be.  Impossible?  Don't bet on it.  Unlikelyprediction?  Hardly.  Some local offices of Big Six and regional firms arealready employing salespeople.Our profession has never been more competitive, and the new millennium willhave a great deal of change in store for accountants.Here are some more predictions:* Non-CPA firms will continue to encroach upon our "turf."Did you know that four of the 10 fastest growing accounting firms in theUnited States are not CPA firms?  Most people don't - including your partners.American Express just won its federal suit against the state of Florida,permitting non-CPA firms to employ CPAs.As other states look to this case, reviews and audits may fall to non-CPAs.After all, why shouldn't non-CPAs perform these same services?  If they passthe peer review process, wouldn't this open up a monopoly to more competition,and wouldn't the consumer ultimately benefit from lower costs?  Accountingcould be next in the line of industries the government has alreadyderegulated, like telephone companies and airlines.I hope it happens.  Just as we are driving much better cars today than 20years ago because of the competition from the Japanese, clients will receive amuch higher level of service when CPAs compete in a marketplace against realbusiness people, not just other accountants.* Big companies will increase efforts to attract the best clients of theirsmaller rivals.Competition will increase not only from below - non-CPAs - but also fromabove.  Many big firms have stagnant revenues and will increase their emphasison obtaining regional and local firms' "A" clients.  This trend has developedsteadily in some markets for the last five years, and will continue to grow.* Competition will increase as CPAs leave stagnant firms to take more controlover their careers.Sharp managers and young partners realize they are often held back by partnerswho won't let go of the management reins and allow the firm to prosper andchange.These rainmakers are already leaving firms in droves, taking some of theirclients.  This trend will continue as these hotshots realize many of them arebuying into firms that have been drained of assets by greedy partners facingretirement, with no desire to invest in technology, training or clientrelationships.These changes will affect our profession in numerous ways by the turn of thecentury.  For instance:* A formalized sales management function will control the development ofbusiness.Firms will hire salespeople.  CPAs will be highly valued, and recruitedspecifically for sales.  Some will drop out of the technical side as they seethe road to partnership open only to those who bring in business.  Many firmswill see hiring salespeople as a panacea for stalled growth, since theirpartners don't want to be involved in the selling process.* The technical aspect of our profession will be relegated to the "back room."As our profession becomes more competitive, business development, rather thanthe quality of technical work, will be recognized as the life blood of theprofessional firm.Firms will focus on garnering new business.  Firms that don't shift emphasiswill merge or perish.* Dramatic decreases in fee structures will hit the profession across allservice lines.As the increased emphasis on marketing prompts clients to become more aware ofalternatives, fee competition will escalate.  Fees will be cut in all areas ofservice, not just in audit and accounting.* Only people with existing books of business will be promoted to fullpartnership.Technicians will no longer be able to share in the fruits of full partnershipas firms finally realize that it is far easier to acquire technical abilitythan entrepreneurial talent.  Just as industrial companies raid competitorsfor successful salespeople, CPA firms will vie for rainmakers.* The profession's image of trust and respectability will be tarnished asclients equate CPAs with other sales-types that they deal with.CPA salespeople will fall into the same grab bag for dollars as othersalespeople.  Clients will view them with the same disdain as printing andinsurance salespeople.* CPA firms will use consulting as the main inroad to new clients.Even small accounting firms will offer free consulting work just to get theirfoot in the door.* The most successful firms will not employ salespeople, but will havedeveloped a solid core of practicing entrepreneurs.Some firms will have decided early on to succeed in a much more competitiveenvironment without resorting to a separate force of salespeople.  Realizingthat marketing and selling is just as important as technical skill, thesefirms will have invested in growing the business development skills of theirmost likely producers.  Their reputation as trusted business advisors willremain intact.So where do marketing people fit in?Marketing directors still play a powerful role, whether establishing aformalized sales function or creating an internal culture of entrepreneurship.In either case, somebody still has to manage the marketing aspects, enhancethe sales process and help bring in the actual opportunities to sell.  Merelyhiring salespeople will not work without a comprehensive, integrated marketingplan so that all are pursuing the optimal targeted clients and markets.In some cases, the marketing director will also assume the role of salesmanager, as many firms will be too small or too cheap to hire someone separateto manage that function.In firms that decide to shun the salesperson route by becomingentrepreneurial, marketing directors will have to take on the role of internalsales manager.What can you do now?CPAs who turn their backs on this undeniable trend towards increasedcompetition will watch their firms disintegrate.There are, however, certain preemptive tactics your firm can employ to avoidthe oncoming onslaught:* Establish a beachhead in the marketplace that is difficult to penetrate.Chrysler is a great example of what can happen in a changing marketplace.  Foryears, Chrysler and their Detroit rivals ignored the increased competitionfrom the Japanese.  Fat and sassy, they believed people would continue to buycars the way they always had.  Caught off-guard by a dramatically changedmarketplace that demanded small, well-made, fuel-efficient cars, they lost asignificant piece of market share that they've never made up.  Chrysler almostwent out of business.In order to survive, Chrysler had to get smart.  In the early '80s, theyintroduced a new vehicle - the minivan - and created a new marketplace.  Astheir competitors jumped on the bandwagon, they pressed forward, leading theway in design and features.  By the time their competitors had established aposition in the market, Chrysler was so entrenched that they still sell moreminivans than ever.* Make sure your firm has a strategic marketing plan.Amazingly, even many of those firms with marketing directors have no strategicmarketing plan that delineates where and how they are going to go to marketfor the next three to five years.  If you don't know where your business isgoing to come from, how can you get it?* Get your people trained to sell and market.Personal marketing and selling skills do not come naturally to the vastmajority of CPAs, but many firms expect CPAs to somehow learn these skills byaccident.  Identifying clients and prospects' needs and wants and persuadingpeople to do business with you are far greater skills than being an auditor ora tax person.* Concentrate on client service.It's time the accounting profession learned to service the clients in the waythey want to be served.  Since this subject still isn't taught in accountingschool, it's up to you to drive the message home internally.  If you don't getyour people up to par in delivering exemplary service, remember that someoneelse will.Establish monthly client service meetings, where the only subject discussed ishow to better serve your clients, helping them be more successful.* Help your people establish and pursue niches.Our profession is the last to realize the importance of marketingspecifically, not generically.  It is obvious to the real business person(i.e., your clients) that there is more value in dealing with someone who isan expert in their field.* Help your people set goals for practice development.Everybody must have their own goal for new business, otherwise how can theytell if they've been successful?* Change the compensation and review process.What's in it for your non-partners?  Practice development must be rewardedfinancially and psychologically, or it won't happen.Only the most successful CPAs embrace change - the great majority have theirnoses to their computers, happy to leave things as they are.  It's up to youto educate your partners on all that is happening in the marketplace.  Andyou'll need to keep telling them until they finally get the message.  Stirthings up now and take control of your firm's destiny.  If you don't, yourcompetition will do it for you.Allan S.  Boress, CPA, CFE, is author of "The I Hate Selling Book" and aconsultant to professional firms for over 15 years.  He is based in CoralSprings, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SOFTWARE REVIEW:  Budgetary moves add steam to fund accountingThe current balanced budget debate in Washington signals that many servicescurrently provided by the federal government may soon pass to the states andthe private sector.This trend will translate into new opportunities for accounting firms, becausethe not-for-profit sector will expand rapidly, as states look tonot-for-profits to administer displaced programs.  And new nonprofitorganizations will develop to handle programs no longer conducted by thegovernment.Not-for-profits will look to CPAs for the management accounting servicesrequired to implement new control systems and to measure operating results.To take advantage of these opportunities, accounting firms must becomefamiliar with the software tools that are available for this complex area.Fund accounting is not an easy area in which to work.  Issues and concepts innot-for-profit accounting differ from those found in the profit sector.Accountability with specific program and grant provisions is critical andrequires extensive departmentalization of information.  Multiple accountingperiods must be considered, as information will be reported not only by fiscalyear, but by program or grant period.Necessary reports include traditional reports needed by management, as well asthose required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, grant providersand other regulatory bodies.This article evaluates five not-for-profit software systems from ExecutiveData Systems, Blackbaud, American FundWare, Micro Information Products andKenrick Technologies.  The last year has seen fund accounting software vendorsaccelerate their move into Windows.  All the vendors in this review have aWindows program on the market or will offer one during this year.The move to Windows has been slow and for good reason.  Many nonprofitorganizations have older equipment and tight budgets which preclude rapidupgrades to new technology.But moving to Windows should provide clients with smoother links to otherapplications, if for no other reason than vendors most often rewrite theirpackages in Microsoft or other standard languages.For example, MIPS Fund Accounting for Windows utilizes C++, Microsoft's VisualBasic programming languages and the Microsoft Access database engine.  Thismove to Microsoft standards has been seen in general accounting packages andis accelerating in all desktop applications.Critical issues to be considered when selecting fund accounting softwareinclude account structure handling, report presentation capabilities,ease-of-use and non-accounting features such as fund-raising support andmailing list capabilities.Flexibility in account number format is important to meet the needs of manydifferent clients.  Account numbering schemes generally determine thedepartmentalization of information.  The more flexible the format, the lessneed for changing a client's existing account numbering system.  Also, moreflexibility means easier filtering of data for reporting purposes.Also important is that all fund accounting packages should meet therequirements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board's Statements ofFinancial Standards 116 and 117.  All the packages reviewed here are compliantwith these standards.There is more to an accounting system than just accounting information.  Inthe profit sector, modules such as accounts receivable, accounts payable andpayroll provide capabilities that may be more critical than the generalledger.  For a not-for-profit business, you must add modules for fund-raisingand grant information requirement compliance.Fund accounting concepts and accounting systems are not just complex to theaccountant/consultant.  The staff of a not-for-profit organization may alsofind them difficult.Therefore, ease-of-use should be a primary criterion in the selection processand should encompass the system's look and feel, data entry conventions,documentation, on-screen help capabilities and vendor support.Special system features that will make the accountant's/ consultant's jobeasier and more profitable should also be considered.  Reporting features thatprepare financial statements and workpapers in formats that can be used aspart of the compilation, review, or audit process can greatly reduce the timespent on these engagements.Also, if the fund accounting vendor offers special programs for theaccountant/consultant for support or reduced pricing, these engagements willbe more profitable.It is in reselling or consulting that CPAs will make the real money on suchsoftware.Except for Blackbaud, which uses only direct sales, all the vendors reviewedhere offer reseller programs.  Generally, these programs offer productdiscounts and special incentives on promotions and technical support.  Kenrickoffers both reseller and consulting programs, the latter for non-sellingfirms, although other vendors also support consultants.Fund AccountingSoftware Series, Executive Data SystemsFund Accounting Software Series from Executive Data Systems is a DOS-basedsystem with a Windows interface for module and process selection.This approach allows the FASS to be used in organizations with both DOS andWindows workstations.  The latest 5.5 release of FASS introduces two Windowscomponents, FASS Access and the Export module, which facilitate data transfer.FASS Access offers the export of information to Access.  In Access, you canthen perform advanced data queries and prepare on-screen and printed reports.Access data is easily used with other Windows applications such asspreadsheets, word processors and report writers.The Export module also exports information in 20 file formats such as Lotus,Quattro Pro and Paradox.  This module also includes an Excel compatiblespreadsheet and graphics package.  It features extensive preformattedfinancial statement reporting capabilities.  FASS financial statements can beconsolidated by "wild-card" selection or by using user-defined fund groups.The Multi Fiscal Year Project Reporting module allows the preparation offinancial statements for any range of dates, including multiple fiscal years.The Custom Report Generator can access FASS accounting and donor informationbased on user defined criteria to prepare management reports and graphs, andto export to other applications.The FASS Donor Records module maintains an extensive database of theorganization's members, donors, alumni and volunteers for reporting andmailing purposes.  This module integrates with General Ledger and will trackpledges, dues payments, donations and matching gift data.  More than 30user-definable data fields can customize the information captured for eachdonor.Transaction detail can be maintained as long as desired.  The system supportsmultiple, overlapping fiscal years for grant and project reporting.  Grant andproject reporting is independent of the organization's fiscal year.Data entry is accelerated through the use of "code tables" for automatictransaction descriptions, and the user can define transaction entry modes tosave keystrokes.Executive Data Systems features toll-free support and offers a service to setup the client's chart of accounts and financial statements.  The cost of thisservice varies with the amount of data involved.Blackbaud Accountingfor Non Profits, BlackbaudBlackbaud's current offerings include the DOS-based application, Blackbaud NotFor Profit Accounting, Windows versions of its Raiser's Edge fund-raisingsystem and its Paragon planned giving software.The company plans to release Windows versions of business applicationsbeginning in April.  Current purchasers with software maintenance agreementswill receive a Windows upgrade at no charge.Blackbaud features a table-driven chart of accounts that breaks down eachaccount by fund, account number, account type, department/cost center,category and object of expenditure.  A visual chart-of-account organizer thatallows you to see and rearrange the chart of accounts makes setting up andediting accounts a simple task.Accounts for new funds can easily be created by copying sample charts ofaccounts for similar funds.  General ledger information can be maintained fortwo years.  The current year need not be closed to work on subsequent year'sinformation.  The year-end close can be delayed for up to twelve months whileawaiting final audit adjustments.The Raiser's Edge supports the organization's gifting development program.Paragon provides the planned giving professional a tool for easily calculatingand graphing the outcome of planned gifts.  Both products are available inWindows versions.  The Raiser's Edge also comes in a DOS version.Windows capabilities are often only marginally advantageous in data entry.However, The Raiser's Edge and Paragon demonstrate the advantages of thegraphical interface over a text-based application in the area of data reviewand editing.  Reviewing and updating information is very easy and intuitive.Entry of new information is enhanced with pull-down menus and keystrokeshortcuts.The system has extensive on- screen reporting capabilities featuring veryreadable reports.  The system features very flexible report-writing tools.Reports can be segmented to provide information about projects and grants andcan be either date- or period-driven to support varying reporting periods.Workpapers can be prepared from system information by saving reportinformation in a spreadsheet format.FundWare on Windows, American FundwareAmerican Fundware offers an extensive suite of applications to meet theaccounting needs of not-for-profit organizations.  Fundware offers 17 moduleson multiple platforms and three Windows specific modules.Fundware runs on a variety of operating systems including DOS, Windows, Unixand AIX.  The system can consolidate not-for-profit transactions as well asany for-profit enterprises the entity may operate.American Fundware has just released FundWare on Windows, which has the abilityto run multiple sessions simultaneously through the FundWare on WindowsSession Manager.A File Viewer makes it easier to access the Windows Print Manager utility,improving printer selection and making it possible to preview reports prior toprinting.Monarch for FundWare is a version of the Datawatch Monarch Windows data accessand analysis tool specifically designed to run with FundWare.  With Monarchfor FundWare, you can use spooled report file information to view, query,analyze and export information.Essentially, Monarch is a report generator in reverse.  Report information isconverted into Monarch data, which can then be "mined" to meet specificreporting needs using spreadsheets and report generators.The FundWare Corridor improves FundWare's data connectivity with otherapplications by providing open access to the FundWare database.  Informationis presented in Microsoft's Open Database Connectivity standard.  ODBCcompliance allows the data to be accessed by other ODBC-compliant applicationssuch as Excel, 1-2-3, Access and Crystal Reports.FundWare allows you to design your own account structure of up to 18 digits,or you can use a predefined chart of accounts.  Two aliases can be assigned toeach account to easily look up accounts that have different descriptions indifferent funds, accounts, grants or projects.  General ledger information canbe retained for an unlimited amount of time.  The system provides up to fouradjustment accounting periods for segregating year-end and audit adjustmentsfrom the normal posting periods.The Allocation Management System automates transaction allocation and can beused to extract information for reallocations.  American Fundware does nothave a fund-raising module, but it links to donor packages from PledgeMaker,Donor Perfect and others.It also features an allocation management module for handlingmulti-fund/department allocation of transactions.  This feature is used toautomatically allocate recurring transactions among multiple accounts, fundsor projects.The Budget Forecasting module extracts historical information into a separatedatabase for creating and revising the entity's budget.  This module willtrack up to 60 budget revisions and allows the updating of historicalinformation without changing budget data.A separate Budget Control module monitors budget compliance and warns when anaccount approaches or exceeds its budget.  Report capabilities include macrosto group reports for batch printing.  Masks are employed to filter reportinformation by fund, grant and project.The Extended Report Writer prepares reports from any journal and any periodmaintained in the system.  This module also maintains an extended database ofinformation such as population, grant dates and number of clients served.  Theinformation can be used in combination with other financial data to producereports.MIP NonProfit Seriesfor Windows, Micro Information Products Inc.MIP's NonProfit Series for Windows, introduced in November, is designed usingnon-proprietary tools:  C++, Microsoft's Visual Basic programming language andthe Access database engine.  MIP also released MIP Fund Accounting for DOS,Version 9.0 at the same time.The Windows release began with the General Ledger module and will be followedby Accounts Payable, Budgeting and Payroll modules in the first six months ofthis year.  Other modules will continue to be released this year, includingFund Raising.MIP offers many ease-of-use features such as Wizards for information setup,customizable tool bars, and Windows-compliant screens, menus and help.  MIPalso features extensive security capabilities that define security for eachuser, module and organization.  Security also can be defined for any menulevel.The system supports complete GASB and FASB reporting and reports can cover anytime period.  The software features many standard reports that are thebuilding blocks for customized reports.  Reports are customized by the rowsand columns of information that the user wants included in the report.The system's design allows the use of data with other applications such asdatabase tools, spreadsheets and word processors.  For example, it supportsdirect query, with proper security, from within Microsoft Excel or Word.MIP allows an unlimited number of user-definable general ledger accountsegments which can be up to 255 characters in length each.  Field size anddata formatting within fields can be user-defined.  An Account Setup Wizardmakes it easy to set up new information and to model new accounts fromexisting information.MIP Fund Accounting does not have its own fund-raising module, but supportslinks to Donor Perfect, Donor$ and Softrek fund-raising packages.  Transactioninformation can be exported to other applications in ASCII, Delimited ASCII, .WKS and DBF formats.The system features strong context-sensitive help tools.  The complete usermanual can be viewed on screen.  With maintenance, all upgrades are free.The company guarantees a new release of each product every 18 months.  MIPguarantees a two-hour response time for customer support calls.Kenrick Fund Accounting for Windows, Kenrick TechnologiesKenrick Technologies was scheduled to ship Version 2 of its Fund Accountingfor Windows this month.  A true Windows application, the new product expandsupon the company's DOS version 4.1's use of C language source code, thusbenefitting from the original source code's maturity.Release 2.0 features several new ease-of-use features.  Journal Genies areused to integrate journal information from a variety of data sources into thegeneral journal.  Using Genies, information in spreadsheet-prepared workpaperscan be the source of journal transactions.Another new feature, Two-Way Spreadsheet Journal Entries, allows the softwareto furnish information for spreadsheet workpapers.  Kenrick uses Dynamic DataExchange linking to exchange information with other Windows applications.The chart of account structure is divided into components for account code,department and fund.  There are as many as 17 segments and virtually unlimitedsub-accounts within the account number structure.  The number of digits of thecomponents of the account number structure can be varied to meet the needs ofeach nonprofit entity.  The minimum length is five characters; the maximum,20.When new funds or departments are added to the system, the accounts for thenew addition can be mirrored from the existing chart.  Transaction informationcan be maintained indefinitely.  Kenrick's approach to grant accounting makesgrant (or project) identifiers a component of the general ledger accountstructure.Grants and projects can also be handled separately from the chart of accountsby entering grant and project code information at the transaction level.  Thissimplifies the setup of short-term projects and grants and allows morecomprehensive reporting on grants and projects.Reports can be prepared for any accounting period, regardless of the entity'sfiscal accounting period.  The KenQuery feature offers fast searches of systemdatabase information for sorting and printing data.  Custom reportingcapabilities are provided via a dBase style report writer.One unique feature is Kenrick's 990 tax return support.  The system willtransfer revenue and expense information directly into the Arthur AndersenA-Plus Tax 990/990PF program.Kenrick offers very flexible budgeting features.  The Projects and Grantsmodule allows for unlimited project/grant lives and multiple budgets for anypart of the organization.  This information can be grouped for any date rangeat any time.  The system maintains budget data for the last budget period, thecurrent period and the next period approved budget.The system offers extensive on-screen help capabilities.  All informationfound in the paper manuals is in on-screen help.  The company also offers dataconversion, training and related network support.SummaryCPAs and consultants are in for a bonanza with not-for-profit organizations.As more services move from the federal government to the states and privateorganizations, the need for tax, financial reporting and consulting serviceswill rapidly expand.  The addition of Windows versions by many fund accountingsoftware vendors will also increase the opportunities for CPAs.DOS users will be interested in moving to the more powerful Windowsapplications.  This will offer the opportunity to provide new and profitableservices.Also, the new Windows applications offer expanded connectivity features.Consultants will be able to provide on-going services for developing reportsand information systems that link fund accounting software information toother applications.Fund Accounting SoftwareBlackbaud Accounting for Nonprofits Blackbaud Charleston, S.C.  800-443-9441Pricing:  1 user NetworkGL, AP, PayrollPurchase OrderStudent Billing (each) $2,000 $2,500Payroll Direct Deposit $500 $500Fund Accounting Software Series,Version 5.5Executive Data Systems Inc.Marietta, Ga.800-272-3374Pricing:1 User 2+ users Support/yr.General ledger $850 $1,275 $225AR, AP,InventoryManagementInvoicing(each) 600 900 100Payroll 750 1,125 175FundWare Version 5.5American FundwareDenver800-551-4458Pricing:Module prices range from $695 to $2,395, depending on the platformrequirements.  Average price is $995.Kenrick Fund Accounting for Windows, Release 2.0Kenrick Technologies Inc.St.  Louis800-659-2022Pricing:Single User Pricing:  DOS WindowsGeneral Ledger withBudgeting $1,295 $1,995AP, AR, Payroll, each 895 $1,395Projects and Grants 795 $1,195PO/Encumbrances 795 $1,195Multi-user network pricing:  Based on the number of concurrent active users.MIP NonProfit Series for WindowsMicro Information Products Inc.Austin, Texas(800) 647-3863Pricing:General Ledger and payroll each, 1 user:  $1,500AR, AP, budget reporting, embranches/purchase order, each, 1 user:  $1,000Second concurrent user:  $1,000Additional users:  $500Source:Accounting TodayBack to Headline List CopyrightACCOUNTING TODAY via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996COMING EVENTS-JANUARY-1-31:  Financial Literacy for Youth Month; National Endowment for FinancialEducation.  Contact:  (303) 220-4847.5:  1995 District Director's Conference - IRS; Long Island University;Brooklyn, N.Y.  Contact:  (718) 488-1070.11-12:  1996 National CPA Health Care Advisers Association; Pencor Marketing &Publications; Bally's Casino Resort, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.11-12:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago GraduateSchool of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:(312) 464-8765.14-16:  IAFP Broker-Dealer Conference; IAFP; San Antonio.  Contact:  (800)945-IAFP.15:  1996 Manufacturing Services Association; Pencor Marketing & Publications;Flamingo Hilton, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.15:  1996 Not-for-Profit Services Association; Pencor Marketing &Publications; Flamingo Hilton, Las Vegas.  Contact:  (800) 869-0491.18-19:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago GraduateSchool of Business; Ritz-Carlton, San Francisco.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.21-22:  1996 National Litigation Support Services Association; PencorMarketing & Publications; Houstonian Hotel, Houston.  Contact:  (800)869-0491.22-24:  Direct Marketing to Business Conference; Dun & Bradstreet InformationServices; The New Orleans Marriott, New Orleans.  Contact:  (203) 857-5660.29:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Wyndham Franklin Plaza,Philadelphia.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.29-30:  Conference on Regulation and Continuing Professional Education; NASBA;Westin Canal Place Hotel, New Orleans.  Contact:  (212) 490-3868.29-30:  Consolidated Returns; World Trade Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:(212) 435-3161.29-30:  Introduction to International Taxation; World Trade Institute; SanFrancisco.  Contact:  (212) 435-3161.31-Feb.  2:  Intermediate Seminar on International Taxation; World TradeInstitute; San Francisco.  Contact:  (212) 435-3161.-FEBRUARY-1:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; Santa Clara Marriott, Santa Clara, Calif.  Contact:  (312)464-8765.1-2:  Reducing European Tax; World Trade Institute; San Francisco.  Contact:(212) 435-3161.5-6:  Compensation Planning '96; Tax Management Educational Institute; LeMeridien Hotel, New Orleans.  Contact:  (202) 728-7902.7-8:  SOFTEX in Accounting & Finance; Interactive Information Services; LosAngeles.  Contact:  (415) 842-7373.15:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (312)464-8765.15-16:  CERCA Membership Conference; Council for Electronic RevenueCommunication Advancement; Key Bridge Marriott, Arlington, Va.  Contact:(312) 644-6610, ext.  3232.22:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; Airport Marriott, Houston.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.26-27:  Tax Aspects of International Acquisitions and Reorganizations; WorldTrade Institute; World Trade Center, New York.  Contact:  (212) 435-3160.-MARCH-5:  Corporate Derivatives; Ibbotson Associates; University of Chicago DowntownConference Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.6:  Defined Contribution; Ibbotson Associates; University of Chicago DowntownConference Center, Chicago.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.7:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Plaza San Antonio, San Antonio.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.7-8:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago GraduateSchool of Business; University of Chicago Downtown Center, Chicago.  Contact:(312) 464-8765.12:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott East Side, New York.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.13:  Advanced Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Marriott East Side, NewYork.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.14:  Communicating Asset Allocation Concepts; Ibbotson Associates; MarriottEast Side, New York.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.22:  Management Science in Spreadsheets; University of Chicago Graduate Schoolof Business; Radisson, Salt Lake City.  Contact:  (312) 464-8765.25:  Mutual Fund Investing; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.26:  Asset Allocation; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.27:  International/Alternative Investing; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, SanFrancisco.  Contact:  (800) 215-2494.28-29:  Portfolio Management; Ibbotson Associates; Park Hyatt, San Francisco.Contact:  (800) 215-2494.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-23IA059-000325-B021-47http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi10.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003143 text/html 133885HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:29:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:47 GMTContent-length: 133695Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi10.html Sample Issue Copyright AMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNet January 02, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TODAY'S NEWS (431 words) COMMUNITY BANKING WEEKLY ADVISER: THE TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FAMILY-RUN BANK (730 words) EYE ON THE STATES: MASS. TRADE GROUP REVIVES WITH MISSION TO SWAP IDEAS (582 words) SBA SAYS 1ST NATIONAL LEADS IN NEW ENGLAND (184 words) AGRICULTURE: FARM LENDERS HARVESTED A DECENT CROP IN '95 (772 words) CREDIT UNIONS COLORADO BANKERS FIGHTING AN EXPANSION IN DENVER (368 words) SCORECARD: GOOD PERFORMANCE MARRED BY CRISES (1042 words) CREDIT/DEBIT/ATMS VISA GUARANTEES CAR RENTALS AT PEAK TIMES (529 words) MIDWEST PAYMENT SIGNS SUMNER NATIONAL BANK (120 words) NEW NICHE: WISING UP DIRECT MARKETERS ABOUT WHO JUST WANTS TO BE LET ALONE (922 words) GENSAR NAMES STRATEGY, SALES EXECS (159 words) NATIONAL CITY UNIT BUYING 1ST DATA PAYMENT BUSINESS (336 words) REGIONAL BANKING SKEPTICISM GREETS TV PREDICTION THAT GLENFED WILL BE SOLD IN '96 (577 words) LOS ANGELES OFFICIALS URGE FED TO APPROVE FIRST BANK SYSTEM'S BID FOR FIRST INTERSTATE (523 words) COMMENT: RELATIONSHIP MANAGERS NEED STRICT SALES GOALS (655 words) STRATEGIES: 1995 IN REVIEW LENDERS ADJUSTING TO A NEW REALITY: TIGHTER BELTS (693 words) LAWMAKERS ASK PATIENCE FOR DEBTORS STRAPPED BY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN (450 words) GE THROWS IN THE TOWEL ON RETAIL ORIGINATIONS (330 words) THRIFTS JUMPED ON FIXED-RATE BANDWAGON IN '95 (311 words) MORTGAGES AFTER ACQUISITION BINGE, NORWEST SEES MARKETING AS THE WAY TO GROW (429 words) PNC UNIT WAS A LEADER AMONG LENDERS SEEKING NEW WAYS TO SELL WARES (445 words) HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995 (173 words) INVESTMENT PRODUCTS NASD PROPOSAL ON BROKER-DEALERS IS WELL RECEIVED (398 words) COMMENT: A LIFE INSURANCE TIME BOMB IN TRUST - AND HOW TO DEFUSE IT (837 words) TRUST RULES MAY BE EASED FOR MULTISTATE NATIONAL BANKS (705 words) WASHINGTON HOPES FOR WIDER POWERS NOW PINNED ON COURTS, REGULATORS-NOT CONGRESS (1331 words) NATIONSBANK WANTS CLASS ACTION DENIED IN FAIR-LENDING LAWSUIT (432 words) MUSICAL CHAIRS AT OCC; NEW AIDE FOR BEREUTER, HEAVYWEIGHTS AT N.Y. FED (582 words) COMPANY INDEX (318 words) FINANCE ROYAL BANK OF CANADA TRIMS U.S. OPERATIONS TO ZERO IN ON PROFITS (604 words) CONSUMER DELINQUENCY SPURRING SHORT SALES (757 words) TECHNOLOGY/OPERATIONS STOCK OF SYSTEMS, PROCESSING FIRMS JUMPED 34% IN '96 (622 words) DELUXE WILL TAKE RESTRUCTURING CHARGE OF $60M TO $70M (312 words) MORTGAGE SECURITIZATION LEADERS (1047 words) CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996TODAY'S NEWSWASHINGTON:   NATIONSBANK asked a federal judge to deny class-action status fora pending fair-lending lawsuit. Page 2   REGIONAL BANKING:   SKEPTICS are having a field day with the prediction of a TVcommentator that Glendale Federal will be sold this year. Dan Dorfman saidGlenfed's chairman was rumored to be pushing hard for a deal worth $1.2billion or more. Page 6   LOS ANGELES "strongly opposes" Wells' bid for First Interstate, themayor and city council president told the Fed in a letter. Page 6   MORTGAGES:   HOUSE BANKING Chairman Jim Leach has asked the chairmen of FannieMae and Freddie Mac to persuade loan servicers to cut some slack forfurloughed government workers who miss mortgage payments. Page 13   AS MORTGAGE BANKERS prepare for a new refinancing wave, they arestruggling to digest the enduring effect of the last one - a strict newemphasis on the bottom line. The signs were everywhere last year.   Pages 12, 13   CREDIT UNIONS:   1995 WAS A BANNER YEAR for credit unions, as capital levels hithistoric highs and delinquency continued a decade-long decline. Too badnobody noticed. Instead, the industry made an embarrassing spectacle ofitself. Page 7   COLORADO BANKERS are going to the courts to block a credit unionexpansion. Page 7   COMMUNITY BANKING:   FARM LENDERS had a fairly good 1995, but not everywhere or with everyproduct. Problems in such sectors as the cattle industry could continue,and Congress is likely to reduce subsidies. Page 10   THE MASSACHUSETTS Independent Bankers Association is waking upfrom a long hibernation, abandoning old lobbying efforts in favor ofhelping members boost profits through cooperative efforts.   Page 10   INVESTMENT PRODUCTS:   NATIONAL BANKS with trust departments operating in several statesmay soon get a break on the cost of doing business. Page 14   AFTER THREE MONTHS of fine-tuning, the National Association ofSecurities Dealers has issued its final proposal to create a new frameworkfor bank-affiliated broker-dealers. The proposal now goes to the SEC.   Page 15   CREDIT/DEBIT/ATMs:   VISA has introduced a guaranteed car-rental reservation servicefor peak travel times. The goal is to discourage consumers from bookingwith multiple renters and then becoming no-shows. Page 17   FIRST DATA's remittance processing business is being acquired by aNational City subsidiary.   Page 16   TECHNOLOGY:   STOCK PRICES of bank technology firms soared  last year. Gains forthe companies tracked by American Banker averaged 34%.   Page 18   ACKNOWLEDGING that its future lies more in electronic banking,check printer Deluxe Corp. said it would take a $60 million to $70 millionrestructuring charge partly related to the closing of printing plants.   Page 18Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996WEEKLY ADVISER: THE TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS OF THE FAMILY-RUN BANKBy Paul NadlersThe family-owned and family-run bank seems like the ultimate incommunity banking.   "I bank at Smith Bank" or "I've been banking with the Jones family allmy life, and so did my father" are typical comments in many communitieswhere a grandfather or even great-grandfather started a bank and son afterson took up the mantle.   But all is not sweetness and light in the family bank tradition, eventhough it has great deal to offer.   One problem is that people in town expect the banker to always say yes."Your father served my father," is the line. "How can you turn me downnow?"   I remember talking to a small group in one town where the banker wasbragging about his family tradition. One customer piped up that he too hada family banking tradition. "I am a third-generation check kiter."   A more serious question for a family bank, though, is whether the newgeneration wants to work at it.   When I was an undergraduate, a speaker at college told us: "Half of youin this room are Republicans because your fathers are Republicans. And halfof you are Democrats because your fathers are Republicans."   Among my proudest achievement as a teacher has been talking students outof being accountants or lawyers or bankers just because their fathers were.   "It's awful," parents tell me. "My son became a chef (or whatever)instead of going into banking."   "Is he happy?" I ask.   "Absolutely."   "Then why are you moaning?" I say. "You should be cheering."   When it is a family business, however, taking a different path is harderto do - even if your heart isn't in becoming a bank president.   And following in your father's footsteps is also not easy. I know.   My father was one of the most famous bank economists of his day. Everytime I did something right, people would say, "What do you expect fromMarcus Nadler's son, with all the help he has received." And when thingswent wrong, the comment would be, "Wow, you let your father down."   Maybe it's the problem of following your dad that has made so manysecond- and third-generation bankers take chances to show theirindependence - chances that in a number of cases have seriously damagedtheir banks, or killed them.   But what if you basically inherit a bank presidency and really want thejob? How do you learn to do it well?   There are three basic training grounds, and each has its drawbacks:   Your own bank. Being trained there limits the opportunities for growth.   All too often a young heir apparent is trained by putting him underGridley, a greybeard with 40 years' experience. Unfortunately, manyGridleys actually have one year's experience 40 times. Under them the newbanker learns the adage "never do something the first time."   Being trained by your dad the CEO has similar pitfalls.   Money-center banks. Heirs apparent used to have this second routeavailable - working for the family bank's correspondent bank. The money-center would be delighted to take the CEO's son aboard for several yearsand teach him banking. It knew this would cement the relationship with thefamily bank, insuring correspondent business for years ahead.   But many money-centers are now giving up correspondent business, becausethe balances have been reduced sharply now that respondents' requiredreserves must be kept with the Fed. As a result, correspondent balancesmust come from money that otherwise could be lent or invested.   Banker schools. There are complaints that they treat all students alike.   What's wrong with that? The gripe is that those who'll wind up runningtheir family banks don't get the instruction and insight they'll need -that instead they learn what a lending officer in a larger regional needsto know, or a branch manager of a major bank.   This, some critics say, is why the major banking schools are not drawingthe students they used to. Ignoring their own marketing courses, theschools fail to segment the markets for their programs.   Despite these problems, the family-run bank is not dead. But like othertraditions that have made community banking unique, it is becoming less ofa force. And the urge to merge is only one reason.   Mr. Nadler is a contributing editor of the American Banker and professorof finance at Rutgers University Graduate School of Management.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996EYE ON THE STATES: MASS. TRADE GROUP REVIVES WITH MISSION TO SWAP IDEASBy JONATHAN D. EPSTEINA Massachusetts bank trade group is waking up from a long hibernation,abandoning old lobbying efforts in favor of helping its independent bankmembers boost their bottom lines through cooperative efforts.   After several years of inactivity, and hardly any meetings, theMassachusetts Independent Bankers Association is seeking to draw communitybanks together to exchange policies and ideas related to lending, humanresources, and marketing.   In particular, officials want the association to establish common creditcriteria to make loan participations among members easier, without havingto work with a larger bank that "might look to take the customer away,"said association president Jim D. Carey, president of Slade's Ferry Bank,Somerville.   "We felt that independent commercial banks have a few common interests,"Mr. Carey said. "There are a few things that we can do together to help ourbottom line."   By sharing policies and practices relating to employee benefits andmarketing, the banks will help those smaller members who can't afford tohire full-time staffs or pay advertising agencies to develop campaigns, heexplained.   Mr. Carey said the wave of consolidation sweeping the industry has onlystrengthened the belief among community bankers that they will survive andprosper because they can better serve customers. But "I think we need tohelp each other with the burden of regulation and the management of bottomlines."   "It's going to be much more one on one, trying to assist each other andmanaging our institutions in the marketplace to preserve our independenceand share our common management concerns and solutions so that we don't endup fading out of existence," he said.   In the past, the group, which was formed about 25 years ago and is anaffiliate of the Independent Bankers Association of America, focused itsattention on influencing banking legislation on Beacon Hill in Boston andon Capitol Hill in Washington. But as the group's members were gobbled upby mergers, its influence and activity dropped off.   Last April, in response to a push from IBAA officials to restart thegroup, officials from about 13 banks met to discuss the organization'sfuture.   Richard D. Driscoll, president of the Massachusetts Bankers Association,said he was unaware of the Massachusetts Independent Bankers' recentactivities.   "If there is a need for one more group, they'll get members," he said."But if banks don't feel there's a need, they won't join."   He added that the Massachusetts Bankers has added about 15 new small-bank members in the last two years. In fact, he said, every commercial bankin Massachusetts is an active member except Mr. Carey's bank.   Still, Mr. Carey said the Massachusetts Independent members concludedthat the group should no longer try to provide lobbying or educationalservices to its members anymore, because the Massachusetts BankersAssociation and other organizations already filled that need better thanthe independent bankers group could.   "Their expertise is in the legislative efforts and the educationalefforts, and we believe you should render to Caesar what is Caesar's," Mr.Carey said. "They're every good at what they do, and our thrust is a littledifferent."   Mr. Carey said the group has stressed to the Massachusetts BankersAssociation that it's not trying to compete. Already the associationincludes 20 banks, with 13 other potential members, all with less than $250million in assets.   Mr. Carey said officials haven't ruled out cosponsoring a seminar with alarger organization, but "that's not our thrust. There are organizationsthat do that well."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SBA SAYS 1ST NATIONAL LEADS IN NEW ENGLANDHARTFORD, Conn.The Small Business Administration ranked FirstNational Bank of New England the largest lender of SBA-guaranteedcommercial loans under its flagship 7(a) program in New England.   The agency, in releasing its 1995 fiscal year figures, shows FirstNational Bank of New England as the region's largest 7(a) lender by a widemargin. First National Bank originated 85 loans during the year, for atotal of $40.7 million. Based on dollar volume, the bank, which has itscorporate headquarters in Hartford, Conn., ranks sixth in the nation. It isthe leader in New England for the second consecutive year.   "Most of our clients are privately owned manufacturers and distributorswho use the SBA-guaranteed loans to invest in equipment, facilities, ormarketing programs that make them more globally competitive, " said BrianJ. Charlebois, executive vice president and head of commercial banking.   Only two other New England-based banks ranked in the top 50 on the SBA's1995 list. The bank's SBA loan volume, for instance, was five times that ofBank of Boston, which was ranked 43d. First New Hampshire Bank was ranked23.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGRICULTURE: FARM LENDERS HARVESTED A DECENT CROP IN '95By BARBARA F. BRONSTIENLast year was a fairly good one for farm lenders.   The year "turned out to be generally quite good for Americanagriculture," said Marvin Duncan, chairman of the agricultural economicsdepartment at North Dakota State University, Fargo. "Prices are ... highenough so there will essentially be no government subsidies in the form ofdeficiency payments."   But in agriculture, you take the bad with the good. Farmers and lenderssaw individual areas hit with weather- and disease-related woes andindustry-specific troubles, such as the cattle industry's price dip.   And so, this year farm bankers will have a keen eye on thestruggling areas such as the cattle industry. And they await with mixedfeelings word on the 1995 farm bill from Washington.   Cattle producers face additional years of low prices as supply exceedsdemand and producers begin selling off breeder animals to ultimately reducesupply. However, this liquidation initially will increase the supply evenfurther.   "It's going to be a pretty tough time in '96, '97 for the cattlesector," said Bill Helming, an agricultural consultant in Olathe, Kan."We've got the prices below the cost of production already, and we haven'teven started liquidation. That's going to add insult to injury."   The dairy industry also has not seen price increases in several years,said Alec Bridges, president and chief executive of $240 million-assetSulphur Springs (Tex.) State Bank, who has numerous dairy customers.   "The performance is not as good as it's been," Mr. Bridges said. "We'renot having any real horror stories. We had tightened our underwritingstandards and made sure that they performed to the point that we could gowith them when things weren't as good."   On the other hand, grain prices rose this year, a result of a wet springand early frost that brought a "short" crop, reducing supply.   "Most farmers who are producing and selling grain have less grain tosell, but they're going to have the opportunity to sell it for a higherprice," Mr. Helming said.   If he were a lender, he said, he'd be encouraging his customers "to takeadvantage of these higher prices and sell into it. Farmers typically don'tsell when the market's going up; they sell when the market's low. I know itdoesn't sound logical, but that's the way it's been done for 50 years."   Mr. Helming said that although the tendency of farmers to sell at theworst time has improved - more farmers are using better farm marketingtechniques to reduce the risk of price fluctuations - it's still a problem.   "When the market's going up, they think it's going to go higher," hesaid. "When the market's going down, they're reluctant to sell. And by thetime they sell, it's a lot lower."   The higher prices also made the industry less anxious over the yet-to-be-determined government farm program, said Larry Knutson, president ofState Bank of Blomkest, Minn., and current president of the Upper MidwestAgricultural Credit Council.   "We're cautiously optimistic about next year," Mr. Knutson said."Production looks like it's going to be a pretty good year."   Still, farmers and lenders alike continue to wait for the 1995 Farm Billto learn what government policy will be on farm subsidies.   "There was lots of discussion about the Farm Bill, and we still don'thave it," said Philip M. Burns, president of Farmers and Merchants NationalBank, West Point, Neb., and the current chairman of the American BankersAssociation's agriculture lenders committee.   Practically speaking, Congress should implement a Farm Bill in Januaryor February so farmers - and lenders - can organize their 1996 planting,Mr. Helming said. "There are a lot of decisions to be made in planting asyou get into the spring," he said.   The consensus is that government subsidies to farmers will bediminished, whatever the ultimate bill.   Mr. Helming expects the legislation to take the form of the Freedom toFarm Act. "That's what bankers ought to plan for, which means theircustomers are going to end up being totally dependent on the real-worldsupply and-demand forces in the marketplace, as opposed to the safety netof the government."   This development has led farm bankers, already a conservative bunch, tobecome more cautious, said Mr. Duncan of North Dakota State.   "More risk is going to be placed on the shoulders of the farmer than inthe past," he said. "They will want to have a full understanding of therisk management techniques that their customers are going to be pursuing.The bottom line for the next one to five years is substantially greateruncertainty in agriculture."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COLORADO BANKERS FIGHTING AN EXPANSION IN DENVERBy JAMES B. ARNDORFERColorado bankers are going to the courts to block a credit unionexpansion.   The Colorado Bankers Association is suing the state banking agency forpermitting $84.4 million-asset Gates Credit Union to expand its membershipbase to include the southern metropolitan area of Denver - nearly 300,000people.   Craig Umbaugh, a lawyer representing the bank trade group, said theexpansion runs roughshod over state laws that restrict community expansionsto no more than 25,000 or to the regulator's discretion.   "The Department of Financial Institutions has exceeded the clearlanguage of the statute," Mr. Umbaugh said. "I think this expansion haswiped away half the statute."   The association filed suit last Thursday against the ColoradoFinancial Services Board, which has some oversight over the Division ofFinancial Services. The five-member board - which includes three creditunion executives - approved the Gates expansion on Nov. 28 despite bankers'objections at a public hearing.   "It's not unexpected," said David L. Paul, commissioner of the division."They had been fairly forthright with our legal counsel that that's wherethey were headed."   Steve Newell, chairman of the Financial Services Board and president ofColorado State Employees Credit Union, said the board considered all theevidence, including that submitted by bankers in Gates' proposed expansionarea, when it approved the expansion.   "The issue boiled down to whether or not the area of expansion was adefined community," he said. "Overall, the board felt that the credit unionitself should be able to define what they consider to be a community."   Gates Credit Union was seeking to expand out of uncertainty over thefuture of its membership base, employees of Gates Rubber Co., said CarrollBeach, president of the Colorado Credit Union League. The company had beencutting employees for years.   Bankers object to the size of the expansion, saying it does notrepresent a distinct community, as required by statute.   Donald Childears, president of the Colorado Bankers, said the creditunion's new membership base included several political districts and aspectrum of income and demographic groups.   Robert Wilson, a Denver lawyer who represents Gates Credit Union, wouldnot comment on the bankers' objections.   "We're still in the process," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SCORECARD: GOOD PERFORMANCE MARRED BY CRISESBy JAMES B. ARNDORFER1995 was a banner year for credit unions, as capital levels hithistoric highs and delinquency continued a decade-long decline.   Too bad nobody noticed. Instead, the industry busily set about making aspectacle of itself for most of the year, beginning with the collapse of$1.6 billion-asset Capital Corporate Federal Credit Union - Cap Corp - inJanuary.   And both the industry and its regulator added to that debacle with flubsthroughout the year.   Before 1995 was over the industry and the National Credit UnionAdministration came under fire during congressional hearings. The CreditUnion National Association and the industry's top regulator were at eachothers' throats. The chief executive of the industry's primary liquidityfacility resigned under a cloud and warned of looming problems.   And to cap the year off, CUNA president Ralph Swoboda was deposed by thetrade group's board and state leagues.   But in interviews with several industry leaders, the Cap Corp situationemerged repeatedly as the single most important event of the year.   It's not hard to see why.   The largest failure in industry history triggered a series ofcongressional hearings in which lawmakers - particularly in the Senate -browbeat the industry for speculating in collateralized mortgageobligations and ripped the NCUA for allowing it.   "The most important thing was the closing of Cap Corp because it broughtcredit unions into the light," said Charles O. Zuver, director ofgovernmental affairs for the Credit Union National Association. "Itgenerated legislation in the Senate and dissension in the credit unionmovement."   Chastened, the NCUA in April issued a regulation limiting corporateinvestments that was so unpopular that the agency withdrew it even beforethe comment period expired. The regulator has since been crafting a newplan with the corporates that has the industry's liquidity centerssignificantly more comfortable.   "We're very encouraged" about the agency's willingness to cooperate,said Richard M. Johnson, chief executive of Western Corporate FederalCredit Union, San Dimas, Calif. "We think the regulator is going to be morecomfortable with us because he's taken a hard look at us."   A rule affecting corporate investments alone would have a powerfulimpact on the industry, but now the agency also is looking to tighten theinvestment regulations of regular credit unions. Part of the inspirationwas the agency's finding that many institutions failed to understand therisks of collateralized mortgage obligations - the same instruments that,indirectly, led to the fall of Cap Corp - in their portfolios.   Some industry experts have already slammed the proposal as requiring toomuch paperwork.   Mr. Swoboda, the former CUNA president, predicted that the struggle toset new investment limits for the industry will be the pivotal event ofthis year.   "There'll be a stir over the investment regulations for natural personcredit unions and corporates," he said.   The NCUA's decision to seize Cap Corp intensified the already hostilerelations between the NCUA and the industry - sparking a dissent on theNCUA board from board member Robert Swan. Many in the industry -particularly Cap Corp depositors that lost money - believed the regulatorcould have saved the corporate if it had so desired.   Acrimony was already present between segments of the industry and theNCUA because of a rule approved in 1994 that would end trade groupmanagement of corporates. The CUNA and the National Association of StateCredit Union Supervisors sued the agency in February in an effort to killthe rule.   But in September the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District ofVirginia ruled in the agency's favor. CUNA decided to drop its suit, butstate supervisors are pursuing their case against what most observersconsider to be heavy odds.   At the same time, the agency and some industry figures have said theythink the federal court's decision might provide an opening for betterrelations.   "That's behind us now," said NCUA Chairman Norman E. D'Amours."Relations have been improving dramatically toward the latter part of theyear."   That, however, remains to be seen: Pentagon Federal Credit Union, whichlost $1.1 million in Cap Corp, in October sued the NCUA to try to obtaindocuments detailing the agency's reasons for imposing conservatorship onCap Corp.   When credit unions weren't taking shots at the regulator, it seemed theywere fighting among themselves.   Competition among credit unions became a big issue, with manyinstitutions protesting the proposed merger of the aggressive PatelcoCredit Union, San Francisco, and First Technology Federal Credit Union,Beaverton, Ore. The complainants appeared to have the sympathy of Mr.D'Amours, who has stressed the need for cooperation among credit unions,and the merger was called off once it became clear NCUA wasn't going to letit happen.   And, the industry's largest trade group went through a meltdown duringthe year, leading off with a management shakeout at the industry's mainliquidity center, U.S. Central Credit Union, which CUNA controlled.   Early on, former U.S. Central president James R. Bell and blamed CUNA-appointed board members for problems suffered by the company. A few monthslater the Overland Park, Kan., institution was slapped with a lowperformance rating by the NCUA.   The industry's largest trade group was bruised on other fronts. Facing arevolt from its affiliated state leagues, the association flip-flopped -first supporting, then opposing - a Senate bill to strengthen NCUA'soversight of state-chartered credit unions, a move that irked the bill'ssponsor, Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y.   After this setback, Mr. Swoboda announced a sweeping review of theassociation's structure, and the state leagues began gunning for him, tradegroup sources said.   To make matters worse at the trade group, losses blossomed at the CardServices division of CUNA Service Group, a CUNA subsidiary.   The board and other CUNA interests apparently believed that new bloodwas the only cure for its problems. In October, it fired Mr. Swoboda, who,before his departure, sacked some of his lieutenants.   Even if credit unions continue to thrive this year, some of the uglyevents of 1995 are expected to work themselves to resolution - someprobably tortuously.   "Credit unions have done very well; the confusion has all been in thesuperstructure," said Ken Robinson, president of the National Associationof Federal Credit Unions.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996VISA GUARANTEES CAR RENTALS AT PEAK TIMESBy MICKEY MEECEAt the behest of major car rental companies, Visa U.S.A. has introduceda guaranteed reservation service for peak travel times.   Visa said the service was available beginning Monday at participatingrenters, including Hertz, Avis, National, and Budget. Cardholders who givetheir account numbers at the time of their reservation can be assured thata car will be awaiting them.   To attack a growing "no show" problem, the rental companies will offerguarantees when demand is high, mainly around holiday periods and specialevents. The service will be similar to the hotel late-arrival guaranteesthat customers can secure with credit card numbers.   Visa, the first of the major card groups to introduce the car-rentalconvenience, said users will no longer have to book cars at a number ofagencies to make sure they get one. By reducing the number of no-shows, therental companies should be able to manage their fleets better.   As a byproduct of the guarantees, renters would penalize no-shows. Visano-shows would have to pay as much as a one-day rental fee if they do notcancel reservations at least eight hours before the scheduled pickup.   American Express Travel Related Services Co. is developing a similarservice, which a spokesman said could be available in the first quarter. Ano-show penalty of up to two days would kick in if a reservation was notcanceled 48 hours in advance.   MasterCard International does not have a rental guarantee in the works,a spokesman for that association said, because "we haven't seen a greatdeal of interest in something like this."   Visa said the service is voluntary. Cardholders can still reserve carsin the customary manner.A guarantee ensures that customers whose rental cars cannot bedelivered in an hour will be transported to their destinations, providedwith cars within eight hours, and given a free day's rental.   Under American Express' proposed plan, if a rental company overbookedand did not have the customer's vehicle, it would have to secure acomparable one from another firm. If it could not do so, the rental agencywould provide an alternative vehicle at a rate no higher than the originalcar and it would waive the first day's fee.   American Express and Visa, which are first and second, respectively, incar rental charge volume, said the rental companies came to them this yearseeking a solution to the no-show problem. No-show rates go as high as 70%during peak periods.   Not all rental agencies have committed to the guarantee service. Aspokeswoman for Alamo Car Rental said the company is evaluating it and hasnot made a decision.   Janet Maizner, a spokeswoman for Value Rent a Car, said, "We normallytake a wait-and-see attitude" to any new service that other agencies adopt.   "Overall, it's a good move for the industry," Ms. Maizner said, addingthat it is hurt by "double and triple booking."   Visa also is introducing an advance deposit program, allowing customersto charge a deposit for rentals of up to 14 days. The association plans tochange its rules and procedures to permit the car rental deposits, similarto an adjustment made in 1989 for hotels.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996MIDWEST PAYMENT SIGNS SUMNER NATIONAL BANKBeth PiskoraCincinnati-based Midwest Payment Systems has signed a contract withNational Bank  of Sumner, Ill., to provide electronic funds transfer andJeanie network services.   By joining the Jeanie automated teller machine network, Sumner offersits customers 24-hour access to more than 1,200 ATMs in Ohio, Kentucky,Indiana, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, Florida, Tennessee, RhodeIsland, and North Carolina. Sumner has only one ATM of its own.   In addition, Sumner will be participating in the MasterMoney program,the MasterCard off-line debit program that enables consumers to use theirJeanie ATM at more than 12 million MasterCard-accepting merchantsworldwide.   Midwest Payment Systems is the data processing subsidiary of Fifth ThirdBancorp, a Cincinnati-based banking company with $17.2 billion of assets.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NEW NICHE: WISING UP DIRECT MARKETERS ABOUT WHO JUST WANTS TO BE LETALONEBy LISA FICKENSCHERMarketers' obsession with buying and building massive customer databases has created a seemingly contradictory subspecialty - removing thenames of people who prefer not to be on mailing or telemarketing lists.   It has become the law for direct marketers of everything from creditcards to long-distance services to respect consumers' desires to be letalone. But the advent of several companies in the "list suppression"business indicates there is profit in it.   "Honoring a customer's request is just good business," said DickGallagher, president of the Signature Group, a company that offers creditcard enhancements, has added a service called "Do Not Solicit."   Indeed, businesspeople are coming around to the view that privacy - andthe publicity they get from disseminating privacy protection policies - canbe a valuable commodity.   "Privacy protection is going to become increasingly a service in Americafar beyond list suppression," said Alan F. Westin, editor and publisher ofthe newsletter Privacy and American Business.   A handful of companies, including a list broker working on the WorldWide Web of the Internet, are apprising direct marketers of the names ofpeople who don't want to be solicited as sales prospects.   The Signature Group's "Do Not Solicit" list helps companies comply withthe Telephone Consumer Act. A rule that the Federal Trade Commission addedto that legislation in August requires telemarketers to maintain lists ofpeople who don't want to be called again. The rule went into effect onSunday.   The Schaumburg, Ill.-based Signature Group claims to be the only companythat electronically gathers such information and will compile a list for aclient marketer within 48 hours. That could significantly shorten theprocess of removing names from a mailing list, which the group saysaverages 45 days in the banking industry.   Consumers get angry if they're called after asking for their names to bestruck off marketing lists, said Fanette Singer, a spokeswoman forSignature Group. They want their names removed promptly, she said.   The Direct Marketing Association has been providing a telephonesuppression service for its members since 1985. But Patricia Faley, vicepresident of consumer affairs for the Washington-based trade group, pointedout that its service is not required by law.   About 600,000 consumers are on the association's telemarketingsuppression list, and three million are on a mail suppression list that wasbegun in 1971. Consumers who appear on those lists are not solicited by avariety of marketers; in contrast, the Signature Group provides its serviceto one client company at a time.   The Signature Group tracks people who are contacted by companies that,for example, sell merchandise to bank customers. As the list provider, thebank is legally responsible for compliance with the telemarketing law, eventhough it may not be calling its customers directly.   Another service, Buyer's Choice, has tapped into a different type ofconsumer who is willing to be solicited for products and services but wantsto control who does the soliciting.   "People are soon going to say, here are the news, the marketing, and thepeople I want to reach me, and I don't want anyone else to reach me," saidMr. Westin.   Buyer's Choice, a division of the Polk Co. of Detroit, seems to beresponding to Mr. Westin's vision of the future. Polk, a provider ofdemographic and lifestyle data, sends out consumer surveys asking people tocheck off categories of products and services that interest them and thosethat do not.   Half a million people have completed the surveys. Keith Wardell, vicepresident of Polk, expects the list to reach two million in a year.   Buyers Choice has been gathering consumers' preferences for five yearsbut only recently have the surveys begun probing what kind of mail peopledon't want to receive. About 20 major mailers, including cataloguecompanies and travel clubs, are participating in a test of the service,which Mr. Wardell said will be launched formally in the second quarter.   Mr. Wardell estimates that people who complete the surveys will receiveabout 20 pieces of mail annually from marketers subscribing to Buyer'sChoice, while 100 to 200 pieces of mail will be suppressed.   The theory behind the service is that most people want to receive somemail offers. The smallest opt-out category, for example, is women'sapparel, and the least popular offer are money market funds.   To keep the list accurate, Buyer's Choice sends out its survey every sixmonths to people who have completed it.   "Part of our intent is to stay in touch with those consumers," said Mr.Wardell.   Aurora, Ohio-based DM Group began compiling a list about four weeks agoof people who don't want to be bothered by unwanted solicitations andadvertising, but its communications method is electronic mail.   Robert Hicks, president of the five-year-old company, said he launchedthe service because DM Group "came under a lot of heat when it came outthat we were managing E-mail lists."   DM Group rents lists with about 250,000 names to marketers who want toreach people via E-mail.   But interest in the suppression list has been tepid so far, said Mr.Hicks.   Still, Mr. Westin believes the service is a significant developmentbecause it recognizes that "E-mail deserves equal treatment with mail andtelephone preference (services), allowing people to opt out."   "I think the DM Group has the right idea," added Mr. Westin. But hesuggested that companies put a question "up front" at their Web sitesgiving surfers the opportunity to opt out of further unsolicited contact.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996GENSAR NAMES STRATEGY, SALES EXECSBeth PiskoraTAMPAGensar Technologies Inc., the point of sale processingsubsidiary of Gensar Holdings Inc., has added two senior vice presidents toits technology and sales team.   William J. Kouser Sr. was put in charge of strategic planning andproduct development, and John M. Gallagher of national supermarket sales.   Mr. Kouser joins the technology team after 30 years in systemsdevelopment and design for the insurance and banking industries. While atthe Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, he developed and implemented acheck processing system. He was also instrumental in the construction ofthe on-line consumer financial services system that CoreStates FinancialCorp. uses to track account activity and customer banking relationships.   Mr. Gallagher spent 25 years at CoreStates in its electronic paymentsbusiness. For the past four years he has worked for Buypass Corp., thepoint of sale processing subsidiary of Electronic Payment Services Inc.,the Wilmington, Del.-based company that also operates the MAC electronicbanking network.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NATIONAL CITY UNIT BUYING 1ST DATA PAYMENT BUSINESSBy BETH PISKORANational City Processing Co. has agreed to acquire the remittanceprocessing business of First Data Resources Inc.   Under terms of the agreement, the Omaha-based card servicing unit willoutsource all of its clients' remittance activities exclusively to NationalCity. These functions include the opening, extracting, recording, andposting of credit card payments with paper invoices.   "This represents a 30% increase on our base of business," said Tony G.Holcombe, chief executive officer of Louisville, Ky.-based National CityProcessing, a subsidiary of $35 billion-asset National City Corp. ofCleveland.   "The additional transaction volume will bring us to 500 milliontransactions annually" in the remittance processing area, added Mr.Holcombe.   Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. It is expected to closewithin 60 days.   "With the acquisition, NPC will be the largest remittance processingcompany in the United States," said David R. Zook, executive vice presidentof corporate services for National City Processing.   "This is an exciting opportunity for us to build upon our existing baseof remittance processing business while further enhancing the serviceprovided to clients of First Data Resources," he added.   The agreement includes a long-term arrangement for First Data Resourcesto continue to market the remittance business to its clients, with theNational City unit serving as processor.   "First Data is not a major player in this area and we felt our clientsdeserved the service and competitive advantage only a leader such as NPCcould provide," said a spokeswoman for First Data Corp., the Hackensack,N.J.-based holding company for First Data Resources.   The spokeswoman said the remittance deal with National City was notprecipitated by First Data's recent merger with First Financial ManagementCorp.   "We were simply trying to find the best solution for our clients, andNational City Processing is a true leader in remittance processing," shesaid.   First Data Resources will continue to offer card embossing, cobrandingand relational data base marketing services, home banking, smart cardservices, and processing for credit, debit, and commercial cards.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SKEPTICISM GREETS TV PREDICTION THAT GLENFED WILL BE SOLD IN '96By BARTON CROCKETTDoes CNBC commentator Dan Dorfman have the inside word on the next bigCalifornia thrift merger?   He certainly gave that impression on his Dec. 21 "Dorfman Report" whenhe singled out $15.9 billion-asset Glendale Federal Bank as a "sure-firetakeover within the next 12 months."   Mr. Dorfman said Glenfed chairman Stephen J. Trafton is rumored to be"aggressively shopping the company at over 30 bucks a share." He alsoquoted "takeover forecaster" Steve Kroll, managing director of Monness,Crespi & Hardt, as saying a takeover of Glenfed is likely at $30 a share,for a total price of $1.2 billion.   Potential buyers were said to be California thrifts Great WesternFinancial Corp., H.F. Ahmanson & Co., and Golden West Financial Corp.   Even on the basis of fundamentals, Mr. Dorfman said, Glenfed would be agood buy. He quoted Mr. Kroll as saying Glenfed was likely to win in 1996 a$1.5 billion lawsuit against the government over regulatory goodwill - avictory that would boost earnings $10 to $12 a share. Mr. Kroll reportedlyset a 12-month price target of $23 to $24 in the absence of a buyout or avictory in the lawsuit.   The report forced a half-hour halt in trading of Glenfed's stock andspurred a $1 rise, to $17.87. This was its high for the year, and more thantwice its 52-week low of $8.50 late in 1994. .   A Glendale Federal spokesman said the bank would not comment on the"Dorfman Report" item, as a matter of policy. In recent months, Mr. Traftonhas said in interviews that Glenfed is open to a takeover but isn'tcounting on one.   Many stock analysts, thrift executives, and investment bankers werehighly skeptical of Mr. Dorfman's analysis.   They noted that Mr. Dorfman was hardly unique in predicting that a bigCalifornia thrift is likely to be acquired in the next year. Most analystsexpect a wave of takeovers to commence as soon as buyers are convinced thatthe California economy has rebounded and that California thrifts' balancesheets are on solid ground.   "The possibility of Glenfed being a takeover candidate is certainly notbrain surgery," said Gary Gordon, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. But heand other sources said that the $30 price seems toohigh unless Glenfed wins the goodwill lawsuit, which is far from certain.   These observers also said they see no signs that a big merger involvingGlenfed is in the works. It is more likely, they said, that Mr. Traftonwill focus on improving the company's performance over the next year inorder to get a higher price in a subsequent takeover.   "Our read is that Trafton is looking to aggressively add value to theGlendale franchise and then sell," said Gregory A. Mitchell, senior vicepresident of Hovde Financial Inc., aninvestment banking firm. There is "no question" that Mr. Trafton will waitat least a year to sell Glenfed, Mr. Mitchell added.   "It doesn't feel like anything's imminent," said a senior thriftexecutive with a big Glenfed rival, who asked not to be named.   Many observers said they see much to recommend in-market mergers ofCalifornia thrifts, including a combination of Glenfed with any number ofother Southern California institutions. But they said they doubtedany of the three thrifts Mr. Trafton mentioned would be willing to pay thekind of premium he'd be seeking in a takeover, or that Mr. Dorfman saidwould be likely.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996LOS ANGELES OFFICIALS URGE FED TO APPROVE FIRST BANK SYSTEM'S BID FORFIRST INTERSTATEBy BARTON CROCKETTRichard J. Riordan is standing up for First Interstate again.   The mayor of Los Angeles has teamed up with the president of his citycouncil to urge the Federal Reserve Board to reject Wells Fargo & Co.'sapplication to acquire First Interstate Bancorp.   The city "strongly opposes" Wells' bid for control of Los Angeles-basedFirst Interstate, Mr. Riordan and Council President John Ferraro wrote in aletter dated Dec. 18.   The letter, filed during the public comment period that ended late lastmonth, escalates the unusual level of political involvement in the battleover First Interstate.   Local politicians are typically silent about bank mergers, or else focustheir energies on trying to minimize office closings and layoffs.   But Mr. Riordan and other prominent California politicians are openlysupporting the deal that First Interstate prefers - a merger with FirstBank System Inc. of Minneapolis.   Speaking at an outdoor rally in November, Mr. Riordan professed "love"for the chairmen of First Interstate and First Bank and said, "We lookforward to working with you for many, many years to come."   The letter to the Fed details Mr. Riordan's reasons for opposing Wells'bid while putting California's largest city in the position of trying toinfluence federal policymakers.   The Los Angeles officials said consumer banking services in Californiawould "be irreparably harmed" if San Francisco-based Wells bought FirstInterstate. They said Wells' plans to close hundreds of traditionalbranches and rely more on supermarket branches, automated teller machines,and personal computers would benefit the well-to-do at the expense of thepoor.   Lower-income communities "are chronically underserved by most retailbusinesses, including supermarkets and banks," the letter said. "Theresidents of these communities cannot afford expensive home computers andoften feel uncomfortable accessing ATMs in high-crime areas."   The writers also warned that competition would suffer, as it was"clearly diminished by the 1992 merger of BankAmerica Corp. and SecurityPacific Corp."   "The proposed Wells Fargo/First Interstate consolidationwould have a similar impact," the city officials said.   Raising concerns about broader economic impacts, Mr. Riordan and Mr.Ferraro said Southern California would sustain "the vast majority" of the7,000 to 10,000 job losses from a such a merger - an especially cruel blowto Los Angeles County, where the 9% unemployment rate is already well abovethe national average.   Real estate markets would also suffer, they argued. First Interstateowns or leases nearly 1.3 million square feet in four major buildingsdowntown, an area where vacancy rates are high, at 20%. Office closures"could completely destabilize (the Los Angeles) real estate market,resulting in huge financial losses to owners and lenders throughout thecountry," the letter said.   Mr. Riordan and Mr. Ferraro also claimed that First Interstate would bea better corporate citizen as part of First Bank than as part of Wells.   "We have no doubt that Wells Fargo is prepared to make new commitmentsto Los Angeles as part of its pending application," they said. "But we areconvinced that these commitments will inevitably fall well short of theservice and community involvement that Los Angeles enjoys today from FirstInterstate Bank."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COMMENT: RELATIONSHIP MANAGERS NEED STRICT SALES GOALSBy CHARLES B. WENDELThe title "corporate lender" has begun to disappear from the commercialbanking nomenclature in favor of the term "relationship manager."   The relationship manager has significantly broader responsibility thanfinding, underwriting, and monitoring loans. Ideally, he or she is acoordinator of the sales process who evaluates customer needs, matches themwith the bank's products and services, identifies the most likely sellingopportunities, and brings in product specialists as needed.   Unfortunately, this is largely a fantasy. It is still a distant goalmany banks have for relationship managers. Scratch the typical relationshipmanager and what you find underneath is a traditional lender. Therelationship manager may sell cash management and other deposit services,but it is rare to see the sale of products from other groups in theorganization.   We estimate that among their best small and middle-market customers,banks capture only a 5% to 10% "wallet share" of financial servicesbusiness. For example, no more that 60% of small-business owners whomaintain a commercial deposit account have their personal account at thesame bank.   The gap between the intent of the relationship manager's job and itsreality needs to be addressed quickly and decisively. Among the reasons:Many companies view lending as a commodity and not the basis fordifferentiating one bank from another. But to achieve growth targets, banksmust emphasize wallet share over market share in many markets.   Few senior managers would argue against the importance of buildingcustomer relationships. Yet few banks are on the right path. There are fourmajor reasons:   *Wrong messages. In a recent speech at a Robert Morris Associatesconference, Norwest Bank regional banking executive Scott Kistingunderscored the importance of communicating effectively with staff aboutnoncredit products. He said banks need to "celebrate" these sales to thesame extent they congratulate bankers for new loans.   *Wrong or meaningless measurements. A banker at a well-respectedregional company told a story that is all too typical: He and his bosswould agree on annual goals for credit and noncredit product sales, butduring the year performance is never measured against those goals. And 12months later, a new set of goals is agreed on, with the manager believingthat he is fulfilling his supervisory role.   *Wrong products. Banks have not challenged themselves enough inevaluating noncredit offerings from the customer's perspective. Are theirproprietary 401(k) investment options really as good as those offered bynonbank competitors? Have cash management or custody products beenleapfrogged by others? Too many product developers are playing a game ofwishful thinking when it comes to product assessment.   *Wrong people. Even after reengineering and downsizing, many banksremain dominated by traditional "good old boys," not aggressive andsophisticated financial consultants and salespeople. Upgrading relationshipmanager staffing, either by improved training or replacing personnel,remains critical to meeting market demands and exploiting opportunities.   Ironically, within the small-business segment it is a nonbank that bestemphasizes the capturing of entire relationships. Merrill Lynch & Co.focuses on meeting customer needs as opposed to a product demand, and itspeople are rewarded for cutting across the organization to meet thoseneeds, whether personal, commercial and credit, investment, or risk-controlrelated. Through superior customer service, they are also skimming thecream off the market.   Bank managements must get beyond their delusions about relationshipmanagers by giving them a clear focus and setting priorities. In the nearterm, a small centralized marketing unit can provide the expertise thatindividual relationship managers may not possess. Management must rethink,reduce, and in certain instances eliminate the relationship manager'sresponsibility for maintenance, monitoring, and underwriting.   Performance goals must be viewed as commitments. A higher level ofincentive compensation will widen the gap between the total compensation ofexcellent and merely adequate performers. The alternative is to riskbecoming a provider of commodities and increasingly irrelevant to thecustomer.   Mr. Wendel is president of Financial Institutions Consulting, New York.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996LENDERS ADJUSTING TO A NEW REALITY: TIGHTER BELTSBy SNIGDHA PRAKASHAs mortgage bankers prepare for a new refinancing wave, they arestruggling to digest the enduring effect of the last one - a strict newemphasis on the bottom line.   The signs were everywhere last year.   In December, PNC Mortgage, Vernon Hills, Ill., announced it would nolonger buy loans from wholesale brokers, which wrote up to 20% of all PNC'sloans. The company said it was paying too much for low-quality loans, andpreferred to focus on writing loans through its own loan officers.   Earlier in 1995, GE Capital Mortgage discontinued its retail lendingprogram, through which mostly small lenders had written GE loans. Theprogram had never generated large volumes, and reportedly did not makeenough profit to satisfy a more cost-conscious approach at GE.   Some players chose to exit the mortgage business altogether. Notably,Prudential Life Insurance Co.'s mortgage unit was put up for sale, andWells Fargo hired Norwest Mortgage Inc. to write its home loans.   Industry executives say that a host of factors conspired to create a newemphasis on cost cutting in a hitherto more relaxed business.   The mortgage industry, which expanded to write a record $1 trillion ofloans in 1993, continues to be too large for current volumes - estimated at$654 billion last year, and $765 billion this year. Fierce competition hasdriven down prices, forcing a new focus on costs.   And the influx of new capital, primarily from commercial banks, ischanging the economics of the industry. The largest lenders can afford tobuy, and constantly improve, expensive computer systems to originate andservice ever larger volumes of loans. At these companies, the costs oforiginating and servicing each loan is consistently going down, andeveryone must strive to keep up.   "The name of the game is keeping your costs down on everything, everylittle operation - the cost of borrowing money, the cost of distribution tothe public," said David Loeb, chairman of Countrywide Credit Industries,Pasadena, Calif.   Within that context, Mr. Loeb and other executives said PNC's decisionto abandon the wholesale purchase of loans from mortgage brokers makeseminent sense.   "There's no money in wholesale lending. The brokers get everything andthen some," Mr. Loeb said. Countrywide is building up its direct businesswith consumers, in order to decrease its reliance on third parties, hesaid.   Fees to mortgage brokers have climbed in the last few years, as lendersjockey for volume by offering lucrative deals to brokers. Brokers thesedays get not only all the origination fees but also a portion of theservicing release premium, noted Saiyid T. Naqvi, chief executive of PNCMortgage.   In addition, loans made by brokers tend to be refinanced more quickly,he said. When rates go down, brokers are quick to resolicit theircustomers. These and other factors led PNC to abandon the wholesalebusiness, Mr. Naqvi said.   PNC's exit from wholesale lending is the latest sign that the mortgagebusiness is rationalizing, said Luke Hayden of Chemical ResidentialMortgage. In other words, players are adjusting their strategies to matchthe real costs and profits of the mortgage business.   So do the largest lenders, such as Countrywide, Chemical, and Norwest,plan to follow PNC's lead?   Not anytime soon. To exit wholesale lending or any other channel meansthat you give up a whole segment of the market to your competitors, saidMark Korell, group president of lender and investor services at NorwestMortgage Inc., Des Moines. That's something that a really large lender justcannot afford to do.   Still, Mr. Korell warned that if brokers charged too much, the pressureto cut back on wholesale lending would mount.   "Brokers have to compete with other forms of production, don't they? Ifthey take too much out of the equation, they're not going to be able tostay in business," he said.   "The moral of the story here is that the mortgage banking industry, likeevery other industry, over time will act in a rational way," Mr. Korellsaid. "Capital is movable. Not too many people are going to stay in abusiness where they can't make adequate returns to their shareholders."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996LAWMAKERS ASK PATIENCE FOR DEBTORS STRAPPED BY GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWNBy KAREN TALLEY and HEATHER TIMMONSTwo key lawmakers have asked the federal housing agencies to persuadeloan servicers to cut some slack for furloughed government workers who missmortgage payments.   In identical letters sent Dec. 28 to the chairmen of Fannie Mae andFreddie Mac, House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach urged that theworkers be "protected from unintended consequences of the budget impasse."   The same day, Rep. Rick Lazio, chairman of the banking panel's housingsubcommittee, urged Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisnerosto extend forbearance to borrowers whose mortgages are held in Ginnie Maepools.   The lawmakers were responding to the second government shutdown in sixweeks. Tens of thousands of government workers have been left withoutpaychecks because Congress and the Clinton administration are logjammedover the budget.   Observers don't expect the budget impasse to drive up delinquency ratesdramatically. Even so, federal employees run the risk of missing payments,forcing lenders to decide what actions, if any, to take.   Lawmakers "send out similar letters for natural disasters, so I guessthey put this in the same category," said Brian Chappelle, staff vicepresident for the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.   In his letters, Rep. Leach asked Fannie and Freddie - formally theFederal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan MortgageCorp. - to advise companies that collect and process mortgage loan paymentsof options for dealing with delinquent borrowers.   Specifically, he said, the agencies should instruct servicers toconsider borrowers' attitudes toward the debt and the reasons for missedpayments before declaring accounts in default.   John Gibbons, a senior vice president at Freddie Mac, said that when itreceived Rep. Leach's letter it was already notifying servicers that reliefis warranted under existing guidelines.   A spokeswoman said Fannie Mae would decide this week how to proceed withRep. Leach's request. "We are very sympathetic to the situation and willaddress the request," she said.   Representatives from Ginnie Mae - a unit of HUD that is formally knownas the Government National Mortgage Association - could not be reached;they are on furlough as part of the government shutdown.   Lenders, meanwhile, said they have already snapped into action. GECapital Mortgage got hold of the lawmakers' letters on Dec. 28. Itimmediately undertook a case-by-case review of defaults by federalemployees, a spokeswoman said.   Capstead Mortgage Corp. said it is prepared to extend forbearance tocustomers who ask for extra time to make payments, said Bill Ruduff,executive vice president of servicing.   Some banks have begun broader programs to help federal workers throughthin times. United Jersey Bank, for instance, is offering unsecuredpersonal loans to people furloughed from the Social SecurityAdministration.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996GE THROWS IN THE TOWEL ON RETAIL ORIGINATIONSBy JULIANA RATNEROne of the most striking developments on the mortgage scene in 1995 wasthe decision by GE Capital Mortgage Services to stop originatingresidential loans directly to consumers.   For years, the Raleigh, N.C., company's hallmark had been its presencein virtually every aspect of the home loan business - insuring mortgages,servicing them, originating mortgages through correspondent lenders, andmarketing loans directly to the public.   Its retreat in August was seen as an acknowledgement that GE Capital,despite its prowess in wholesale originations, had not grabbed enoughbusiness to be a force in the retail business. In the first half of 1995,retail loans accounted for only 7% of the company's originations, whichtotaled just under $1 billion.   "There are certain lines of business in which a company either has tobecome a major player or leave," said Rolland Johannsen, president ofFurash & Co., a Washington-based consulting firm.   Mr. Johannsen said that, unlike banks, finance companies such as GECapital don't have to worry that customers will leave if they can't choosefrom a wide array of financial services. In short, GE Capital has theluxury of picking the services it offers.   "Because they don't have to consider mortgage originations in terms of acustomer relationship, it becomes a straight decision on how they willallocate capital," Mr. Johannsen said.   To be sure, GE Capital still casts a big shadow in the mortgageindustry. The company continues to originate home loans through brokers andsmaller lenders, and to sell mortgage insurance products. Also, it servicesa portfolio of loans that totaled $110 billion last June 30, second only toNorwest Mortgage.   A spokesman for GE Capital declined to comment for this report.   Industry observers said it's unlikely that many companies will follow GECapital's lead.   "For most companies retail is the appropriate road because they controltheir own destiny in a very cyclical business," said David Lereah, chiefeconomist at the Mortgage Bankers Association of America.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996THRIFTS JUMPED ON FIXED-RATE BANDWAGON IN '95By SNIGDHA PRAKASHSobered by the last refinancing boom, the nation's largest thriftsdecided in 1995 to plunge into the fixed-rate market.   For more than a decade, most thrifts have stuck to making adjustable-rate mortgages to hold in their portfolios -  a strategy aimed at earninginterest income while guarding against swings in market rates.   But last year they decided they couldn't afford to sit out future fixed-rate lending booms, and began to offer 30-year fixed-rate mortgages. As atmortgage banks, the loans were intended for sale to the secondary market.   "We're trying real hard to be competitive in those product lines, and toget the word out to our realtors that they can come to us for things otherthan just (cost-of-funds index) ARMs," said Fredric  J. Forster,president of Home Savings of America, Irwindale, Calif.   Mr. Forster said the thrift, which derives interest income from a $53billion portfolio, wants fee income to bolster its bottom line. Incomederived from servicing mortgages - including those sold to other investors- was seen as a natural fit.   Beyond that, thrifts were keen to retain their market share and keeptheir loan officers busy during periods when falling rates draw consumersto fixed-rate loans. But as 1995 progressed, thrifts continued to lagbehind the overall market in fixed-rate originations.   Sam Lyons, senior vice president at Great Western Bank, Chatsworth,Calif., pointed to the "heart-wrenching discipline" of mortgage banking.Mortgage bankers originate every loan knowing that it has to be sold intothe secondary market, he said.   "It's kind of like salmon swimming upstream - they know where they aregoing and what the goal is," Mr. Lyons said. By contrast, the focus atthrifts is divided between originating loans to hold in portfolio and tosell in the secondary market, making it more difficult to generate largefixed-rate volumes.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AFTER ACQUISITION BINGE, NORWEST SEES MARKETING AS THE WAY TO GROWBy KAREN TALLEY1995 was the year Norwest Mortgage broke into the most exclusive clubin mortgage banking, becoming one of just four companies with a servicingportfolio topping $100 billion.   Acquisitions have fueled most of the Des Moines company's growth,helping it to more than double its servicing assets in two years.   The Norwest Corp. unit plans to continue expanding this year. But now itexpects much of the growth to come from its own marketing efforts.   Norwest Corp.'s chairman, Richard M. Kovacevich, contends that banks cangrow most efficiently by mining their customer bases for salesopportunities.   "The most effective way to gain revenue and profits is to cross-sell tocustomers," he said.   Norwest's focus on internal growth is likely to spread this year. Bigbanking companies that bought mortgage businesses in the merger andacquisition frenzy of the past two years are finishing the job of absorbingthese operations. The next step is to deliver on the cross-marketingpotential.   For Norwest Corp., that means offering credit cards, consumer loans, andprivate banking services to the mortgage unit's 1.2 million customers - andoffering mortgages across equally diverse product lines.   Mr. Kovacevich said the mortgage unit's involvement is key to the cross-selling blitz. Norwest customers - from mutual fund investors to checkingaccount users - often need mortgages, he said.   And mortgage loans are the kinds of profitable products that Norwestneeds to stay ahead of competitors, Mr. Kovacevich said. "The war we are inwill be won on the field of revenue."   Norwest Mortgage's president, Mark Oman, says it will take tremendouscooperation among operating units for referrals to begin flowing. "The keyto success is how well the group works together as a team," he said.   Observers agree. "Cross selling is still in its early stages," said StanRoss, managing partner at E&Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate Group, LosAngeles. "So far there has been limited success."   Much depends on whether banks can reach a lot of prospects withoutsacrificing the personal touch that keeps customers coming back, hecontinued.   "You look at their approach," said Mr. Ross. "Did they use a personalapproach or a mailer? Bankers have to be very proactive in making sure thecustomer understands the service."   Because Norwest has a broad network of mortgage offices, it has a strongshot at making its aspirations a reality, said Moshe A. Orenbuch, bankinganalyst with Bernstein Research.   With its hundreds of mortgage offices, Norwest could create "anationwide financial services network" that offers a range of retailproducts, Mr. Orenbuch said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996PNC UNIT WAS A LEADER AMONG LENDERS SEEKING NEW WAYS TO SELL WARESBy KAREN TALLEYFinding new ways to deliver an old product - the mortgage loan - was abig theme in 1995, and perhaps no company exemplified it better than PNCMortgage.   In February, the PNC Bank Corp. unit teamed with Coldwell Banker Corp.in a joint venture to market mortgages directly to homebuyers in realestate agents' offices. The move gives PNC access to customers in 2,400Coldwell Banker offices nationwide.   Seven months later, PNC cut its ties with the 200 outside brokers thathad formed the backbone of its wholesale program, citing too much time andexpense in return for too little profit.   Both strategies are too new to have proved their worth. But they typifythe creative approaches mortgage lenders are experimenting with these days.   PNC isn't alone in testing new techniques. In September, for example,Wells Fargo & Co. stopped extending mortgage loans to its customers,handing this task off to Norwest Corp.'s mortgage unit.   Changes like these don't always proceed smoothly. For PNC, the decisionto revamp distribution channels was swiftly followed by a shake-up in itsexecutive ranks. In November, the company unexpectedly promoted itspresident, Saiyid Naqvi, to chief executive, replacing Walter C. Klein Jr.   PNC said Mr. Klein resigned to pursue other opportunities. But industryobservers said he was eased out after PNC Bancorp decided its mortgagegroup didn't need two top executives.   Mr. Naqvi clearly has high hopes for the Coldwell Banker venture, dubbedHome Mortgage Network. In an interview last year, he said he expects theventure to originate about $3 billion of loans annually. PNC Mortgage'soriginations totaled $2.3 billion in the first six months of 1995.   The decision to scrap the wholesaling effort, meanwhile, got positivereviews from observers.   PNC is better off, because margins are "very thin" on the wholesaleside, said James M. Schutz, senior bank analyst at Chicago Corp. Thecompany, he added, already "has a great distribution network" through itsown loan officers and PNC bank branches.   Industry observers agree that independent brokers are harder to keeptabs on than in-house sales representatives. Brokers may also lack the kindof loyalty that would compel them to present very good credits to theirwholesalers, some observers said.   "It's incumbent upon brokers not to foul the system up by throwing inbad-quality loans," said Walter W. Vail, executive vice president atGraystone Mortgage Corp., Boston.   Still, he said, PNC's decision to drop its broker network probably won'tbe widely followed.   "For every one that drops out another five get in the wholesalebusiness," Mr. Vail said. "The only way larger institutions will get tosmaller guys in communities is through brokers."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996HIGHLIGHTS OF 1995January   Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac post record 1994 profits, despite a sharpdrop in residential lending.   February   PNC Mortgage unveils plan to offer mortgages through 2,400 ColdwellBanker realty offices.   March   NationsBank buys a $25 billion servicing portfolio from KeyCorp, thebiggest mortgage deal to close in 1995.   Prudential's residential mortgage unit becomes the largest put on theblock to date.   April   Citicorp slashes 100 jobs in mortgage securities, reflecting sluggishvolume on Wall Street.   Spring   Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae introduce automated underwriting systems,drawing mixed reviews from lenders.   June   Countrywide links with Intel Corp. to connect homebuyers and loanofficers via video conferences.   September   Underscoring how tough the terrain is for lenders, once-mighty LomasFinancial puts itself on the auction block.   Serious mortgage delinquencies take their biggest jump in nine years.   November   Freddie Mac raises the maximum size of loans it will buy to $207,000.Fannie Mae keeps its limit at $203,150.   November/December   The budget impasse forces lenders to struggle through two furloughs offederal workers who process their paperwork.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NASD PROPOSAL ON BROKER-DEALERS IS WELL RECEIVEDBy WILLIAM PLASENCIAAfter three months of fine-tuning, the National Association ofSecurities Dealers has issued its final proposal to create a new frameworkfor bank-affiliated broker-dealers.   The proposal now goes to the Securities and Exchange Commission forfurther review. Final approval is expected by midyear, industry lawyerssaid.   "These rules are intended to eliminate any confusion between uninsuredsecurities products of broker-dealers and insured deposit products offinancial institutions," said John E. Pinto, executive vice president ofregulation at the NASD. The association, based in Washington, setsprofessional standards for the brokerage industry.   The plan contained few surprises, apart from its size. It came in at1,235 pages.   "I think the meat of it will be in the first 65 pages," said Sarah A.Miller, senior government relations counsel for the American BankersAssociation. She said the NASD, which took its first crack at the rule inNovember 1994, had addressed most of the banking industry's concerns.   The initial draft drew bankers' wrath, with many saying it conflictedwith or duplicated existing rules of bank regulators.   Mr. Pinto said the association had "honestly taken into account thecomments made by our members. We've tried to insure consistency with theguidelines that have already been issued by bank regulators."   The proposal, issued last Thursday, did leave intact certain provisionsthat banks had lobbied hard to change.   For example, the NASD kept a provision that prohibits brokerages fromdirectly compensating bank employees for referrals. And the agency stillrequires that bank customers give written permission before informationabout their finances can be shared with brokers.   Under the proposal, banks would be able to share customers' names,addresses, and telephone numbers, as well as credit reports, withaffiliated brokerages. Bankers had argued that such information sharing iscrucial to their cross-marketing efforts.   Ms. Miller said the NASD still needs to clarify some points. Forinstance, the proposal limits investment sales in areas "where retaildeposits are taken," but does not explain exactly what this means, shesaid.   But for the most part, bank brokerage executives could find little tocomplain about.   "It almost appears that everything we took exception to was stricken,"said Joel Calvo, president of PNC Brokerage Corp., Pittsburgh.   For instance, Mr. Calvo said he was pleased that the NASD dropped arequirement for brokers to give a lengthy explanation of how SecuritiesInvestor Protection Corp. insurance works.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COMMENT: A LIFE INSURANCE TIME BOMB IN TRUST - AND HOW TO DEFUSE ITBy TED S. BERNSTEINTrust departments are confronting substantial liability associated withthe life insurance policies held by trusts under their management.   However, few banks recognize the potential liability they face. Thestakes are huge, with a potential price tag of tens or even hundreds ofmillions of dollars.   At issue is the estimated $1 trillion in face value of life insurancepolicies held by irrevocable trusts.   Most of these policies were purchased to generate funds to satisfyfederal estate tax liabilities. However, insufficient management of thepolicies and today's volatile insurance and financial markets have put thevalue of many policies at risk.   In addition, trust departments are solely responsible for managingassets in the best interests of the trust and its beneficiaries. If thepolicies under a trust department's control fall short, it will bedifficult for banks and trusts to escape liability when beneficiariescontend that insurance policies were managed inefficiently.   Already, Crown Life Insurance Co. and New York Life Insurance have paid$50 million and $65 million respectively to settle lawsuits claimingvanishing premium fraud. In the suits, disgruntled policyholders contendedthat the insurers had promised that premium payments would end after aspecific period. But when policies failed to perform as expected, insurersdemanded additional premiums to keep policies in force. These consumerissues undoubtedly will spill over into trust management, and banks couldbe the focus of policyholders' wrath.   It is important to understand that trust officers at most banks andtrusts lack the training to review or manage life insurance policies. Inaddition, over the past 15 years the life insurance industry has introduceda variety of products that make purchase decisions more complex.   Many trust officers try to minimize their liability by holding insurancepolicies from carriers with excellent credit ratings. However, it's justnot that simple. The lawsuits being filed today are not claiming damagesdue to carrier failures; the basis for these lawsuits is policyperformance.   Three scenarios most likely to expose banks and trusts to liabilityinclude:   *Failing to analyze the difference between vanishing premiums and levelpremiums.   *Holding inappropriate or obsolete life insurance policies.   *Failing to purchase enough life insurance for the premiums paid.   Beneficiaries and their attorneys could evaluate these issues todetermine whether a policy has performed in accordance with its objectives.   One situation commonly overlooked by trust departments is adverse healthratings applied when a policy was first issued.   Assume that in 1988 an overweight nonsmoking male purchased a $5million, 15-year level term policy owned by an irrevocable trust. Becausehe was overweight, the annual premium payment of $15,000 was 33% higherthan the standard rate.   Now, seven years later, the insured - no longer overweight - would pay$10,000 annually for the same death benefit. Or he could maintain hispremium at $15,000 but purchase $1.75 million in additional coverage.   When the insured dies and the trust begins distributing its funds, thebeneficiaries review the policy and discover that the trust could havepurchased $1.75 million in additional life insurance without increasingpremiums. They decide to sue the bank or trust for mismanagement.   However, the beneficiaries do not seek $5,000 - the difference in annualpremiums. They seek $1.75 million in damages - the difference in deathbenefit.   Considering that some banks manage as many as 4,000 trusts, thepotential liability is staggering. This example represents one of the manypotential issues banks and trusts confront.   However, today's prudent-investor laws provide these institutions withthe ability to limit their exposure and liability - particularly if theyobtain the necessary expertise to review the policies of each trust.   Banks and trusts can significantly reduce their exposure to liabilitythrough several steps.   Establish corporate policy. Banks should determine whether to absorb thecost of a policy review or pass the cost along to the trust. And if therisk associated with life insurance policies is too great to manage, theyshould get out of the irrevocable trust business.   Determine how often policies will be reviewed. Most banks reviewpolicies at least every two years.   Select an experienced insurance consultant or firm to assess the lifeinsurance policies held by trusts. To keep the consultant's recommendationsimpartial, banks and trusts should prohibit consultants from selling lifeinsurance policies to the trusts they evaluate.   Demand more service from insurance companies. Have them provide theratings they receive from every service that evaluates them. Also, ask forinformation about the junk bonds and troubled real estate held in thecompany's portfolio as a percentage of its net worth.   Policy reviews can generate significant client good will. By conductingthe reviews, banks and trusts help policyholders fully understand theirspecific policies, often for the first time.   The reviews also allow trust departments to demonstrate their activemanagement of trust assets. Finally, reviews help banks and trusts reducetheir exposure to liability.   It's a "win-win" situation for all parties involved.   Mr. Bernstein is president of Trustee Consulting Corp., a Chicago-basedfirm that advises on personal trust issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996TRUST RULES MAY BE EASED FOR MULTISTATE NATIONAL BANKSBy KATHARINE FRASERNational banks with trust departments operating in several states maysoon get a break on the cost of doing business.   The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has issued a proposal thatwould allow banks to account for all trust operations at their headquartersrather than having to maintain separate books in each state they dobusiness in.   Trust bankers see the OCC proposal - outlined in a Dec. 21 letter - as awelcome reprieve. Currently, national banks with trust operations in two ormore states must maintain staffs in each state that do nothing but preparefor state examinations.   "It's a lot easier to run a business under a single regulatory roof,"said David J. Kundert, chairman and chief executive officer of  Banc OneCorp.'s investment management and trust group.   Mr. Kundert believes that a relaxation of regulatory demands could helpBanc One compete with nonbank investment managers that do not have toadhere to the same regulations as national banks.   "You need to level the playing field to compete with those kind offirms," Mr. Kundert said.   First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, is also supportive of the proposal,according to a bank spokeswoman.   The OCC proposal, if enacted, would represent the first major revisionof the agency's 32-year-old rule defining how fiduciary businesses can beconducted by national banks whose trust businesses are also subject tostate regulations. The proposal comes on the heels of an OCC interpretiveletter issued on Dec. 8 that allows national banks to offer trust servicesoutside their home states without having to set up new branches.   "Much about the national banks fiduciary business has changed since(1963) including ... the structures and operational methods that banks useto deliver those services," reads the OCC notice.   While the OCC proposal would allow for accounting and businessadministration to be streamlined, that does not mean that banks could use acookie cutter to deliver trust services to clients in different states.   The agency writes that case-by-case determinations would be made whetheror not state laws regarding the conduct of trust relationships can bepreempted by federal oversight.   "They have clearly opened the door to banks doing their administrationon a uniform basis out of the headquarters state," said John P.C. Duncan, apartner at Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue, which counsels banks on interstateissues.   But, Mr. Duncan observes that the OCC is making a distinction betweenstreamlining bean-counts and implementing any standardized investmentpolicies.   All 50 states have different "prudent investor" rules that govern whattypes of investments are acceptable and how they should be disclosed.   The OCC is inviting comment on how to minimize the differences amonginvestment laws so national banks can operate on a uniform basis.   "We're dealing in a national environment now, and it's important thatbanks and customers both know what law applies," Mr. Duncan said.   State consumer interests and regulators have until Feb. 20 to submitcomments to the OCC.   In the meantime, the affected banks are offering their support to theproposed regulation.   Banc One is a classic example of a banking company that stands to gainmuch from this OCC proposal. The institution would like to whittle down itsfar-flung banking operations to a single charter someday.   Banc One has 60 affiliate banks in 11 states, compared with 88 threeyears ago. In each state, there are three or four separately charteredbusiness units that all have to be accounted for.   Other trust executives at banks with similar situations would welcomeany opportunity to centralize the business.   "The current approach is encumbered by a variety of differentregulations," said Daniel E. Klimas, KeyCorp's executive vice president forprivate banking and investing. "This new proposal may offer us a moreeconomical way of offering those services," he added.   Though Mr. Klimas said he is supportive of the OCC proposal, he expectsan onslaught of litigation from state regulators before anything isresolved.   Like Banc One, KeyCorp sees a clear benefit to consolidating thereporting of its segmented trust departments.   "We are supportive of anything that allows us to look at ourselves andrun a business on a national basis instead of several independently," Mr.Klimas said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996HOPES FOR WIDER POWERS NOW PINNED ON COURTS, REGULATORS-NOTCONGRESSBy JUSTIN FOXWhen 1995 began, a new Republican majority on Capitol Hill seemedpoised to release banks from the shackles that had kept them a step or twobehind the rest of the financial services industry.   No such luck.   Instead, the good news for bankers came from the courts and theregulators. The Supreme Court affirmed banks' right to sell annuities. TheFederal Deposit Insurance Corp. cut premium rates to all-time lows. All thebanking regulatory agencies trumpeted regulation-cutting reforms.   The only major banking legislation Congress approved was a SavingsAssociation Insurance Fund rescue that will - if President Clinton signs it- cost banks and thrifts more than $20 billion.   Should the industry look to Congress for answers in 1996? Probably not.   Bank lobbyists say there is no predicting what lawmakers might do,particularly if plans to follow the thrift fund fix with a merger of thebank and thrift charters gain momentum.   But the stalemate persists in the House of Representatives betweensupporters of broader bank powers and insurance agents who want to protecttheir turf. What's more, with elections looming, Congress is likely toeffectively shut down by summer.   The courts and banking agencies, meanwhile, will keep on judging andregulating. And they could take actions this year that have a big impact onthe business of banking.   First up is the Supreme Court, which on Jan. 16 will hear oral argumentsin Barnett v. Gallagher, the attempt by Barnett Banks Inc. to overturnFlorida laws that keep it from selling insurance.   Last January, the court ruled in banks' favor in a case challengingNorth Carolina-based NationsBank's right to sell annuities, and many in theindustry expect a similarly favorable Barnett decision before midyear.   Bank lawyers think the court also will decide to hear another importantbanking case - dealing with credit card issuers' right to charge late feesto out-of-state customers.   A win in the Barnett case would let banks use current federal law tolaunch insurance marketing efforts from branches in towns with fewer than5,000 people.   It also would likely embolden Comptroller of the Currency Eugene A.Ludwig. The comptroller laid off proposals to expand bank powers last yearafter receiving a series of stinging letters on insurance and other issuesfrom House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach.   If the Supreme Court acts and Congress does not, the door will be openedfor Mr. Ludwig to revive his plans to let bank subsidiaries move into linesof business now generally off-limits to banks.   But if the Supreme Court hands banks a victory, insurance agents are notlikely to sit idly by. "It could whip them into a frenzy," said KennethGuenther, executive vice president of the Independent Bankers Associationof America.   All this points to rough sailing for Rep. Leach's bid to break down someof the Glass-Steagall Act barriers that keep commercial banks out of thesecurities business. In September, insurance agents' pressure led Houseleaders to combine Rep. Leach's bill with a regulatory relief measure and amoratorium on the Comptroller's ability to grant banks new insurancepowers, making for a legislative stew unpalatable to most banking groups.   Rep. Leach will keep fighting for passage of his bill, Mr. Guenthersaid, but others believe it is more likely that regulatory relief - alongthe lines of the bill approved in September by the Senate BankingCommittee, which doesn't touch the controversial Community Reinvestment Act- will be decoupled from Glass-Steagall and enacted on its own.   Then there's the charter merger. In return for being forced to chip inalmost $600 million a year for 22 years to help pay the interest on bondsfrom the savings and loan bailout, commercial banks have clamored for anend to the federal thrift charter.   Thrifts now possess insurance, affiliation, and branching powers thatbanks don't, and some in the industry see the charter merger as a back-doorway to improve the bank charter. But any major changes would run up againstthe same forces that have halted Glass-Steagall reform, while an attempt toforce savings institutions into the existing bank charter would be fiercelyopposed by many thrifts.   Thrifts also want to make sure the industry isn't forced to pay billionsin back taxes on their so-called bad-debt deductions as part of a chartermerger - although agreements by House and Senate tax writers late last yearput such fears largely to rest.   "We do not want to see our people hurt because of this," said RandallMcFarlane, director of governmental relations for America's CommunityBankers, the leading thrift trade group.   Thus, while Sen. Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, chairman of the BankingCommittee, has promised action on the charter merger by Easter, chances aregood that the issue won't be resolved this year.   More likely to be dealt with in 1996 is a Federal Home Loan Bank Systemmodernization bill, which foundered in 1995 because of disputes overdividing the 12 Home Loan Banks' payments on thrift bailout bonds.   If Glass-Steagall reform indeed goes nowhere in 1996, bank groups planto start pushing regulatory buttons - urging the Federal Reserve Board tolet bank holding companies' section 20 subsidiaries get more of theirincome from securities activities that banks themselves cannot engage in.   Currently, such business - which includes underwriting municipal bonds,dealing in consumer receivables, and underwriting corporate debt and equity- can't provide more than 10% of the income of a bank holding companysubsidiary. Bank lawyers say the Fed has the legal leeway to raise thatlimit as high as 49%.   The Fed already has a proposal in the works to make the limit moreflexible. In a December speech, Fed governor Susan M. Phillips said theboard definitely will consider raising the limit if Congress fails to act.   The Fed and the other banking agencies are also in the midst ofcampaigns to rewrite their rules to reduce confusion and regulatory burden,and make the examination process more "banker-friendly."   The Comptroller's office has been most aggressive, mixing regulatoryrelief with new powers for national banks. James D. McLaughlin, director ofagency relations for the American Bankers Association, said he doesn'texpect other regulators to go that far, but does see real reductions inpaperwork and other hassles on the horizon for bankers.   The agencies also promised that the new community reinvestment rulesthey approved in April will make life easier for banks and thrifts. Examsunder the new rules start this month, giving banks a chance to judgewhether their regulators were right.   Also sure to show up in 1996 exams - particularly those by the FederalReserve and the Comptroller's office - is an increased emphasis on riskmanagement, something regulators talked about often in 1995.   Then there are the deposit insurance premiums. Throughout 1995, bankspushed the FDIC to cut them further and faster as the once-depleted BankInsurance Fund returned to health. But the industry had nothing more tocomplain about after Nov. 14, when the FDIC cut most banks' premiums to thelegal minimum of $2,000 a year.   In 1996, bank premiums can't go down any more. In fact, they will almostcertainly go up about 2 basis points as part of the thrift fund rescue.   As of last week, however, the budget reconciliation bill that includesthe thrift fund plan was still caught in the tug-of-war between PresidentClinton and Congress.   The savings fund proposal, which would let the FDIC drop thrifts'premiums to bank levels, is not the subject of any tension between thePresident and Congress. But if the budget legislation were to collapsecompletely and the thrift fund legislation were considered separately, 1996would witness a Capitol Hill battle royal between thrift executives whowant their fund fixed and bankers who don't want to help pay for it, Mr.Guenther said.   No one is predicting that this is will happen. But then again, as 1995showed, predictions can be wrong.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996NATIONSBANK WANTS CLASS ACTION DENIED IN FAIR-LENDING LAWSUITBy JARET SEIBERGTrying to limit its potential liability, NationsBank Corp. asked afederal judge last week to deny class-action status for a pendingfair-lending lawsuit.   The bank charged the Washington Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights andUrban Affairs with missing the deadline to seek class-action certification.   "By failing to move for class certification by Dec. 20, 1995, which was90 days from the date on which the class complaint was filed, plaintiffsdirectly violated (the) local rule," the bank said in Dec. 26 memorandumfiled with the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia."Accordingly, plaintiffs' class-action allegations should be stricken intheir entirety."   John Relman, director of the fair-housing project at the WashingtonLawyers Committee, said the group hasn't missed the deadline. He declinedto elaborate, saying he will explain the group's position in a future courtfiling.   Class-action status is crucial to the lawyers committee's case, whichalleges that NationsBank discriminated against borrowers. The bank wouldhave much more to lose fighting a class action in court.   Without class status, the case involves only 13 plaintiffs and nine loanapplications; even if NationsBank lost, the damage award would be limited.But with class-action status, the lawyer's committee could seekcompensation for all similarly affected consumers. That could raise thebank's tab dramatically.   The bank also argued that the lawyers committee has had since itsDecember 1994 press conference announcing its fair-lending initiative tosearch for clients. It said the group has employed a toll-free number,meetings with community groups, and a "carefully orchestrated" mediacampaign.   Still, NationsBank noted that just 11 plaintiffs joined the lawsuit,which was filed Sept. 21. Two months of publicity persuaded only one moreperson to join the case, NationsBank told the court.   "If the plaintiffs believe they have meritorious individual claims, theyshould be required to litigate them as such," the bank said. "NationsBankshould be subjected to no further prejudicial adverse publicity tied tograndiose promises of class-action litigation that the plaintiffs' counselhave been unable to fulfill."   NationsBank said this is not the first time the lawyers committee failedto file its papers on time. It said in the memorandum that a federal judge"sternly admonished" the group for failing to file a timely class actionrequest in a 1982 employment discrimination case.   According to the memorandum, the judge allowed the committee to file therequest late. But he warned them not to let it happen again.   "Plaintiffs chose to bring this as a class action and it is time forthem to fish or cut bait," the judge said.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996MUSICAL CHAIRS AT OCC; NEW AIDE FOR BEREUTER, HEAVYWEIGHTS AT N.Y. FEDMark P. Jacobsen was named senior adviser to Comptroller of theCurrency Eugene A. Ludwig last week. After joining the agency in January1994, Mr. Jacobsen was special assistant to the chief counsel. Before thathe hadbeen an associate with the law firm of Covington & Burling, where Mr.Ludwig was a partner.   Mr. Jacobsen replaces Ballard Gilmore, who is now director of licensingoperations in the agency's bank organization department.   Meanwhile, John Hartzell has left his post as deputy comptroller forinternational banking for, of all things, an international bank.   Mr. Hartzell, who left last month, will soon join the New York office ofDresdner Bank, which is based in Frankfurt. His new title will be directorof economic and group strategy. The Comptroller's office has not chosen areplacement.                              ***   Rep. Doug Bereuter, R-Neb., has hired Alan Brubaker as his new bankingaide. Mr. Brubaker, 28, most recently worked as a loan officer with aMaryland mortgage company, but has Capitol Hill experience. From 1989 to1991 he was a staff member with the House Republican Conference.   Rep. Bereuter is sponsor of the House's regulatory-relief bill, whichwould cut bank paperwork and red tape. The legislation is stalled becauseof banks' opposition to restrictions on their insurance powers.   Mr. Brubaker replaces Joe Pigg, who left in October to be a Washingtonlobbyist for New York City.                              ***   Investment banker John C. Whitehead, insurance executive Thomas W.Jones, and balanced-budget crusader Peter G. Peterson have been named tothe board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.   Mr. Whitehead, a former State Department deputy secretary and former co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Co., now heads AEA Investors Inc. He will bechairman of the New York Fed board.   Tapped as deputy chairman was Mr. Jones, who is vice chairman,president, and chief operating officer of Teachers Insurance and AnnuityAssociation-College Retirement Equities Fund.   Mr. Peterson is a former secretary of commerce and former CEO of LehmanBrothers, Kuhn, Loeb Inc. He now heads the Blackstone Group, an investmentfirm, but is perhaps best known for founding the Concord Coalition, anonprofit group pushing for a balanced federal budget.   The Federal Reserve Board appointed the three men; the other six membersof the New York Fed board are elected by Fed member banks.                              ***   Gail L. Patelunas is the new acting director of the division ofresolutions at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. She takes the placevacated by Robert H. Hartheimer, who resigned as of Dec. 31 to join theAlexandria, Va., investment banking firm of Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &Co.   Since 1994, Ms. Patelunas has been associate director of the division,which is responsible for the resolution of failing FDIC-insured banks andthrifts. Before that she was assistant director of resolutions, and beforejoining the FDIC in 1990 she worked at the Federal Reserve Board, Kidder,Peabody & Co., and KPMG Peat Marwick.                              ***   Lynn Reaser is the new chairman of the American Bankers Association'seconomic advisory committee. She replaces Alan Gayle who just completed atwo-year term.   Ms. Reaser is senior vice president and chief economist at FirstInterstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.   In her ABA post she will oversee the committee's forecasts of economicindicators and national and regional economic issues. The panel's nextsemiannual economic forecast and monetary policy recommendation will beannounced Jan. 24.   The committee's new vice chairman is Joel L. Naroff, chief economist atFirst Fidelity Bancorp. in Philadelphia.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996COMPANY INDEX[TABLE]   A   AEA Investors, 2   America's Community Bankers, 1   American Bankers Assn, 1,2,15   American Express, 17   B   Banc One, 14   Bank of Boston, 10   Blackstone Group, 2   Boatmen's, 1   Broadway & Seymour, 18   C   Capstead, 13   Chicago Corp, 12   Coldwell Banker, 12   Colorado Bankers Assn, 7   Concord EFS, 18   Continuum, 18   Countrywide Credit Industries, 12   Credit Union National Assn, 7   D   Deluxe Corp, 18   Direct Marketing Assn, 1   DM Group, 1   Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette, 1   Dresdner, 2   E   E&Y Kenneth Leventhal Real Estate, 12   F   Fair Isaac, 18   Farmers & Merchants (NE), 10   Federal Home Loan Mortgage, 13   Federal National Mortgage Assn, 13   Fifth Third, 17   Financial Institutions Consulting, 6   First Bank System, 6,14   First Data, 16   First Fidelity, 2   First Interstate, 2,6   First National (New England), 10   First Technology Federal CU, 7   G   Gates Credit Union (CO), 7   GE Capital, 13   General Electric, 12,13   General Motors Acceptance, 1   Gensar Holdings, 16   George K Baum & Co, 18   Glendale Federal, 6   Graystone Mortgage, 12   Great Western, 13   H   Hogan Systems, 18   Home Savings, 13   Hovde Financial, 6   I   Independent Bankers Assn of America, 1   J   Jack Henry & Associates, 18   Jones Day Reavis & Pogue, 14   M   Massachusetts Bankers Assn, 10   Massachusetts Independent Bankers Assn, 10   MasterCard, 17   Merrill Lynch, 6   Monness Crespi & Hardt, 6   Mortgage Bankers Assn, 13   N   Natl Assn of Securities Dealers, 15   Natl City, 16   NationsBank, 2   Norwest, 12,13   O   Olympic Financial, 1   P   PaineWebber, 6   Patelco CU, 7   Pentagon Federal CU, 7   PNC, 12   Polk, 1   Prudential, 12   R   RCSB Finanical, 1   Rodman & Renshaw, 1   Royal Bank of Canada, 24   S   Signature Group, 1   State Bank of Blomkest (MN), 10   Sulphur Springs State (TX), 10   Sumner National, 17   T   TIAA-CREF, 2   Trustee Consulting, 14   U   U S Central CU, 7   United Jersey, 13   V   Value Rent a Car, 17   W   Wells Fargo, 6   Western Corporate Federal CU, 7===Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996ROYAL BANK OF CANADA TRIMS U.S. OPERATIONS TO ZERO IN ON PROFITSBy DANIEL DUNAIEFLess is more for the U.S. businesses of Canada's biggest bank,  RoyalBank of Canada.   In the last three years, U.S. senior vice president and general managerDavid L. Robertson has reduced the bank's corporate client base to about685 from 1,500.   At the same time, he has reduced the bank's staff to 217 from 415, evenas the bank has added an asset-backed securities business, a syndicationdistribution business, and a structured finance team.   And Mr. Robertson is not done. He plans to reduce the number ofcorporate clients even further in 1996, to 600, focusing on multinationalcompanies that present the greatest opportunities for the bank.   In conjunction with its investment banking affiliate DominionSecurities, Royal Bank has been building its expertise in various capitalmarkets arenas, hoping to develop a critical mass of business to justifydoing business with each customer.   "We want to be able to deliver at least three or four main products toeach of our clients," said the 53-year-old Mr. Robertson.   The bank also hopes to find companies that have subsidiaries in Canada,where it can provide a branch network and services ranging from payroll tocash management.   The strategy has worked so far, with fewer customers accounting for morerevenues.   Mr. Robertson estimated that revenues from U.S.-based banking hadreached 10% to 12% of gross revenues, up from about 8% three years ago whenhe took over the U.S. operations.   Some of that increased profitability can be attributed to  growth inspecific business lines.   "We've more than trebled the amount of foreign exchange and capitalmarkets derivatives that we deliver to the remaining clients," said Mr.Robertson.   The key products Royal Bank is looking to deliver include trade finance,syndicated loans and standby lines of credit, foreign exchange, capitalmarkets derivatives, and equity derivatives.   To that end, Dominion Securities last year added 20 former KidderPeabody equity derivatives traders to its staff.   Additionally, this fall the bank raised its profile among U.S. investorsby listing its stock on the New York Stock Exchange.   Mr. Robertson said the listing was "a first step," as the bank continuesto view the United States as an area for expansion in such areas as retailbanking, fund management, and regional investment banking.   While the New York Stock Exchange listing presents an opportunity for anacquisition, it's not something the bank considers practical right now."You see what everyone wants to pay to buy banks these days?" Mr. Robertsonasked.   Down the road, Mr. Robertson said, the United States presents an idealarea for expansion, especially as laws like the Depression-era Glass-Steagall Act and the Bank Holding Company Act change.   "If you look at North America and at the North American Free TradeAgreement, (a strategic acquisition) would be a natural expansion for us,"he said.   The Royal Bank executive said that a focused strategy is the rightapproach in a foreign marketplace.   Indeed, Mr. Robertson, who has been with the bank for 36 years, has donethree stints outside Canada, including one in London, and articulated theneed for targeted competition.   "You can't compete with Natwest or Barclays on the ground in England andreally make any money," said Mr. Robertson. "When you're outside thecountry, you have to try to deliver certain things you can do profitably."   The Royal Bank favors profitability over size.   With about a $6 billion-asset base in the United States, the bank hasthe smallest amount of American assets among Canadian banks.   "We're not chasing assets," said Mr. Robertson. "We concentrate onproducts, and if it results in assets, that's fine."Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996CONSUMER DELINQUENCY SPURRING SHORT SALESBy JAMES C. ALLEN and STEPHEN KLEEGESharp divisions are developing on Wall Street over the recent upticksin consumer loan delinquencies.   Short-sellers are betting on further damage to consumer financecompanies, while some stock analysts are touting buying opportunities inthe stocks.   A case in point is Olympic Financial Ltd., a Minneapolis-based autolender that won a "buy" affirmation from Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette lastweek - after the short interest in its shares had soared 65% in a month.   The skepticism about consumer lenders helped push up short interest inbank-related shares traded on the National Association of SecuritiesDealers' system by 9.5% in the month ended Dec. 15. The rise in bank shortinterest came amid a general decline in short interest in stocks traded onthe over-the-counter system. (See tables on pages 22 and 24.)   Short interest is the outstanding volume of shares sold short - that is,borrowed and promptly sold. Short-sellers are betting that the stock pricewill fall, so their short positions can be covered profitably with cheapershares.   Earlier, the New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchangereported a slight decline in bank-related short interest. The basket ofbank stocks traded on the Nasdaq includes numerous small, retail-orientedbanks and thrifts that could be seen as vulnerable to rising delinquencies.   Short interest in Olympic Financial - which provides auto finance mostlyto "prime," or creditworthy, consumers - rose by nearly 1.8 million shares,to more than 4.6 million shares. It was the largest short position in thebank-related group.   RCSB Financial, a Rochester, N.Y., thrift holding company, had thelargest short position relative to its daily trading volume. Its shortposition of 2.3 million shares represents 21.1 days of average trading.   RCSB had the fourth-largest short position in total among the Nasdaqbank-related issues, behind Olympic and Boatmen's Bancshares, the St. Louisbased regional bank, with 2.7 million shares sold short.   The second-biggest increase was in the Money Store, the well-known homeequity lender. The Money Store's short position increased by 848,852 sharesto 1.5 million shares - the 10th-largest total.   Olympic Financial's shares were trading at $16 last week, off from morethan $30 in September. Short-sellers apparently believe Olympic could falleven further because of what analyst Andrew Jeffrey of Rodman & Renshawcalls its "loss deferral strategy."   "I think the assumptions they have used are unrealistic, given the typeof paper they are buying," said Mr. Jeffrey, who specializes in companiesthat make auto loans to less creditworthy consumers.   Olympic's chairman and chief executive Jeffrey Mack insists thecompany's loss assumptions are based on historical performance: Loan lossesare currently running at an annualized rate of 65 to 75 basis points, or130 basis points to 140 basis points over the average two-year life of aloan, he said.   He said the company is setting aside nearly 172 basis points to coverany variance that economic swings cause for the portfolio.   "On top of that, we have set up what we call general reserves, which areother allocated reserves in the millions of dollars, to add furtherprotection," he said.   But that is not enough, Mr. Jeffrey said. He said General MotorsAcceptance Corp., also a prime lender, has experienced cumulative losses of200 basis points during previous economic downturns.   Another disconcerting factor for Mr. Jeffrey is the manner in whichOlympic disposes of its repossessed automobiles. Instead of auctioning theautos as its competitors do, Olympic puts the cars on a used-car lot andsells them on consignment, he said.   By doing so, he said the company is increasing its future losses becauseit is making greater concessions in order to get the asset sold.   But some observers said the pessimists are misguided.   Thomas Brown, a banking analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, saidthat short-sellers tend to be paranoid and that they are "wrong in assumingthis is a giant conspiracy."   The rating agencies, third-party guarantors, and Olympic's accountantshave all signed off on the company's assumptions regarding such things asprepayment speeds and loan-loss reserves, Mr. Brown said.   "In my experience it's typical of the way short-sellers have tried tojump on financial stocks," he said. "It makes a good story until youexamine it."   Mr. Brown said even if losses exceed the level of reserves the companyhas set aside, it is unlikely that shareholders will see a significantreduction in current earnings to cover any losses.   If he's right, a lot of short-sellers will be licking their wounds nextyear.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996STOCK OF SYSTEMS, PROCESSING FIRMS JUMPED 34% IN '96By BRIAN TRACEYLike in the rest of the U.S. equities market, 1995 was a terrific yearfor bank technology stocks.   The publicly traded financial systems and processing-services firmstracked by American Banker saw their stock prices rise an average of 34%last year.   That hefty increase was statistically in line with the Standard & Poor'sindex of 500 stocks and the Dow Jones industrial average, which both roseby about one-third in 1995.   But what was even more interesting was that only 6 of the 30 listedfinancial systems stocks lost value over the 12-month period, while 13outperformed the average gain. The number of advancing stocks far exceeded1994 performance levels, when just 13 out of 28 firms experienced gains.   Wall Street analysts said the bull market in 1995 was led mainly by thetechnology sector, as more consumers and companies sought to leverage thelatest advances in computer and telecommunications systems.   Banks and their technology vendors seem to be at the nexus of thistrend, observers said. Financial institutions increasingly see technologyas vital to their future competitive positioning, as well as providing themeans to link up with their most profitable customers.   Payment systems and information processing firms are "the growth stocksof the next century," said Richard K. Weingarten, an analyst at MontgomerySecurities in San Francisco. "They're the new Cokes and Pepsis andGillettes of the world."   Like 1994, payment services and financial application software companiesoffered the best returns on investment. Leading the pack was bank softwaredeveloper Jack Henry & Associates, which saw its stock appreciate awhopping 156% in 1995.   Kevin J. Dyches, an analyst with George K. Baum & Co. in Kansas City,said Jack Henry's big gain was mainly attributable to the company's Juneacquisition of the community banking software business of Broadway &Seymour Inc.   "Through that acquisition, Jack Henry increased their customer base by33%," Mr. Dyches said. "At that time, their market value was about $150million, and they bought a company that was one-third their size for $12million." He also noted that the acquisition was profitable in the firstquarter after Monett, Mo.-based Jack Henry acquired the business.   Mr. Dyches added that Jack Henry was generating internal revenue growththrough sales of its Silverlake core accounting system, designed formidsize banks with between $100 million and $10 billion in assets.   The second-biggest percentage gain among financial systems firms wasConcord EFS Inc., a provider of payments systems services to retailers.Then Memphis-based firm's stock rose 146% during 1995.   Two years ago, Concord's stock dipped after some weak-performingquarters, but since then "they've gained back the confidence of themarket," Mr. Weingarten said. "They had the strongest internal growth ofany company in the payment services group."   He added that Concord's specialty is provident credit and debit point ofsale systems to supermarkets, "which is the fastest growing part of thepayments processing business."   Hogan Systems Inc., another bank software firm, gave its stockholders atidy profit for the year: its common stock rose 110%. After months ofspeculation, Dallas-based Hogan agreed last month to be acquired byContinuum Co., an Austin, Tex.-based developer of systems for the insuranceindustry, in stock swap currently valued at about $200 million.   It's also interesting to note that two of the best-performing stocks in1994, Charlotte, N.C.-based Broadway & Seymour and San Rafael, Calif.-basedFair, Isaac & Co. lost ground in 1995.   The common stock value of Fair, Isaac, a developer of credit scoringsystems, dropped 9%. for the year.   Broadway & Seymour, after peaking at $31 a share last summer, hasskidded back to about $16 a share after the company announced it would takea fourth-quarter restructuring charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996DELUXE WILL TAKE RESTRUCTURING CHARGE OF $60M TO $70MBy BRIAN TRACEYCheck printing firm Deluxe Corp., acknowledging that its future successlies more in electronic banking, said last week it would take $60 millionto $70 million restructuring charge.   Executives at St. Paul-based Deluxe said last week that the fourth-quarter charge to earnings would cover expenses related to the closing ofseveral check printing facilities and other writeoffs in several businessunits.   The company has seen its profit margins shrink in its core checkprinting business in recent years as the banking industry has consolidated.In addition, electronic payments are expected to slowly begin replacingpaper checks as consumers increasingly use bank cards.   "Our earnings declines over the last three years have clearly been adisappointment to our shareholders and employees, and it is now time tobegin reversing that trend," said J. A. "Gus" Blanchard, Deluxe's presidentand chief executive officer, who added that the restructuring shouldgenerate $100 million to $125 million in annual expense savings by the endof 1997.   Mr. Blanchard said that as part of its new strategy, the company plansto enhance its electronic banking and other types of information servicesfor financial institutions, mainly through its Deluxe Data unit, a leadingthird-party processor of automated teller machine transactions.   "Through our Deluxe Data subsidiary, we already provide a variety oftransaction processing and settlement capabilities as well as applicationsfor linking various back-office functions," Mr. Blanchard  said. "Our newplan calls for strengthening our existing offerings as well as broadeningour total value proposition, with the objective being to permit our clientfinancial institutions to connect their customers to any bankingapplication ... by whatever electronic means the customer chooses."   Deluxe officials also said they plan to beef up their product offeringsin the payment protection arena, as banks have been forced to eat billionsof dollars in fraudulent transactions in recent years.Back to Headline List CopyrightAMERICAN BANKER FULL TEXT via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SECURITIZATION LEADERS[TABLE]Aggregate for all three government-sponsored enterprises   Overall issuance                                   Volume in   Rank                             millions    %          1 Countrywide Funding     $24,537   10.50%          2 Norwest Mortgage          19,599     8.4          3 Prudential Home Mtg.       7,723     3.3          4 Fleet Mortgage Group       6,314     2.7          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       5,343     2.3          6 Chemical Residential       4,780     2.1          7 Resource Bancshares        4,519     1.9          8 North American Mtg.        4,372     1.9          9 BancBoston Mortgage        3,411     1.5         10 Standard Fed'l Bank        3,186     1.4   Single-family fixed                                   Volume in   Rank                             millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding     $16,283    9.40%          2 Norwest Mortgage          12,554     7.2          3 Fleet Mortgage Group       6,085     3.5          4 Prudential Home Mtg.       6,016     3.5          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       4,635     2.7          6 Resource Bancshares        4,060     2.3          7 Chemical Residential       4,058     2.3          8 North American Mtg.        3,680     2.1          9 Standard Fed'l Bank        2,903     1.7         10 BancBoston Mortgage        2,594     1.5   ARM issuance                                    Volume in   Rank                             millions    %          1 Countrywide Funding      $7,202   15.00%          2 Norwest Mortgage           6,406    13.4          3 World Savings and Loan     2,326     4.9          4 American Savings Bank      1,727     3.6          5 Prudential Home Mtg.       1,112     2.3          6 Home Savings of America    1,012     2.1          7 BancBoston Mortgage          808     1.7          8 Chemical Residential         679     1.4          9 North American Mtg.          663     1.4         10 Union Fed'l Indianapolis     658     1.4   Multifamily issuance                                    Volume in   Rank                             millions     %          1 GMAC Commercial Mtg.       $269    6.30%          2 WMF/Huntoon, Paige           191     5.9          3 American Mtg.                170     5.3            and Investment          4 Patrician Financial Co.      169     5.2          5 Berkshire Mortgage Co.       162       5          6 Green Park Financial         157     4.9          7 AMI Capital Inc.             156     4.8          8 Eichler, Fayne & Assoc.      107     3.3          9 Mellon Mortgage Co.          104     3.2         10 Bright Mortgage Co.           98       3                            ***   Fannie Mae          Overall issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding  $11,525   12.40%          2 Norwest Mortgage        4,683       5          3 Fleet Mortgage Group    2,939     3.2          4 American Savings Bank   2,370     2.6          5 World Savings and Loa   2,326     2.5          6 North American Mtg.     2,315     2.5          7 Chase Manhattan Mtg.    2,104     2.3          8 GMAC Mtg. Corp. Pa.     1,439     1.6          9 Chemical Residential    1,384     1.5         10 Standard Fed'l Bank     1,322     1.4   30-year-fixed issuance                                  Volume in   Rank                           millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding   $8,542   14.50%          2 Norwest Mortgage        3,251     5.5          3 Fleet Mortgage Group    2,427     4.1          4 North American Mtg.     1,955     3.3          5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.    1,354     2.3          6 Standard Fed. Bank        939     1.6          7 GMAC Mortgage Pa.         892     1.5          8 Chemical Residential      825     1.4          9 Prudential Home Mtg.      770     1.3         10 BancBoston Mortgage       707     1.2   15- to 20-year fixed                                  Volume in   Rank                           millions     %          1 Countrywide Funding    $1,170    8.80%          2 Norwest Mortgage          568     4.3          3 Fleet Mortgage Group      511     3.8          4 Chase Manhattan Mtg.      371     2.8          5 Standard Fed. Bank        339     2.5          6 Chemical Residential      285     2.1          7 Samuel T. Isaac & Ass     278     2.1          8 Barnett Mortgage Co.      241     1.8          9 North American Mtg.       232     1.7         10 Republic Bank             159     1.2   ARM issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                           millions    %          1 World Savings and Loa $2,326   15.80%          2 American Savings Bank   1,727    11.8          3 Countrywide Funding     1,180       8          4 Home Savings            1,012     6.9            of America          5 Citizens Bank of Mass     441       3          6 First Nationwide Mort     425     2.9          7 Bank of Hawaii            410     2.8          8 NVR Mtg. Finance          364     2.5          9 Coast Federal Bank        318     2.2         10 San Francisco Fed'l S     300       2                                 ***   Freddie Mac   Overall issuance                               Volume in   Rank                        millions      %     1 Norwest Mortgage         $3,592    4.80%     2 Countrywide Funding        3,392     4.5     3 Prudential Home Mtg.       3,154     4.2     4 Resource Bancshares        2,836     3.8     5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       1,989     2.7     6 First Security Savings     1,766     2.4     7 Standard Fed'l Bank        1,755     2.3     8 PHH Mortgage Services      1,564     2.1     9 Washington Mutual          1,288     1.7    10 Chemical Residential       1,209     1.6   30-year-fixed issuance                               Volume in   Rank                        millions     %     1 Norwest Mortgage         $3,055    6.40%     2 Resource Bancshares        2,381       5     3 Countrywide Funding        1,938     4.1     4 Prudential Home Mtg.       1,846     3.9     5 Chase Manhattan Mtg.       1,732     3.6     6 First Security Savings     1,339     2.8     7 PHH Mortgage Svcs.         1,115     2.3     8 Chemical Residential       1,108     2.3     9 Standard Fed'l Bank        1,024     2.2    10 Fleet Mortgage Group         995     2.1   15- to 20-year fixed                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions   %     1 Washington Mutual          $542    4.80%     2 Standard Fed'l Bank          521     4.6     3 Prudential Home Mtg.         484     4.2     4 Norwest Mortgage             473     4.1     5 Resource Bancshares          449     3.9     6 Banc One Mortgage            352     3.1     7 Branch Banking and Trust     309     2.7     8 Countrywide Funding          227       2     9 First Security Savings       222     1.9    10 Chase Manhattan Mtg.         220     1.9   ARM issuance                                Volume in   Rank                         millions    %     1 Countrywide Funding        $823    6.70%     2 Washington Mutual            629     5.1     3 Old Kent Bank                244       2     4 Prudential Home Mtg.         229     1.9     5 Standard Fed'l Bank          165     1.3     6 PHH Mortgage Services        102     0.8     7 Sterling Savings              95     0.8     8 First Security Idaho          83     0.7     9 First Security Utah           81     0.7    10 Bank South Mortgage           76     0.6                                 ***   Ginnie Mac   Overall issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions      %     1 Norwest Mortgage         $11,323   17.40%     2 Countrywide Funding         9,620    14.8     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        3,638     5.6     4 BancBoston Mortgage         2,318     3.6     5 Chemical Residential        2,187     3.4     6 Fleet Mortgage Group        2,172     3.3     7 Resource Bancshares         1,645     2.5     8 Principal Residential       1,416     2.2     9 North American Mtg.         1,399     2.1    10 NationsBanc Mtg.            1,335     2.1   Single-family fixed                                Volume in   Rank                          millions    %     1 Norwest Mortgage          $5,206   12.60%     2 Countrywide Funding         4,406    10.6     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        2,797     6.8     4 Fleet Mortgage Group        1,945     4.7     5 Chemical Residential        1,762     4.3     6 BancBoston Mortgage         1,530     3.7     7 Resource Bancshares         1,203     2.9     8 Principal Residential       1,127     2.7     9 GE Capital Mortgage         1,053     2.5    10 NationsBanc Mtg.              998     2.4   ARM issuance                                Volume in   Rank                          millions       %     1 Countrywide Funding       $18,160   11.40%     2 Norwest Mortgage           13,600     8.6     3 Prudential Home Mtg.        6,022     3.8     4 Chase Manhattan Mtg.        3,927     2.5     5 Chemical Residential        3,219       2     6 Resource Bancshares         3,141       2     7 North American Mtg.         3,062     1.9     8 Fleet Real Estate Funding   2,869     1.8     9 American Savings Bank       2,178     1.4    10 BancBoston Mtg. Corp.       2,120     1.3   Multifamily issuance                                 Volume in   Rank                          millions    %     1 WMF/Huntoon, Paige           $191     14%     2 GMAC Commercial Mtg.          171    12.5     3 Mellon Mortgage Co.            99     7.2     4 Highland Mortgage Co.          96       7     5 Greystone Servicing Corp.      95     6.9     6 TRI Capital Corp.              86     6.3     7 American Capitol Resource      74     5.4     8 First Maryland Mtg.            56     4.1     9 Bank of America                55       4    10 P/R Mtg. and Investment        51     3.7===Back to Headline List WT03-B37-24IA059-000325-B021-93http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi108.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003327 text/html 96698HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:30:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:51 GMTContent-length: 96509Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi108.html Sample Issue Copyright ASIAN BANKER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TRENDWATCH: BANKS FEAR RE-FINANCING OF SMALL BUSINESSES (534 words) CENTRAL BANKS RELY ON REGIONAL CO-OPERATION (920 words) FEATURE HONG KONG FIRST TO GO RTGS (1503 words) INDONESIAN BANKS STILL VULNERABLE (931 words) DBS BANK STREAMLINES FOR THE FUTURE (762 words) BANKS PUSH ON WITH DIRECT TRADING (1030 words) INTERNATIONAL DEBIT MAKES ITS DEBUT (1861 words) MASTERCARD INTERNATIONAL (220 words) VISA INTERNATIONAL (166 words) THE MASTERCARD-VERIFONE ALLIANCE PROGRAMME (146 words) CLIENT/SERVER - THE NEW COMPUTING PARADIGM? (1049 words) SOVEREIGN RISK: BANK DEPOSITS V. BONDS (4023 words) NEWS BRIEF MITSUBISHI BANK'S PROFITS RISE (101 words) BANK OF TOKYO'S INTERIM RESULTS (56 words) HANA BANK COMPLETES ISSUE OF FLOATING RATE NOTES (104 words) CITYTRUST SHARE OFFER (148 words) METROPOLITAN BANK & TRUST INTERIM RESULTS (79 words) FAR EAST BANK AND TRUST FORECASTS (112 words) GOVERNMENT UPS STAKE IN LAND BANK (90 words) PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK PRIVATISATION OFFERING UNDERSUBSCRIBED (100 words) FLOATING RATE CD ISSUE (75 words) UNITED WORLD CHINESE BANK PROFITS (82 words) TAIWAN'S BIG THREE GOVERNMENT BANKS ANNOUNCE LOWER PROFITS (141 words) CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TRENDWATCH:  BANKS FEAR RE-FINANCING OF SMALL BUSINESSESTHE YOUNG Thai banker was despondent. "The board thinks that anyoneseeking re-financing is potentially a bad debt case," he said,recounting how the bank's board turned down a package he put togetherto re-finance the business of a small property company."The company was paying 17 percent to a finance company for a 700million baht ($16 million) project. They have had a five-year trackrecord of on-time payment," the banker said.There was also a strong fee-based component. He had proposed a 400million baht facility at 15 percent per annum, with a 1 percentup-front fee and a 40 million baht revolving facility at half apercentage maintenance fee per month.The banker reckoned the deal was turned down because of his bank'sstrongly conservative culture. A lack of competitiveness in the Thaibanking industry preclude large and established banks from movingaggressively to capture new businesses away from other banks.Around the region, sustained economic growth averaging 10 percent inmuch of Asia has been creating a strong cohort of well-run smallbusinesses in growth industries.A senior Malaysian banker told Asian Banker, "typically, a smallbusiness that is begun with little more than the wits of theentrepreneur would turn to factoring to manage its cash flow. A low endfinancial institution may also be interested."A Filipino banker admitted: "Often, it's a case of us not understandingtheir business. In the Philippines, we'd rather lend to theco-operatives who, in turn, lend to these small businesses." But evenwith a strong track record, they continue to be viewed suspiciously bybankers.Finance companies in Malaysia and Thailand charge up to 4 percent overpublished prime rates. When Filipino banks do lend directly to smallbusinesses, the rates are exorbitant, at 7 percent-8 percent overprime.The problem is that by the time these small businesses reach a stage ofmaturity to warrant the interest of banks, the competition would havebecome very tough. Competition at a mature stage is not only betweenbanks, but with non-bank financial institutions, the venturecapitalists, merchant banks and even other corporations.Malaysia appears to have the most progressive environment ofcompetitive re-financing in the region. "Nobody advertises it aloud,"the Malaysian banker said,"but it sometimes goes down to the level of abank asking to see the letter-of-offer of the original financier andsimply substituting that with a better offer." He joked that if theoriginal bank had a good reputation, the competitor would not need tobother doing its own due diligence.In Singapore and Hong Kong, government incentives play a critical rolein getting favourable terms for targeted small businesses they want topromote. Singapore banks charge as low as a quarter percent over primefor loans under the Local Enterprise Financing Scheme.While the rates are attractive, such loans come with conditions thatcan be restrictive if a company proves to grow very fast. What isneeded is a banking community that is as nimble as the fast-footedentrepreneurs who are creating the economic miracles in the region.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CENTRAL BANKS RELY ON REGIONAL CO-OPERATIONGiven that the world's three largest economies, the US, Japan andGermany, have never been completely successful at thwarting speculativeassault against their currencies, what chance do five of the region'scentral banks stand of doing so?RECENTLY, five members of the 11-member Executive Meeting of East Asianand Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP), namely Australia, Hong Kong,Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, took the unprecedented step ofsigning a series of bilateral "repo" agreements. The Monetary Authorityof Singapore, while deciding not to join its members, also set upsimilar arrangements on a bilateral basis with the central banks ofThailand and Indonesia to ameliorate the volatile influence of globalcapital flows on exchange-rates.The bilateral pacts, although not a carte blanc for central banks totap into the reserves of their neighbours, nevertheless allow signatorycountries to borrow from one another to boost their reserves in timesof crisis. This was in reflection of the Mexican peso crisis that ledto speculative assaults on a number of regional currencies.Technically, it formally contracts the parties to raise US dollars fromone another against US Treasury securities.Market watchers, however, are not convinced that these agreements willresult in central banks pooling their foreign exchange reserves.Analysts highlighted the fact that the effectiveness of such measuresagainst potentially disruptive market speculation has never been put tothe test. It would certainly be sensible to think that no currencywould ever be immune to"attacks".Economists say that the soundness of macroeconomic fundamentals andpolicy prudence remain the ultimate guarantors of exchange systemstability. In its weekly economic update, the Union Bank of Switzerlandnoted that even G3 (Japan, Germany and the US) co-ordinatedintervention works best when it aims to support market moves.In a recent speech calling for greater co-operation between Asia'scentral banks, Joseph Yam, chief executive of the Hong Kong MonetaryAuthority, said the Mexican episode was a wakening bell to Asiancentral bankers. This, he said, has made central bankers wonder: whathas changed for Asian monetary stability? What has remained the same?What needs to change?Yam believes that with open capital accounts, and significant foreigndirect and portfolio investments pouring into Asia, Asian currencieshave become susceptible to the global ebb and flow of financialresources.Players have also changed. The commercial bankers, who have always hadbranches and offices in Asia, understand the region well. On the otherhand, new actors have appeared on centre stage in the last five years.Securities houses, pension and mutual funds, investment banks and alsohedge funds have appeared in Asian markets.In the face of these developments, central bankers believe that theability of central banks to stabilise exchange rates seems to haveslipped from their grasp. However, Yam noted that the soundfundamentals in the Asian markets still hold.What has also remained the same is that, as lenders of last resort,central banks are in a position to dictate terms when eventually theyare asked to lend domestic currencies directly or indirectly tospeculators shorting their currencies.In the aftermath of the Mexico crisis, an informal meeting of some ofthe region's central banks concluded that it would be useful toexchange information on market activities, to monitor the markets moreclosely, to share knowledge and techniques on overall financial marketsupervision, and to immunise the pain tolerance levels of the economyin case it becomes necessary to inflict pain on the speculators.At present, most Asian economies are keeping their exchange rates at alow level in order to ensure export competitiveness. The most obviousmanifestation of this is reflected in the increase in the reserves ofsome economies as a result of direct central bank intervention to holddown their currencies.Economists point to the fact that in terms of purchasing-powerparities, most Asian currencies, including those of China, India andThailand, are still grossly undervalued.Another factor which impinges on the stability of some of the region'sexchange rates is the fact that most economies in the region aregrowing huge current account deficits. However, current accountdeficits in Asia mostly reflect foreign capital inflows which fueldevelopment.The argument is that if these are mainly short-term portfolio capital,then it is better to allow reserves to grow, as opposed to allowing anincrease in the exchange rate which may later fall when theseshort-term capital flow elsewhere.In the case of more long-term capital inflow, then a stronger exchangerate is not such a bad proposition at all. However, the problem oflosing export competition due to a stronger currency will come back tohaunt the governments.In the aftermath of the peso crisis last year, Indonesian stocks fellto six-month lows amid concern that speculators were going to targetthe rupiah. In the Philippines, the central bank raised rates to defendthe peso.However, some feel that the move suggests inherent weaknesses in theircurrencies. Some say that it only serves to raise more concerns in theminds of investors, making matters worse not better.Exchange rate against US$ (% change as at December 21 1995)Australia           -4.34China               +1.55Hong Kong           +0.5India              -10.4Indonesia           -3.83Japan               -1.97Malaysia            +0.5New Zealand         +2.14Philippines         -6.41Singapore           +3South Korea         +1.95Sri Lanka           -7.59Taiwan              -3.84Thailand            -0.2Source: MMS InternationalCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HONG KONG FIRST TO GO RTGSNearly 30 years after banks in the US have been processing payments ona real time basis, banks in Asia have finally taken the same routeTHE HONG Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) is confident that the colony'shigh value transaction payment system will be able to go real time bythe end of this year. Almost all banks in Asia still settle theirinterbank cheques and other payments mostly on a net overnight basis.The system to be used by the HKMA will be similar to that used by theFederal Reserves Board in the US, called FedWire.While the US FedWire System has been settling payments on an Real TimeGross Settlements (RTGS) system since 1968 and the Swiss have beendoing it since 1987, the HKMA began looking into this faster and safersystem to deal with rising interbank exposures only in 1993."The adoption of RTGS will immediately eliminate most of the legalrisks associated with bilateral or multi-lateral netting," Joseph Yam,chief executive of HKMA, said at a payments system seminar organised bythe agency in Hong Kong late last year. "Settlement across the books ofthe Hong Kong Monetary Authority will eliminate any doubt over creditrisks associated with commercial banks acting as settlementinstitutions, however prudently these commercial banks are run."RTGS enables settlements to be made on a payment-versus-payment basis(see definitions box), so that there is virtually no exposure betweeninstitutions at any point in the day. Experts believe that this in turneliminates what is known in large payment systems circles as "HerstattRisk". Coined in reference to the situation that arose from a majorsettlement failure in the past, Herstatt Risk arises in foreignexchange transactions when one counterparty delivers currency in onetime zone and receives value in the other currency in another timezone. The risk arises out of the possibility that the counterparty whodelivers later may fail to settle.According to Yam, Hong Kong adopted a "single tier architecture,instead of the present three tier one, with every bank settlingdirectly across the books". The HKMA also plans to integrate itsCentral Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) service, which is its book entrysecurities system, directly with the RTGS system. So daylightoverdrafts incurred by the banks at the clearing account with the HKMAwill be fully collateralised with the Exchange Fund paper on a repo(sell and buy-back) basis.Yam believes that Hong Kong will be the first to settle its moneymarketdeals on this basis. "As far as I know, our RTGS system is one of thefirst to be engineered with a seamless integration between thesettlement function and the government securities book entry function.We will be happy to share our technical specifications on this andother features with other central banks."In December, it introduced the first of a series of enhancements forits CMU by making it possible for end-of-day delivery versus payment(DvP) facility for private sector debt securities lodged and clearedwith the CMU.In January this year, the CMU announced it is also able to clearforeign currency debt securities. "So far, the CMU only accepts HongKong dollar debt securities because the CMU service is designed and setup to promote the Hong Kong dollar debt market," Yam said. "However,there is no reason why the CMU, which is already linked up withEuroClear and Cedel, cannot widen its coverage to debt securitiesdenominated in foreign currency."The DvP function will be made available to all CMU instruments,including exchange fund bills and notes, private sector debtsecurities, on a real time and end-of-day settlement basis when theentire RTGS system goes live at the end of 1996.Hong Kong chose to build its RTGS settlement system on top of itsexisting large value fund transfer system called CHATS. The decision tobuild on CHATS was taken because it would have taken a long time tobuild a new system from scratch and also because it was possible tobuild on a system that banks in Hong Kong were already familiar with.The new RTGS system would have clocked a mere 24 months in installationtime.Small banks are able to access the HKMA's RTGS using a simple personalcomputer. It is also possible for the larger banks to interface theirown complex systems with RTGS through existing AS400 computer systems.Introducing RTGS was especially tricky in Hong Kong as the colony's 180licensed banks operate on a three tier clearing structure. The toplayer comprises Hong Kong Bank, which plays the role of the managementbank of the clearing house. Hong Kong Bank also owns and runs thecurrent CHATS system. The second layer comprises a number of settlementbanks and the third layer comprises the sub-settlement banks. The RTGSsystem was implemented by a joint venture company called the Hong KongInter-bank Clearing Limited, which is 50:50 owned by the HKMA and theHong Kong Association of Banks.Hong Kong set the end of 1996 as the target to complete its RTGS systemfor two reasons. The first reason being that the Federal Reserve Boardof the United States had already announced that the operating hours ofits own FedWire system was to be extended to 18 hours. As this wouldextend the time into Asian trading hours, the HKMA wanted to have asystem that could complete cross-currency transactions on apayment-versus-payment (PvP) basis.The second reason was to tie in with the targeted completion of theChina National Automated Payment Systems for the renminbi in 1997. Boththe US dollar and the Chinese renminbi are important currencies, as theHong Kong dollar is linked to the US dollar based on a monetary policyobjective and to the renminbi through extensive trade.RTGS on a global basis?While daily inter-bank Hong Kong dollar transactions constitute $15billion, foreign exchange transactions are in the order of $91 billiona day. Although most Asian transactions are currently with US andEuropean counter-parties, the growth in intra-Asian trade is expectedto increase regional transactions tremendously.Between 1990 and 1994, the number of SWIFT messages recording financialflows around the world increased by 9.1 percent, but total messages forthe Asia Pacific region alone grew more than twice that rate at nearly14.6 percent.The question naturally arises if a global RTGS payment system willarise any time soon. "A robust network of global cross-border paymentscan only be built on robust domestic payment systems," Yam said. Healso thinks that some countries are ahead of others in this respect.Yam believes that RTGS linkages between countries should be developedon a bilateral, instead of a multi-lateral, basis. It is not possibleto internationalise or harmonise payment systems even among G10countries because of different agendas in each of them. The legal andstructural constraints will be too many to handle all at once. "It isin the two economies own direct interests to build a bilateral linkagewith each other, and this could be achieved with much greater ease."Furthermore, PvP linkages are better achieved either indirectly viaprivate sector banks or directly with linkages of two RTGS systemstogether. A US payment systems expert, Bruce Summers, recently proposedthat central banks can act as"matching agencies" by examining thepayments originated by users of the service and releasing such paymentsonly when a well-defined set of conditions are met. This method is oneway of reducing Herstatt risks without involving central banks in newtypes of credit risks.How the HKMA's RTGS System will workHONG KONG'S new RTGS system will adopt a Y-shaped flow as indicated inthe diagram above. All banks will have direct access to the system. Theadvantage of this flow method is to keep the system simple and direct.There is no routing of information or value via any other intermediary.A bank will send in its full payment instruction (including the valueand information on the customer) to a Central Transaction Processor.The processor will"strip" the details of the customer. Only thesettlement instruction (i.e the information on the amount, the payeeand recipient banks) on the Settlement Account Processor will be passedon to the Settlement Account Processor and known by the HKMA.All payments will have to be settled on an individual and gross basis.As the system will have no provisions for daylight overdraft, bankswithout sufficient clearing balance (or securities for repos) will bequeued in the system until the bank meets the liquidity requirement.All payments cleared by the HKMA will then be final and irrevocable.Intra-day liquidity is created by the seamless integration with theCentral MoneyMarket Unit book entry securities clearing and settlementsystem. This interface enables banks to develop same day repos.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INDONESIAN BANKS STILL VULNERABLEEven as the government works at introducing prudential measures tostrengthen the country's banking industry, Indonesian banks still havea long way to go, according to a recent report by Standard & Poor'sHIGH NON-PERFORMING assets continue to hang over Indonesia's bankingsystem. Rating agencies have flagged caution in dealing with the banksin this country for at least five to seven years. Standard & Poor's(S&P) notes that Indonesia's banking industry is underpinned by apotentially more volatile, albeit developing, economy and shouldattract more caution than the banking system of other countries.At this stage of its economic development, Indonesia is overbanked,said S&P in an assessment report. The industry has 240 commercial bankswith average assets per bank of $500 million. On an internationalcomparison, this implies an excess number of banks and a lack ofoperating efficiency among small to mid-sized banks.Recent data collated by Asian Banker suggest that in spite of the largenumber of banks in Indonesia, the penetration level is still very low.When viewed in the perspective of the archipelago's 17,000 islands and190 million population, there are only 1.3 banks per million people and24.3 branches per million.This branch penetration level compares very poorly even with itsnearest comparison. The Philippines has a penetration of 41.8 branchesper million population. At the other end of the scale, Hong Kong hasthe highest penetration with 261.4 branches per million.The low branch penetration is matched by the extremely low averageasset size for Indonesian banks, which is a mere $0.66 billion per bankbranch as compared to $54.6 billion in Japan and $10.44 billion forThailand. The impression created by this data is that the basis forconcern should not be based on the asset quality of any one smallIndonesian bank but on the knock-on effect that any lack of confidencewould have.It is exactly this concern that the rating agencies talk about.Standard & Poor's believes that undercapitalisation of small banks mayhave a knock-on effect on mid-sized banks. This is because the smallerbanks in Indonesia are in the practice of obtaining funds from thelarger banks on the inter-bank money markets. This gives the largerbanks an arbitrage in the market because of their stronger financialposition.Under a World Bank-assisted "Action Plan", the Indonesian Governmenthelped the state-owned banks to increase their paid-up capitalisationto Rp1 trillion ($455 million). Private sector banks are also in theprocess of building their capital base to meet the new capital adequacyratio (CAR) of 8 percent. In addition, private banks with foreignexchange licences will have to increase their capital to Rp150 billionand CAR of 12 percent by the year 2001.Banks in Indonesia, however, play a greater role in the country'seconomic development as compared to other countries. Viewed from aGross Domestic Product (GDP) perspective, there are 3.6 banks to every$10 billion GDP. Japanese banks account for only 0.56 banks to every$10 billion GDP in that country.While this does imply that Indonesian banks are in a better position tobenefit from the 8 percent-10 percent growth in the GDP in recentyears, the converse is also true. If there is any let up in the growthof the country's economy, the banking industry will suffer more thanthe Japanese banks are experiencing currently.Bank Indonesia issued a directive in September 1995 that commercialbanks holding foreign-exchange licences have to increase their paid upcapital to Rp150 billion by September 2001. This is expected to causesmaller banks to merge in order to meet the higher capitalisationrequirements.Standard & Poor's is also concerned about the banking community'sexposure to finance companies. The number of finance companies hasproliferated in recent years. Finance companies in Indonesia operateoutside the ambit of the central bank and are disallowed from acceptingpublic deposits. They are funded primarily through bank borrowings. S&Pis concerned that banks lending to finance companies are indirectlytaking on finance companies loan portfolio, which is inherently muchweaker than that of the banking industry.But Bank Indonesia has been introducing tighter supervision and aclearer accounting framework to improve the transparency in theindustry. The only concern is that banks generally delay the release ofaudited statements."Many commercial banks still do not disclose non-performing loans,"said S&P in an evaluation of the Indonesian banking industry. Theagency is concerned that loans are concentrated towards affiliates andlarge borrowers. There is also high exposure to office and condominiumprojects. Lippo Bank experienced a crisis situation in late 1995 whenit was unable to manage its own fundings of the large propertydevelopment projects undertaken by its own affiliate propertycompanies.Equities analysts, however, feel that if the government's strengtheningefforts pay off, several Indonesian banks will ride the strong economicgrowth predicted for the country. Analysts predict that loans wouldgrow by 30 percent-40 percent last year, and that average earningswould have grown by about 25 percent. Bank Dagang Nasional Indonesia,Panin Bank and Bank Bali have been identified as being fundamentallystrong.However, the lack of depth in the capital market makes it difficult forbanks to meet their obligations in a timely and cost efficient manner.S&P's assessment is that"banks bearing the brunt of problem loans arenot likely to recover, unaided, to full fiscal health for at least fiveto seven years".Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DBS BANK STREAMLINES FOR THE FUTUREThe Development Bank of Singapore recently restructured its topmanagement in a move that is expected to generate greateraccountability for product linesTHE KEY feature of the recent reorganisation move by the DevelopmentBank of Singapore (DBS Bank) is the stronger vertical reporting lines.The two top positions will be taken by Ng Kee Choe and Lau Chan Sin. Ngwill be responsible for the entire institutional banking side of thebusiness while Lau will be in charge of individual banking, which willinclude the retail and private banking businesses.The heads of the bank's retail and private banking divisions,respectively Elsie Foh and Tan Mong Tong, will report directly to Lau.This is expected to give them greater leverage at the top level of thebank's management to respond to changes more quickly.Similarly, Ng Kee Choe will have Tan Soo Nan reporting to him ontreasury and investment management activities, and Soh Kim Soonreporting on international and corporate banking. Oliver Tan, anothersenior executive vice president, will take over special projects fromJanuary 1, reporting directly to the chairman, Ngiam Tong Dow.DBS Bank has been introducing new initiatives in rapid successionlately. On the retail front, it recently extended opening hours to 5pmfrom the traditional 3pm for other banks, as a result of greaterefficiencies in the branch network. This is in addition to theauthorised trading centres and investment centres it set up last year.In investment banking, the bank achieved distinction in becoming theregion's leader in advisory and underwriting portfolios.The bank is also already working out an expansion plan across theregion. It has obtained banking licences in Shanghai (China), SriLanka, Thailand (provincial licence in Rayong) and the Philippines. Thenotable exception is Malaysia, where DBS Bank is the only Big FourSingapore bank without a full banking licence in the neighbouringcountry. However, it has set up representative offices in Bombay,Rangoon, and Labuan (an offshore centre in Malaysia).DBS Bank is particularly active in the securities industries in most ofthe regional markets, particularly Hong Kong, Indonesia and Thailand.DBS has a strong custodian business in its home market as well as inMalaysia. In December, it set up a custodian joint venture in Thailandwith the Thai Danu Bank. Ng announced the bank's plan to expand itsshare custodian services network to South Korea, Indonesia, thePhilippines and India.Singapore banks have had a strong reputation of being adequatelycapitalised. Although profitability has not been one of their strongpoints, things have been improving in the last two years.According to analyst reports, the combined return on equity of the BigFour banks for the year ended 1994 was 13.3 percent, up from 9.9percent the previous year.As the Singapore economy matures and competition for funds becomes moreintense, banks are becoming more cognisant about shareholder value. Thecapital surplus position of Singapore banks and the returns fromnon-bank activities, such as investment and property holdings, alsoputs them in a good position to acquire new businesses.A DBS Bank spokesperson told Asian Banker that there is no overridingmotive in the restructuring exercise. In typical public relationsparlance, she said the move "is part of our ongoing renewal process".The bank did not hire any consultants to advise it on the changes inthe top management line up.This is in contrast with at least two of the other Big Four banks,which have been using consultants quite extensively. The leading edgeretail banking initiatives in UOB Bank, such as its InvestShops, weretreated as special projects, with consultants from Andersen Consultingreporting directly to the president.OCBC Bank, on the other hand, appointed McKinsey & Co as consultants todevelop a new strategic focus for the organisation. One observer toldAsian Banker that as McKinsey specialises in high level strategyissues, OCBC Bank is being forced to speak to other consultancycompanies to propose new implementation initiatives.The overall business and organisational direction, strategies andpolicies of DBS Bank will now be driven by a"Bank Business Committee".It will be chaired by chairman Ngiam Tong Dow, with the deputypresidents and senior executive vice presidents as members. This smalltask force approach is expected to help the management to take decisiveand timely measures to respond to new challenges in the market. It willalso keep management meetings short and sweet.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BANKS PUSH ON WITH DIRECT TRADINGMalaysia's stockbroking community did not take too long to realise thatnew delivery channels through PALDirect and Southern Bank Link maythreaten their very existenceTONG KOOI Ong, the 35-year-old chief executive officer of Malaysia'sPhileo Allied Group, has much in common with PALDirect, the geniusproduct of the group's subsidiary, AlliedBank. Both are essentiallybrash, new innovations into a market that has yet to wake up to therealisation that the brave new world has already arrived.PALDirect was designed primarily to give stock market players directcontrol over their trade. Through a dedicated terminal, the bank'scustomers are able to place their trades on-line to Phileo Allied, thebank's broking subsidiary, which then executes it.As the entire transaction is carried out within the group, PhileoAlliedis able to give AlliedBank a rebate of 25 percent of the 1 percentbrokerage commission that was due to it under securities regulations.The bank in turn passes on 20 percent to the customer and keeps 5percent for itself.Any banker looking at the arrangement would recognise the geniusinvolved in running a transaction through several organisations, usingtechnology that enables all parties to be winners - the bank adds valueto its customer services, the stockbroking company gets trade orders,and the customer benefits from lower overall costs and greaterconvenience.But the Malaysian stockbroking community panicked. The immediate fearwas that if the system was perpetuated, brokers would lose their marketshare and remisiers would have become essentially redundant. The KualaLumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE), possibly acting on pressure from thestockbroking community, issued a directive to PhileoAllied Securitiesto stop passing down the commission to AlliedBank.The KLSE based its directive on the exchange's Rule 6(7) that specifiesthat rebates can be only given to approved financial institutions. TheKLSE further interpreted the rule as saying that this rebate can onlybe enjoyed by the financial institution and not passed down further toits customers.Tong, true to form, went on the offensive. He applied for a courtruling on the interpretation of the rule against devolving commissionto customers. The financial community was, at best, amused as nobodyhad ever taken the stock exchange to court before.The upshot of the offensive was that Tong was able to call the KLSE'sbluff. The court application was subsequently dropped after anundisclosed out-of-court agreement and PALDirect continued unaffected.The issue that arose out of this skirmish is of a more fundamentalinterest to the financial community and deserves some thinking through.Firstly, does PALDirect enable banks to enter the stockbrokers' tradewithout a licence? Secondly, do these computers in remote locationsbecome de facto "branches" of stockbroking houses? This is significantbecause of the restriction in many countries against stockbrokersexpanding their branch networks, particularly into remote areas.Malaysia does have many remisiers - 5,000 licensed remisiers at thelast count a few months ago. This is almost half the number of peopleworking in the entire banking industry in the labour scarce country.Remisiers come from a variety of backgrounds - from housewives tohighly-qualified professionals. All are lured by the opportunity tomake much more money in passing share certificates around than throughpursuits that could build much needed skills in other areas of thecountry's development.At the height of the stock market's bull run in the early 1990s, thelack of Remisiers called for urgent technological innovations, althoughnone was forthcoming at the time. Small retail customers had to begremisiers to take on their trade. All this turned with the market. Themarket itself became more sophisticated with unit trusts and otherlong-term investment products becoming available and affordable.Remisiers generally fear that PALDirect is setting a precedent. Alreadytwo other Malaysian banks are said to be interested in developingsimilar products. Although the stockbrokers that Asian Banker spoke toare generally dismissive about PALDirect, there is no reason why theytoo cannot go on the offensive.Southern Bank Securities, a small stockbroking company located in theunlikely town of Ipoh 200 kilometres north of the capital city of KualaLumpur, has also recently introduced a system similar to PALDirect.Called Southern Bank Link (SBL), the system sits on any personalcomputer running the Windows operating system (as compared toPALDirect's "dedicated" terminals).Brokers are far from losing their jobs too soon. Both SBL and PALDirectstill require brokers as, in effect, customers actually place theirorders with them to be executed on-line to the stock exchange.Remisiers also remain useful where contra trade is involved. InSingapore, where retail investors can trade using automated tellermachines, transactions have to be settled immediately. This isunfavourable as compared to trading through a broker where customershave a settlement period of T+7 days, during which time they can dealin contra trades.In the case of PALDirect, the entry level for direct trade is set veryhigh. Customers are expected to maintain an interest-earning fixeddeposit of RM198,000 ($79,200) to have the PALDirect link-up for free.Alternatively, they will have to pay RM6138 ($2,455) over 31 months forthe terminal and RM98 every month after that as maintenance fee. SBLcustomers on the other hand pay only RM250 per month, although thisbroking house does not pass on savings to the customer. Thesearrangements could only interest the most liquid and active of retailinvestors.The managers of both products say they hope to attract the"middle tohigh level players" on the stock market. This includes fund managersand sophisticated investors who want greater control over their tradepositions. Although neither was willing to disclose the number ofcustomers they have signed up, it is believed they are each aiming atapproximately 1,000 customers within a year from their respectivelaunch dates.While not all brokers and remisiers are about to lose their jobs, thosewho will survive will be the ones that prove that they add greatervalue than the machines that threaten their relevance.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INTERNATIONAL DEBIT MAKES ITS DEBUTAn international consumer debit payment industry is about to take offin Asia, now that the major card organisations and terminalmanufacturers are introducing major initiatives in the regionUNTIL RECENTLY, when bank customers travelled abroad, the onlyeffective card-based payment channel had been the use of a credit card- either at the ATM for cash advances or at point of sale for creditcard sales.The two card organisations, MasterCard International and VISAInternational, are currently at the forefront of major initiatives thatcan see the use of international debit cards (the international versionof the domestic ATM card or the electronic funds transfer at point ofsale) take off in Asia, and around the world.Debit cards provide consumers with an alternative to cash, cheques,travellers cheques or even converting currencies when they travel.Officials from both MasterCard and VISA told Asian Banker they areconvinced that international debit cards are not alternatives to creditcards and will not cannibalise this market.Andre Sekulic, the senior vice president of MasterCard's debit cardprogramme in the region, told Asian Banker that studies in the US showthat well over 60 percent of all payments made in the US are stillbased on cash.The banks benefit by being able to add value to their depositors'lifestyle in a tangible way while earning fees on transactions. Themerchants benefit from the incremental sales generated by impulsebuying. Experts also believe that merchant receipts are higher as aresult.John Hinds, the executive vice president of Verifone, a transactionautomation company, said the debit system is safer, and transactionsare completed on-line, which is faster than cheque and even cashtransactions where money has to be moved around.The safety of a debit card transaction is based on the PIN-basedtechnology introduced by transaction automation companies such asVerifone. Card users are required to key in their personalidentification numbers (PIN) into a "PIN-pad" before a transaction isauthorised. In most instances, the same PIN is used for ATM-relatedtransactions.Market growthIt is likely that the international debit programmes of both cardorganisations will depend largely on the link-ups they make with themajor domestic networks services in the region. This is also becausethe major networks already have in place, or are building, domesticdebit programmes that would be severely disrupted if internationaldebit is introduced alongside them.For example, the Network for Electronic Transfer (NETS) in Singaporewas concerned that non-participating banks would be able to effectivelyaccess these networks if card holders were able to use theirinternational debit cards within the same country. Because of this, thebanking authorities in Singapore disallowed domestic card holders fromusing their international debit cards within the country.Henry Mundt, MasterCard's director for Global Debit Services, estimatesthat by the end of 1995, there would be 750,000 terminals acceptingMaestro cards globally. Out of this number, he expects that 250,000terminals would be operational in co-operation with networks such asNETS.In Taiwan, the Financial Information System Centre (FISC), whichprovided the national domestic debit card network, is stillcontemplating its involvement in international debit. Silvia Lee,FISC's executive vice president, said Maestro is obviously somethingwhich it has a keen interest in, except that right now the organisationis concentrating on its own IC Card-based EFTPOS system.The IC Card is a smart card-based ATM-cum-debit card which FISCintroduced in 1993. Currently, more than 400,000 of the cards have beenissued by its 19 member banks. The system has a merchant base of some4,000.FISC is now in direct competition with the National Credit Card Centre(NCCC) which previously processed only credit card transactions. TheNCCC has announced that it expects to start international debitacquiring activities in early 1996 by signing on with Maestro. NCCCexpects to build its debit programme on its existing credit cardmerchant base exceeding 60,000 organisations.The NCCC has applied to be the switching and settlement centre for alldomestic Maestro transactions. At present, Chinatrust Commercial Bankis the only Maestro acquirer in the country. Sources said that becauseof unresolved issues pertaining to interchange and switching functions,the Ministry of Finance has restricted the other banks from acquiringmerchants. However, the NCCC and FISC have been instructed by theMinistry of Finance to co-operate on a programme that will allow allcard transactions to be settled domestically.The other Maestro issuing banks have understandably pushed for thelifting of the restriction. Observers see the assignment of thetransaction processing function to NCCC as a possible solution to thequestion of who should be responsible for the domestic processing ofMaestro transactions.This will then pave the way for the other institutions to be involvedin merchant acquisition. So far there are an estimated 1,000 merchantlocations that accept the Maestro debit facility in the country. Anestimated 400,000 Maestro cards have been issued.In China, what have been dubbed as MasterCard and VISA credit cards,are actually at best deferred debit transactions - that is, customerspay for their transactions from their salary accounts held with thebank.The controversy over the definition is not as significant as the factthat it means China is potentially the largest debit card market in theworld. The Chinese Government, responding to a World Bank study on thedevelopment of payment systems in the country, has been committed todeveloping a nationwide cashless payment system. This commitment isexpressed in the development of the Golden Card project.In Malaysia, MasterCard launched its Maestro/Cirrus programme throughtwo organisations in 1993. It hopes to issue 500,000 internationaldebit cards in the country by the end of 1995. MasterCard's Mundt toldAsian Banker that there are already 5,000 Maestro acceptance locations,mostly at petrol kiosks, in Malaysia.The banks currently issuing the Maestro/Cirrus cards are MBf CardsServices, a non-bank issuer which pegged the card on its existingVision bank card, and Standard Chartered Bank.Maestro went on-line in the Philippines as an extension of the BPIExpress Payment System debit programme. Link-ups are expected withJetco, the domestic point of sale debit switch provider in Hong Kong.Cost issuesTim Molly, a director with VISA International, said that merchantsaccepting Maestro transactions will have to pay acquirers transactionfees that are similar to fees for credit card transactions.Mei-may Lek Bors, a debit programme director with MasterCard, toldAsian Banker that debit programmes offer profit opportunities toacquiring institutions in the form of higher interchange fees, a newsource of merchant revenue, and the overall lower implementation cost.For issuing members, the profit opportunities arise from interchangefees, transaction fees and annual membership fees.In Australia, where direct debit initiatives were driven by themerchants in the past, it was the banks that paid the merchants toacquire their transactions. This was called the "negative interchangefees" and was thought to be the trend that would develop.However, Jim Culbertson, the VISA country manager for Australia, toldAsian Banker that this situation was unique to Australia and only inthe past when the merchants originally invested in the technology. Thistrend is being reversed in Australia as smaller merchants sign up withbanks that have already got the infrastructure in place. As such, it isthe merchants that now have to pay transaction fees to the acquiringbanks.There are cost benefits also for the customer. MasterCard's Mundt toldAsian Banker in an interview that in 1995 alone, there were 330 millioncredit and debit cross-border transactions around the world. Seventypercent, or 210 million, of those transactions were for cash withdrawalon ATMs.Mundt also pointed out that customers would benefit from the lowerexchange rates used for debit products and save between $5 to $10 pertransaction. He is convinced that the market would welcome a cheaperdebit-based service that would enable them to access cash from theirown home accounts.Transaction equipment manufacturersHypercom, which accounts for 90 percent of the credit card verificationdevices market, and its competitor VeriFone, which accounted for 60percent of all new installations exported from the US in 1994, are bothbelieved to be making major advances in the area of developing commonterminal acceptance for debit as well as credit and smart cards.Other competitors in the market are Taiwanese-based ADI, France-basedIngenico and the Australian company KeyCorp. Domestic competitors  suchas Fuzhou's Star Group are also coming on-stream.Connecting to smart cardsAll debit card players in the market have an eye towards building asmart card capability in their overall cards strategy. Adding a chip ona debit card is beneficial as it enhances the security of transactions,whether they are credit or debit and can be loaded with value. Theseare also called electronic purses.There are other benefits of smart cards, such as the ability to storerelationship data with merchants and the bank. This has beensuccessfully exploited by major retail organisations such asTakashimaya in Singapore which has issued up to 200,000 cards to date.This is why transaction automation players such as Verifone are keen topush terminals in the market that can process smart card as well ascards with the traditional magnetic strip on them. Verifone has alsoset up a joint venture marketing company with the smart cardmanufacturer GemPlus, called VeriGem, to promote the move towards asmart card-based payments system.Which way now?MasterCard's Mundt told Asian Banker that MasterCard will not allowMaestro to be resident on the same card as the MasterCard credit card,at least not in the foreseeable future. He also said that MasterCardwould not allow duality to participating institutions. This means thatissuers would not be allowed to put MasterCard's Maestro and VISA'sInterlink on the same debit card.He is convinced that having a credit and a direct debit facility on onecard will cause confusion to users and merchants, particularly inmarkets where direct debit facilities are not yet available. Mundt toldAsian Banker that MasterCard may reverse this policy if there isworldwide availability of account select between credit and debittransactions at merchant's EFTPOS terminals. This policy is significantas it is different from the relationship card strategy taken by VISA,which allows all facilities to be resident on one card.So which way will the banks and financial institutions go in Asia?Francois Dutray, the group executive vice president of VISAInternational responsible for product development, told Asian Bankerthat "we can't make the members do what they don't want to do".Both organisations will obviously push their international debit cardsas one of the products to member associations. The cards market maywell have enough space for credit and debit products to co-exist sideby side successfully in the near future.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MASTERCARD INTERNATIONALMEI-MAY LEK Bors, director of MasterCard's Debit Card Programme inSoutheast Asia, revealed at a Verifone seminar late last year that1,444 institutions in 58 countries worldwide have signed up toparticipate in the Maestro programme. The programme has gone live in 28countries and 168 million cards have been issued for use on 536,271point of sale terminals.In the Asia Pacific region alone, 80 member institutions have signed upfor Maestro involving 29,392 million committed cards and 8,375 millionlive cards. Out of 96,197 point of sale terminals which have beencommitted, 25,920 have gone live. Around the region, 51,778 merchantshave committed to the programme out of which 15,552 have gone live.According to MasterCard, there are 9 million active Maestro cards inthe Asia Pacific region and another 43.5 million cards committed. Thisis supported by more than 24,000 terminals in the region and 505,000terminals worldwide.According to Henry Mundt, MasterCard's director for Global DebitServices, in total there are 110 million debit cards in MasterCard'sMaestro and Cirrus programmes around the world. He expects the AsiaPacific region to be the fastest growing for the organisationworldwide. The region will commit approximately 16 million live cardsby the end of 1995.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VISA INTERNATIONALACCORDING TO Eric Trotter a director with VISA International is arelatively new player in the region's international debit market. VISAPlus is its ATM access card and VISA Interlink is its debit card foruse at EFTPOS terminals.The Interlink programme is better developed in Australia than othercountries in the region. Fifty-eight banks have signed up to theprogramme in that country. In Asia itself, Singapore is the firstcountry in the region to introduce the VISA Interlink card.Elsewhere, Interlink will be introduced in Korea (going live inNovember), Malaysia (five members issuing), Thailand (working with ThaiFarmers' Bank and Thai Military Bank to acquire Interlink transactions,while four out of the top six banks already issue such cards), HongKong (three projects), Singapore (first full issuing and acquiringproject with UOB Bank) and Taiwan (four banks have signed up). He alsomentioned initiatives in New Zealand, Indonesia and the Philippines.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THE MASTERCARD-VERIFONE ALLIANCE PROGRAMMEIN AUGUST this year, MasterCard and Verifone announced a jointmarketing alliance to promote the acquisition of on-line debittransaction equipment by banks for use at merchant points of sale.Under the scheme, discounts and bonuses are given for selected Verifonesystems for deployment in targeted merchants such as fast foodrestaurants, supermarkets, pharmacies, petrol kiosks and other retailoutlets. The Verifone terminals being promoted are the Omni 395Transaction Automation System, a printer roll, and/or Printer 950 andthe PINpad 1000 entry device.The combination supports credit, debit and smart card transactions, allon the same system. The Printer 950 also supports Japanese, Chinese andKorean languages as well as supporting customised printing.Verifone is also committed to provide training and support services tosupport the successful take up of the new technology.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CLIENT/SERVER - THE NEW COMPUTING PARADIGM?Asian Banker investigates the impact of client/server technology, andhighlights some of the key issues that banks should be looking atEVERY ORGANISATION, including banks, wants to know, in measurableterms, that the benefits derived from their investments in informationtechnology should exceed, if not at least equal, the costs involved.With new technology the task of justifying such investment becomes evenharder. The task becomes even more tedious when one considersclient/server technology.Although significant cost savings may be available in automating anapplication on a client/server rather than a mainframe system, the costsavings may not be as pronounced when comparing mid-range systems toclient/servers. Many mid-range systems are priced to compete withlarger multi-workstation LANs (local area networks), and thedevelopment tools and the on-line security features available onmid-range systems may be more advanced than the client/servers.Similarly, fully-featured turnkey application software may be generallyavailable on a mid-range system, while client/server-based applicationsoftware may lack the functionality desired by larger financialinstitutions.Organisation-wide application systems are generally less attractivecandidates for downsizing to client/servers than departmentapplications. Departmental applications tend to have a limited numberof users and less sophisticated database and integration requirementsthan organisation-wide systems. Consequently, these systems can bemoved to client/server architecture with less risk and less potentialnegative impact on the organisation as a whole.Moving to a client/server architecture may not be a difficult process.Data extraction tools, file transfer tools, query languages,downloading and uploading tools, and PC interface products allcontribute to the cultural change necessary to implement client/servertechnology. The next step is providing graphical user interfaces to endusers so data can be represented in a more "user friendly" format -with charts, graphs and other pictorial representations.Some productivity gains may be found with client/server technology.Mainframe development time has long been the Achilles' heel ofmainframe computing - and the most significant reason for consideringplatform changes. Lengthy development time equates to high costs, unmetexpectations and dissatisfied end users. Client/server architectureoffers the advantage of quickly addressing minimum systems requirementand providing tools that can be implemented by the end user withlimited technical support involvement.Ideally, the use of client/server technology will help an organisationbetter utilise the equipment already in place. Most organisations havesignificant investments in personal computer-based systems, which areoften used for"resource sharing" - that is, local area networks set upto share hardware resources, which may be under-utilised in theclient/server context.Client/server architecture provides the capability for the front-endportion of major application to be processed on a LAN, while theback-end portion of the application can reside on the mainframe system.Each system should be dependent on the other for the transfer andcommunication of timely information, and together they should form theentire application system.US-based IT magazine Computerworld recently cited a survey by SentryMarket Research, which found 70 percent of IT shops predicting thatclient/server will ultimately be their primary computing model. InAsia, although no similar survey has been carried out, industrywatchers believe that within the next two to five years, large Asianbanks will start to deploy client/servers in the more mission criticaland higher volume back-office applications.While most client/server implementations have occurred in selectedapplications, organisations are now focused on moving mission critical,strategic applications towards client/server technology.As the market moves towards the new paradigm, there are many lessons tobe learned from earlier experiences with the technology. Earlierimplementators of client/server technology found that the costsinvolved far exceeded what was budgeted, especially labour, networkingand training bills. Worse, the expected benefits were hard to measureand quantify. Productivity and improved customer service wereattributes which were simply impossible to be put on the balance sheetand analyse.One of the prime movers behind client/servers technology has been thebusiness unit managers who have profit and loss responsibilities.Tasked and under pressure to realise ever increasing revenues andincome targets, these managers see client/server as the technologicalenabler that will bring about faster and more prolific productdevelopment, improved customer service and decreased costs.Client/server may or may not provide the tool that is needed to achievethese goals. However, the question can only be ultimately answered whensystems are fully deployed.The implementation of client/server systems may improve productivity ofthe organisation's non-technical resources as well as technicalresources. Client/server systems should provide tools for the end userfor data extraction, reporting and graphical interfaces. In some cases,both technical and non-technical personnel will have access to CASE(computer-aided software engineering) tools for developing andenhancing client/server applications.Although mainframe processing work load can be reduced throughclient/server technology, this is not the area of greatest benefit tothe organisation. Data integrity may be improved by providing anenvironment where information is created and maintained closer to theuser department responsible for information ownership. Through goodapplication controls, this information in detailed form can beavailable to many user departments, but controlled through securitypractices and procedures. Duplicate information and dispersedinformation, which may lack consistency and accuracy, could beminimised with proper design of the application.While client/server architecture offers some significant benefits tothe organisation, it also can have disadvantages. Applicationmaintenance when dealing with several platforms, data structure andprogramming languages could increase the complexity of the change.Consequently, CASE tools that embrace departmental and host processingrequirements are important to minimise ongoing support and maintenanceof client/server systems. In addition, the lack of standards forclient/server technology may reduce the consistency of applications.Ultimately, the lack of standards impacts the speed of modification andimplementation when application requirements need to change. Some defacto standards already exist in the industry, such as the UNIX orNovell operating systems for server operating software and SQL(structured query language) for interfacing and accessing variousdatabase systems. However, more specific standards may be needed forthe organisation to ensure proper control over the development andimplementation process. This can be achieved through a standardscommittee, which would be responsible for identifying standards for theorganisation.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SOVEREIGN RISK: BANK DEPOSITS V. BONDSMoody's explains why it maintains foreign currency bank depositceilings that are distinct from foreign currency sovereign ceilingsIN OUR view, the two ratings (a foreign currency bank deposit ratingand a foreign currency sovereignity rating) are needed to reflectinherent differences in the credit risks of bank deposits versus bonds.As sovereign ceilings, both types of ratings are intended to accountfor foreign currency transfer risk - the risk that no matter howcreditworthy a given borrower domiciled in the nation may be, thatborrower always remains subject to transfer risks.On the basis of both empirical evidence and analytical considerations,we believe that foreign currency transfer risk applies somewhatdifferently to bonds and notes than it does to foreign currency bankdeposits, especially as we move down the ratings scale.Specifically, a review of worldwide sovereign default experience sinceWorld War II shows that when sovereign nations have defaulted on any oftheir foreign currency obligations (in our concept of default weinclude missed or delayed disbursement of interest and/or principal,and/or obligatory credit maintenance arrangements), they have been morelikely to default on bank deposits and commercial loans than onsovereign bonds or notes.Put differently, when sovereigns have come under sufficient financialstress to default on foreign commercial loans, if they have had anysignificant amount of foreign currency bank deposits, they have usuallyalso defaulted on these deposits -but not necessarily on theirsovereign bonds.In fact, we have concluded that the overall risk that a particularcountry will "reschedule" foreign currency deposits comes very close toequalling the overall risk that country will becoming involved in anytype of foreign currency debt rescheduling. The risk of a bond defaulthas been significantly lower.There are several key reasons for this. For one, the consequences ofdefaulting on (ie. rescheduling) bank deposits or loans has been morepredictable and potentially far less detrimental to a nation'sinterests than defaulting on bonds and notes. In addition, it is clearin international law that a foreign currency bank deposit is generallywithin the purview of the country where it is located. Thus, agovernment that forces a rescheduling of foreign currency bank depositsthrough changes in its foreign exchange policy is unlikely to face asuccessful legal challenge to its action from depositors.By contrast, given the erosion of the older concept of sovereignimmunity since World War II, the legal immunity of sovereign whodefaults on foreign currency bonds has become considerably moreproblematical than it once was.Increasingly, defaulting sovereigns will face determined legalchallenges from bond-holders armed and encouraged by such developmentsas the 1992 US Supreme Court case of Argentina v. Weltover, whichsanctioned an action brought against a sovereign borrower in a USCourt, Great Britain's State Immunity Act of 1978, which limited claimsof sovereign immunity, and the European Convention on SovereignImmunity which has also codified limits to claims of sovereignimmunity.Given this risk differential, we are likely to maintain foreigncurrency bank deposit ceilings that are in some cases lower than ourratings for sovereign bonds and notes, While these ratings will tend inpractice to be identical in the case of countries characterised by highcredit quality - due to small differences in the two risks forcountries at the higher end of the ratings scale - they may diverge inthe case of countries in the lower investment grade or below investmentgrade range.The conceptual frameworkIn order to establish foreign currency bank deposit ceilings that aredistinct from currency sovereign ceilings, several preliminary tasksare required, including: 1) an examination of what distinguishessovereign borrowers from other borrowers; 2) an empirical analysis ofsovereign default experience; and 3) an examination of implications ofthe changing legal and economic framework for sovereign borrowing.As indicated in this report, the legal framework surrounding sovereigndefault has evolved considerably since 1945.In the prewar period, countries enjoyed near-total immunity fromlawsuits. That is no longer true in the US, the UK, or throughout mostof Europe.A good way to start a technical discussion is to lay out firstprinciples. By now, although most investors have become comfortablewith the concept of foreign currency sovereign ceiling, it is stillalways worth defining our terms to avoid any misunderstanding.What is sovereignty?The first thing we should ask ourselves here is what is meant by"sovereign"? According to Webster's dictionary, the possession ofsovereignty means having "supreme power, especially over a body politicwhat distinguishes sovereign borrowers from all other creditors.The self-image of sovereign states, and the way that sovereign statesview each other, have changed in many important ways over thecenturies. During various periods in history, sovereignty has lain withvillages, towns, cities and tribes. At some points sovereignty becameassociated with entire empires. In the modern period, sovereignty hasbecome a property almost exclusively of the nation state, a relativelyrecent political development. Since nation states did not appearspontaneously, but rather emerged over time, it should not besurprising that the nature of nation-state sovereignty has evolved andmutated as circumstances have changed.Freedom from a higher authority is clearly an important characteristicof sovereignty. However, as we know from history, powerful states haveoften influenced events in weaker ones through military, economic,and/or diplomatic means.What appears to be relevant since 1945 is that military intervention byone state against another is no longer considered to be an acceptablemodus operandi, except for the gravest of reasons. Prior to 1945,nations often used military force for all sorts of reasons: colonialambitions, ideology, territorial expansion, etc. In some cases,countries resorted to military intervention to insure repayment offoreign debts.To realise how international convention has changed, one need onlyconsider that in today's world no one would ever propose militaryintervention to deal with a sovereign state that was unable to meet itsforeign currency obligations on a timely basis, in contrast to the 19thand early 20th centuries, when such measures were resorted to onseveral occasions.In recent decades we have seen the development of a greater respect fornational sovereignty. For instance, international boundaries are nowgenerally considered inviolate, as is a government's right tonon-interference in its domestic political affairs - except perhapswhen basic human rights are grossly threatened. Ironically, at the sametime, increased international co-operation has in practice tended toreduce actual expressions of sovereignty.Economic co-operation, economic integration, economic interdependenceall are creating a situation in which new limitations upon sovereigntyare evolving. A perfect example of this development is the developmentis the changing relationship between commercial law and sovereignstates.Any credit analysis must take into account not only a debtor's ability- but also its willingness - to repay. Determining a country's abilityto repay is in the end not very difficult task. In all but the mostextreme cases, countries have the ability to repay their debts.This may appear surprising to anyone who lived through the debit crisisof the 1980s, let alone the economic devastation of 1930s. But in fact,no matter what their economic status, countries usually have theresources needed to repay their debts. However, as John Moody pointedin 1933, when discussing depression-era sovereign defaults, "Many[sovereigns] were confronted with the choice between suspension of debtservices or almost complete elimination of imports." As he noted,import reduction could only be taken so far. If imports declined beyonda certain point, governments faced the possibility of politicalunrest.[1] The real question is - what level of resource mobilisationare governments willing to undertake in order to repay their debts? Inthe end, willingness to repay is the key to sovereign credit analysis.And here we do not mean merely the desire to repay, but rather thedesire coupled with willingness to bear the consequences of repayment.Governments may not like the economic and/or political consequences ofpolicies which would enable them to meet payments on their debts. Thereis often a kind of conventional wisdom regarding the degree ofsacrifice which should be required in order for a sovereign to remaincurrent. In the final analysis, the nature of the "willingness issue"is what distinguishes commercial from sovereign borrowers.If a commercial borrower lacks willingness, legal sanctions up to andincluding asset seizure and liquidation are available to creditors.However, in cases where sovereign borrowers refused to pay - or as ismore likely the case, refuse to repay according to original terms -they are immune from most of the legal sanctions available to creditorsvis-a-vis non-sovereign borrowers. Obviously, sovereign borrowerscannot be forced into bankruptcy.Until recently, foreign sovereign borrowers could not even be broughtinto court in the world's major financial centres. Even now, attachingsovereign assets is seldom seen as a viable option. Fortunately forcreditors, however, other less drastic sanctions, which will bediscussed below, appear to preclude frivolous sovereign defaults.More importantly, there are many incentives for sovereigns to maintaintheir creditworthiness. For instance, a creditworthy sovereign borrowerhas much lower borrowing costs than one which has a poor credithistory. Economic conditions which contribute to sovereigncreditworthiness are also often associated with more rapid economicgrowth. The more rapid the rise in income, generally the happier is anational body politic. Unless subject to considerable stress, sovereignborrowers clearly would prefer to meet their financial obligations on atimely basis.Sovereign ceilingsSovereign ceilings for bonds and notes represent the highest foreigncurrency rating an issuer might have where the obligor is subject tothe sovereignty of a particular government. Such ratings are based uponthe default risk for medium and/or long-term debt obligations issued bya national government (denominated in a foreign currency), either inits own name or with a guarantee. Put differently, it represents the"foreign currency transfer risk" associated with investing in aparticular country.In cases where there is no particular debt obligation outstanding, asovereign ceiling rating could still be issued based on an assessmentof risk posed by a national government if it were to issue a foreigncurrency obligation.We consider such obligations to represent the lowest foreign currencydefault risk within a country. The reason: a national government,through its ability to mobilise foreign currency assets within its owndomain, has almost by definition the best ability to obtain foreignexchange of any issuer within the country. For instance, governmentsmay, and often have, imposed foreign exchange controls. Governmentsmay, and often have, instituted foreign currency deposit regulationsaimed at capturing foreign exchange within the country. The toolsavailable to a government to gain access to foreign exchange are wellestablished and clearly recognised under international law.Private issuers often have argued that their obligations posed a lowerrisk than those of their own government in this regard because of theirspecial circumstances. Although we always explore each case on anindividual basis, in the end, if the issuer is subject to the law ofits home government, even if its activities are mainly undertakenoutside the home country, we have found that the issuer is in factstill subject to the foreign currency sovereign ceiling. The foreigncurrency sovereign ceiling does not necessarily represent the risk ofthe establishment of exchange controls.Nor does it necessarily represent the risk of rescheduling bank loans.Rather, it represents simply the assessment of default risk on mediumand long-term debt foreign currency marketable debt obligations ofnational governments, which in our view carry, in almost allcircumstances, the lowest foreign currency default risk in thatparticular country.Sovereign ceilings for foreign currency bank deposits represent thedefault risk of: 1) foreign currency- denominated bank deposits heldwithin a country; 2) deposits with a branch of a foreign bank locatedin the particular country; 3) deposits with a foreign branch of a bankdomiciled in that country. A foreign currency bank deposit in anyforeign-currency-denominated deposit (eg. in Mexico, any depositdenominated in any currency except the peso) in any domestic bank orforeign bank branch located in the country. (A foreign currency depositheld with Citibank's Mexico City branch office would be subject to theMexican foreign currency bank deposit ceiling.)It also includes any foreign-currency denominated deposits in foreignbranches of the country's banks. A Japanese yen deposit in the New Yorkbranch of a Mexican bank would be subject to default risk posed eitherby US or Mexican government.But since the bank is subject to the laws of its home country, in thiscase Mexican, any legal actions taken by the Mexican government mayhave an impact upon the bank's ability to meet its foreign currencyobligations anywhere in the world, despite the deposit being located inthe US. Therefore, the Mexico foreign currency bank deposit ceilingwould apply, despite the deposit's US location.Looked at from a different angle, since the Mexican bank's foreigncurrency deposit rating is limited by the Mexican sovereign ceiling forthe bank deposits, the ratings on deposits by Mexican financialinstitutions anywhere in the world are limited by the rating of foreigncurrency deposits of the bank in its home country.A default on a foreign currency bank deposit would be judged to occurif the government mandated credit maintenance facilities, which meansthat if any depositor withdraws a deposit, the depositor mustimmediately redeposit/relend the same amount as was withdrawn (eg. arequirement whereby a maturing certificate or CD must be replaced bythe purchase of new CD or provide other credit equal to the amount ofmaturing CD).What do we mean by "default"?Moody's defines default as any missed or delayed disbursement ofinterest and/or principal. We include as defaults distressed exchangeswhere: (1) the issuer offers bondholders of depositors a new securityof package of securities the amount to a diminished financialobligation (such as preferred or common stock, debt with a lower couponor par amount, or less liquid deposit either because of a change inmaturity or currency of denomination, or required credit maintenancefacilities) and (2) the exchange has the apparent purpose of helpingthe borrower avoid default.Moody's also classifies as a default when an issuer delays payment evenwhen payment is ultimately made within the grace period provided for inan indenture or deposit agreement. Our rationale for including graceperiod defaults is simply that a contractual payment was not made whendue.It is important to keep this definition in mind, because manycommentators use"default" in a much narrower sense, that is, in thelegal context of creditor actually declaring a debtor in default on aparticular obligation, resulting in a judgment by a court in favour ofthe creditor.Anyone who examines the post-World War II period will quickly recognisethe significant practical difference between what we mean by defaultand what a judge might determine to be a default in a legal proceeding.This analysis will provide some explanations of why creditors, inrecent year, have not declared sovereign debtors in default, even whenthese same sovereigns would have been considered in default using ourcriteria.Empirical evidenceSince the debt crisis of the 1980s, there has been a tremendousresurgence of interest in pre-World War II sovereign defaults. This iscertainly understandable, for analysing the past is always useful inproviding insights into possible future developments. Now that we haveonce again entered a period where sovereign borrowers - in particularmost of the world's significant developing countries - have returned tointernational bond markets in a big way, many observers see the threatof a repeat of the sovereign defaults of the 1930s as an object lessonfor what might lie ahead for creditors.Others see the experience of the 1980s, where sovereign defaults onbonds or other publicly traded securities were relatively rare, as aclear indication that such sovereign securities are now substantiallyimmune from default risk. When we examine the history of both theprewar period and the debt crisis of the 1980s in the light of thestructural changes which have occurred in the financial and legalframework of international capital markets since 1945, a much morecomplex picture emerges. (Editor's Note: Due to space constraint, weare unable to publish the full and interesting examination of thehistory of defaults, but subscribers may request for a full version ofthis comment.)Although in 1980 official creditors still supplied a greater amount ofcredit than commercial banks or bond markets did, the marginal increasein lending in the decade was dramatically higher for commercial banks -from about 10 percent of the total in 1970 to 40 percent in 1980 - thanfor official creditors. The increase in the relative importance ofbonds as a source of funds for the LDC's was modest.The Debt CrisisMexico's debt moratorium began a period where defaulting on sovereigndebt to commercial creditors became a rather commonplace occurrenceboth in the developing world and among the socialist or formersocialist countries, with over the years, several hundred billiondollars worth of credits falling into default.This was due to a combination of economic pressures, including adisinflationary commodity price environment, credit quality problemsemerging in the domestic markets of the major creditor nations (eg. thesavings and load industry's restructuring due to a changing interestrate and regulatory environment in the US), and the emergence ofeconomic bottlenecks in the more advanced socialist economies. Alltold, approximately 50 countries have defaulted on their sovereign andcommercial obligations since August 1982 (vs. 27 countries from 1960 to1982). Many of these countries have had to reschedule more than once.During this time period, we have also seen reschedulings of previouslyrescheduled debt. A number of countries have had a portion of theirdebt forgiven by commercial creditors in recent year. A similar patternemerges when examining official credits.One category of debt which seemed, according to many, to have escapeddefault during the crisis of the 1980s was bonds or other marketablesecurity debt. Unfortunately, on closer examination, this does notprove to be the case - at least not to the degree generally believed.Beyond the Costa Rican, Polish, and Rhodesian (Zimbabwe) defaults,which predate August 1982, after a careful search into the records, wehave found that six additional countries defaulted on foreign currency,marketable securities debt.Changes in the Legal Framework since WWIIWhile changes have been occurring in the structure of world financialmarkets, other important changes have also been taking place whichimpact the whole question of sovereign risk. One of the most importantchanges has been the growth of restrictions on appeals to sovereignimmunity.This development, on the surface, seems counterintuitive, especiallyduring a period when nation-states have increasingly tried to respectthe right of other nation-states. The reasons are quitestraightforward.If sovereign immunity were absolute, then any contract with a companywholly-owned by a foreign government would be unenforceable in a court.This was not only the disadvantage of the non-sovereign participant toa contract, but also would put publicly-owned companies at adisadvantage in international trade. The risk of entering intocontracts with them would be too great in many instances.Therefore, it was to the advantage of both sovereign-owned firms andnon-sovereign firms for sovereign-owned companies not to be consideredfully protected by appeals to sovereign immunity So for the first time,sovereign states had a vested interest in seeing their own sovereignimmunity curtailed in order that their newly acquiredcommercial/industrial activities might prosper.As time passed, more and more activities were felt to be outside thetraditional sovereign immunity sphere. Although these developmentsbegan to emerge gradually through individual legal decisions, some ofthese changes became codified in the US in the Sovereign Immunities Actof 1976, and in the UK in the State Immunity Act of 1978, and byinternational agreement in the European Convention on State Immunity.Despite these relatively recent attempts to codify sovereign immunityquestions, major points of contention still remain, resulting, as onewould expect in this increasingly litigious world, in various lawsuits,some of which helped illuminate certain aspects of the remainingproblems.Medium and Long-Term Debt of the LDC's [12] US$ BillionsOwed to:             1970 (% of total)   1980 (% of total)Official Creditors   32.1   (84.9)       182.7   (53.5)Commercial Banks      3.8   (10.1)       139.5   (40.9)Bond Markets          1.9    (5.0)        19.1    (5.6)                     37.8  (100.0)       341.3  (100.0)Default Experience, 1960-1982Although most observers would not characterise this period asparticularly turbulent in terms of sovereign defaults, on carefulexamination one finds more defaults than conventional wisdom wouldseem to indicate.Debt to official creditors:  During this period, at least 22countries defaulted on debt to official creditors. (As pointed outearlier our definition of default includes reschedulings.)Countries Which Defaulted On Official Creditor Debt,1960-August 1982ArgentinaPakistanBrazilPeruCentral African RepublicPolandChileRomaniaGabonSenegalGhanaSierra LeoneIndiaSudanIndonesiaTogoLiberiaTurkeyMadagascarUgandaNicaraguaZaireCommercial Bank Debt: During this same time period, at least 17countries defaulted on debt owed to commercial banks. There is noevidence that any of these other countries were ever legallydeclared "in default" by a court of law, with one exception. In 1979a major New York bank declared Iran in default and succeeded insetting off deposits against the unpaid loan.[13] This defaultoccurred as a result of sanctions being placed against Iran. Theissue was later settled by negotiation.Countries Which Defaulted On Foreign Currency Marketable Securities1970-1990ArgentinaCosta RicaGuatemalaNigeriaPanamaPolandRhodesia (Zimbabwe)UruguayYugoslaviaArgentina defaulted on bonds (bonods). Guatemala restructured itsstabilisation bond debt. Nigeria defaulted on government-guaranteedpromissory notes. Panama defaulted on both bonds and floating ratenotes. Uruguay defaulted on bearer treasury bonds. Yugoslaviadefaulted on short-term bonds. Therefore, although it is clear thatsince the 1970s, at least, marketable security debt has defaultedless the risk of default of sovereign marketable security debt isnegligible.Countries Which Defaulted On Commercial Bank Debt 1960-August 1982ArgentinaPoland*BoliviaRhodesia*Costa Rica*RomaniaIranSenegalLiberiaSudanMadagascarTogoNicaraguaTurkeyPeruZairePhilippines* Also defaulted on bonds or notes.Bonds and Notes: It was much rarer for governments to default onforeign-currency-denominated bonds or notes between 1960 and August1982. But it did happen. Specifically, Costa Rica, Poland andRhodesia (present-day Zimbabwe) all defaulted on international bondsand/or notes. We have found no evidence that either Costa Rica orPoland were legally declared in default on marketable securitiesalthough it has been reported that creditors did go to court inSwitzerland to try to remedy a default by Bank Handlowy (Poland'sofficial foreign trade bank).[14] It is not clear from our search ofthe published records whether there was ever a formal defaultjudgment made against Rhodesia. Rhodesia's default is easilyexplained by the civil war and the burden of internationalsanctions. Costa Rica and Poland's defaults were related to economic/political developments within both countries. Altogether, then,from 1960 to 1982, at least 22 countries defaulted/rescheduledagainst official creditors, 17 countries against commercial banks,with just three defaulting on marketable securities. However, theaggregate amount of credit involved, however, although difficult tomeasure from public sources, was nonetheless small enough so thatthe international financial system was in no way threatened by anyof these defaults/reschedulings. But once Mexico announced itspayments moratorium in August 1982, sovereign credits entered a newphase.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MITSUBISHI BANK'S PROFITS RISEMitsubishi Bank's consolidated net profit rose 15 percent in the firsthalf year ended September 30 1995. Net profits totalled 24.11 billionyen ($237.2 million), or 8.37 yen a share, compared with 21.02 billionyen, or 7.13 yen a share, a year earlier. Problem loans stood at 790.1billion yen as of September 30 1995, down from 1.123 trillion yen atMarch 31 1995. Non-performing loans accounted for 610.9 billion yen ofthe problem loans. Reserves against uncollectible accounts totalled500.7 billion yen, equal to 63 percent of total problem loans.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BANK OF TOKYO'S INTERIM RESULTSBank of Tokyo's net profit totalled 10.02 billion yen, or 4.92 yen ashare, in the half year ended September 30 1995. Reserves againstuncollectible accounts totalled 401.3 billion yen, equal to 60 percentof total problem loans of 667.8 billion yen at September 30 1995.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HANA BANK COMPLETES ISSUE OF FLOATING RATE NOTESHana Bank completed an issue of $50 million floating rate notes (FRNs).The interest margin of Hana Bank's borrowing dropped from a 46 basispoint in 1994 to a 42 basis point in 1995 over the six-month Londoninterbank offered rate. The cost of funding for some Korean bankssoared from 39 to 45 basis points, resulting in some banks scrappingtheir fund raising plans. The rise of the loan rates was due tothe"Japanese premium". Hana Bank will use $30 million for domesticlending and the rest for offshore offices in Southeast Asia.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CITYTRUST SHARE OFFERAyala Corp, including the bank of the Philippine Islands, will joinMadrigal Group for the exercise of the latter's rights over CitytrustBanking shares. Citytrust shares held by Citibank Overseas Investmentand Philex Mining have been offered for sale. The exact number ofshares up for sale had not been disclosed by the time Asian Banker wentto press. Citibank currently has a 47 percent stake in Citytrust andPhilex holds 17 percent. Only partial sales will be up for sale as bothparties will keep enough shares to maintain at least one board seateach in the ten-person Citytrust board. Madrigal Group has the upperedge because it already has a 16 percent stake in Citytrust, making itthe third-largest shareholder after Citibank and Philex. Ayala wants tohave an equal footing eventually with Madrigal in Citytrust.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996METROPOLITAN BANK & TRUST INTERIM RESULTSMetropolitan Bank & Trust's net profit in the first 11 months of 1995was PPs3 billion ($114.4 million). The bank was on track to meet itsyearly target of PPs3.5 billion. For the 11- month period revenuetotalled PPs12.3 billion. Interest income composed the bulk of therevenue, amounting to PPs9.6 billion, while the remaining PPs2.7billion came from bank charges, fee- based income, foreign exchange andtrading gains.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FAR EAST BANK AND TRUST FORECASTSFar East Bank and Trust Company (FEBTC) was expecting a capital ofPPs10 billion ($384.6 million) and a net income growth of 10 to 15percent by the end of 1995. Assets were expected to grow to PPs90billion by the year end. The bank aims to reinforce its position as oneof the largest banks and is expected to increase its branches to 300within the next two and a half years from the current 220. FEBTC alsoexpects to have its own rights offering for purposes of increasing itscapital as soon as it gets the approval from its shareholders.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GOVERNMENT UPS STAKE IN LAND BANKLand Bank recently turned over to President Ramos a stock certificaterepresenting the bank's PPs4.2 billion ($162 million) stock dividend infavour of the national government. This increases the nationalgovernment's share holdings in Land Bank by 233 percent, from PPs1.8billion to PPs4.2 billion. In addition, Land Bank paid cash dividendsto the national government of over PPs600 million ($23 million) in 1994-95. This translates to a 266 percent return on investment of thegovernment in the unibank.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK PRIVATISATION OFFERING UNDERSUBSCRIBEDThe Philippine National Bank (PNB) third tranche privatisation offeringallotment to the member brokers of the Philippines Stock Exchange (PSE)was undersubscribed due to miscommunication between PNB and PSE. Out ofthe 180 brokerage firms only 120 were able to subscribe to theoffering. PNB blames PSE for releasing the offer sheet only one daybefore the deadline. The PNB sold 7.3 million shares and 2.4 warrantsattached to every three PNB shares. PNB expects to get an estimatedPPs1.750 billion ($68.6 million). These funds will help with itsprivatisation.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FLOATING RATE CD ISSUESecurity Bank and Trust Company (SBTC) recently tapped theinternational capital market with its $30 million Floating RateCertificate of Deposit (FRCD) issuance, the first in its operation as acommercial bank in the country. Proceeds from the issuance have beenset for the improvement of the bank's foreign currency lendingrequirements and for the purchase of more securities to enhance thebank's investment portfolio.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNITED WORLD CHINESE BANK PROFITSUnited World Chinese Commercial Bank, or UWCCB, posted a pre-tax profitfor the first 11 months of T$3.81 billion ($139.5 million), 96 percentof the company's forecast. One of Taiwan's leading banks, UWCCB alsogenerated a higher 11-month revenue of T$26.58 billion. It receivedapproval recently for listing on the local bourse. Jardine FlemingSecurities (Taiwan) expects UWCCB to post a net profit for 1996 ofT$3.6 billion, or T$2.46 a share.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightASIAN BANKER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TAIWAN'S BIG THREE GOVERNMENT BANKS ANNOUNCE LOWER PROFITSTaiwan's Big Three government banks announced lower July-Novemberpre-tax profits for 1995 amid an overall slowdown in Taiwan's financialindustry. First Commercial Bank's pre-tax profit declined by 14 percentto T$2.80 billion ($102.6 million) from T$3.24 billion a year earlier.Hua Nan Commercial Bank's pre-tax profit sagged 22 percent to T$2.65billion from T$3.4 billion. Chang Commercial Bank reported a 4.7percent decline to T$2.42 billion from T$2.54 billion. The TaiwanProvincial Government plans to privatise the Big Three banks by early1997. Currently, the government owns 71.35 percent of First Bankshares, 57.83 percent of Hua Nan Bank and 53.01 percent of ChangCommercial Bank. Taiwan's 59 offshore banking units, or OBUs, jumped20.2 percent to a record $34.599 billion at the end of October 1995from a year earlier.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT03-B37-25IA059-000325-B021-122http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi33.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003408 text/html 28220HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:32:19 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:10 GMTContent-length: 28031Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi33.html Sample Issue Copyright ASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNet January 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEW YORK CITY PLANS TO SECURITIZE TAX LIENS (515 words) LATIN AMERICAN ABS SEEN STABILIZING AFTER SURGE IN '95 (336 words) INVESTORS BULLISH ON ABS PROSPECTS IN '96 (495 words) FIRST CREDIT CARD ISSUES ENJOY SMOOTH RECEPTION (527 words) FASIT CAUGHT IN BUDGET QUAGMIRE (193 words) COMMENTS TO FASB FOCUS ON REPOS (311 words) CITIBANK'S MASTER TRUST RENAMED (92 words) CORRECTION (25 words) FLOATING-RATE SECURITIES WELL-BID AS NEW ISSUANCE BEGINS (330 words) CREDIT CARD ABS WEAKER: MOODY'S (69 words) CHARMING ABS STEADIER IF UNCERTAIN (341 words) NOMURA'S TRAIN DEAL CLOSELY WATCHED AS EURO PIPELINE BUILDS (542 words) CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NEW YORK CITY PLANS TO SECURITIZE TAX LIENSThe nascent movement among municipalities to securitize delinquentproperty taxes took a major step forward last week when New York Citystepped into the fray, requesting proposals from investment banks on howbest to securitize $200 million to $250 million of tax liens; it would bethe biggest such securitization ever.        The city has approximately 250,000 properties with tax arrearstotaling over $2 billion, according to a request-for-proposal document; andit is looking for a team of two to four bankers to underwrite the seniornotes, expected to receive an investment grade rating.        Although the document states that an objective is to complete thetransaction by April 15 -- a timetable one source described as "prettytight" -- the letter also cautions that the implementation and completionof any transaction is subject to the New York City Council's enactment ofpending legislation to permit bulk lien sales. WR Lazard & Co. is thecity's advisor.        A source at City Hall said one of the main goals of the pendinglegislation and securitization is to "enforce taxes" and remove the city asthe lender of last resort, which is what it essentially becomes whensomeone falls behind on his property taxes.        The proposed issue will be backed by the higher quality tax liens,mostly commercial real estate with a high likelihood of repayment.        According to the city, the proposed and subsequent securitizationswill accomplish four things: to increase the cash flow from delinquent taxliens; provide an efficient real property tax enforcement mechanism;increase the current property tax collection rate; and reduce the need forthe city to assume ownership of properties in tax arrears.        "The sale of liens represents a faster, cheaper, and more efficientmethod to enforce property tax collection than the ... foreclosure processthe City currently uses. Tax lien sales will enable the City to restorefairness to the property tax collection system, maintain and improvecollection rates, generate additional cash for operations, and relieveupward pressure on property taxes. Key to the success of a long-term saleprogram will be the initial securitization," the request for proposalsstates.Choosing Bankers        The issue will be sold to institutional investors, but unlike atraditional private placement, it will be fully underwritten by theinvestment banks, which will assume some risk. It will not be a best-efforts transaction, the source at City Hall said. The raised capital willbe funneled into the city's operations fund.The deadline for bankers to submit proposals to the city was last Friday,and a team of underwriters is expected to be chosen in about two weeks.        The document asks bankers to describe their experience implementingnew products such as tax lien securitizations. And the list of those withspecific tax lien securitization experience is quite short.        Most recently, Smith Barney priced a $19 million issue for the Cityof New Haven, Conn., in the fall. Chemical Securities worked on New YorkCity's securitization of cash flows from delinquent tax liens a couple ofyears ago and CS First Boston has structured deals for Jersey City.--Michael SiskBack to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996LATIN AMERICAN ABS SEEN STABILIZING AFTER SURGE IN '95Securitization of future cash flows in Latin America hit an all-time high last year of  almost $3 billion. Although securitization offuture receivables may post a moderate gain in 1996, the market is unlikelyto see the same level of expansion, industry sources said last week.        Duff & Phelps estimates that around $2.8 billion in new future flowtransactions were issued last year, up from around $1.5 billion theprevious year.        "1995 was an extraordinary year," said Michael Moran, assistantvice president. "It won't be that good this year, but we're projectingmoderate growth," he added. New issuers will learn about securitizationthanks to high profile deals from companies like YPF, Moran said. Andinvestment bankers searching for new business in Latin America willcultivate securitized transactions, resulting in slightly greater volumethis year.        Investment bankers note, however, that securitized volume is alwaysdependent on the Eurobond market. If Latin American issuers have access tothat market, many find it more economical.        Following the Mexican peso crisis at the end of 1994, LatinAmerican issuers were essentially shut out of the Euromarket andsecuritized volume grew dramatically as a result in 1995.        This year, the door to the Euromarket may open a crack, noted onebanker active in securitization. Indeed, Mexico already tapped that sectorwith a DM 1 billion bond two weeks ago which was reportedly well-received.        "As conditions improve in the Eurobond market, future receivablesecuritization will inevitably decline," the banker said. But Mexico isstill perceived as risky overall, with BB ratings from Duff & Phelps andStandard & Poor's. "Mexican issuers will still use securitization," hepredicted.        Ultimately, as countries in Latin America reach investment grade,they will switch altogether to Eurobonds from future cash flow deals. Atthat time, these countries will probably be ready to develop their owndomestic asset-backed markets.        However, "this could be a ten-year process," one banker said, andthere may be several more cycles for future flow securitizations in thecoming years as a result.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996INVESTORS BULLISH ON ABS PROSPECTS IN '96Despite the general tightening of spreads in 1995, fixed-incomeinvestors are inclined to increase their allocations to asset-backedsecurities in the year ahead, according to preliminary results from asurvey conducted by Asset Sales Report and MBIA Insurance Corp.  Finaltallies will be presented next week at the American Banker/Asset SalesReport 11th Annual Asset Securitization Conference in Naples, Fla.        Of the 13 institutional investors responding, 11 said they areready to put still more money into ABS even though 10 of the 13 believethat spreads will at best remain near current levels and could widen out in1996. Only one institution expected to cut its allocation to ABS and onesaid that it was unsure at this point whether it would increase or decreaseits commitment to the area.        Despite near unanimity about their commitment to ABS, investorswere clearly more ambivalent about the prospects for interest rates and theeconomy. Of the 13 respondents, seven predicted higher long-term Treasuryrates and six projected a drop.        An averaged forecast from the group would put the long Treasuryrate at about 6.18% at year-end 1996, or almost exactly where it was atlast Wednesday's close. At the time the first surveys were distributed inlate November, the long Treasury yield was at 6.30%.        Similarly,  seven expected that GDP will rise in 1996 while sixforesaw a decline. An averaged growth forecast from the 13  put GDP at again of just under 1% in 1996. There were no projections at either the highgrowth (above 4%) or sharp decline (-4%) ends of the spectrum.        Among the new asset classes that investors showed some interest inwere home improvement loans and subprime auto loan-backed securities. Ineach case, more investors indicated that they would buy the securities in1996 than actually did participate in 1995.        Other areas mentioned were securities backed by 12b-1 feesgenerated by mutual funds and franchise-backed securities. Asset classesthat elicited caution from the investor group included timeshares, futurereceivables, subprime auto loans (appearing on both lists) and LatinAmerican securitizations. In each case, more than three investors said thatthey would not consider participating in these kinds of deals.        Although not listed as a choice in the survey, three investorswrote in to say they would not consider healthcare receivable-backed issuesin the year ahead, possibly owing to the well-publicized fraud in Towers'deals two years ago as well as the complexity of the asset itself.        Overall, however, investors expect to see even more asset-backedsupply in the year ahead. All 13 respondents said they expect at least $100billion in new issuance this year, while 10 said that volume should exceed$110 billion. Two even projected that issuance would top the $130 billionmark. Interestingly, the investors as a group were more bullish on thisyear's issuance level than investment bankers.        Final details on investors' and others' forecasts for 1996 marketwill appear in next week's issue of ASR.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FIRST CREDIT CARD ISSUES ENJOY SMOOTH RECEPTIONThree credit card issuers broke the ice in 1996, issuing around$2.5 billion in new securities last week. All of the deals benefited frompent-up investor demand including the first zero coupon asset-backed bondfrom Citibank.        Advanta's $466 million deal was fully sold just after pricing,reportedly purchased with new cash, while Discover's transaction wasupsized by 100% to $1 billion.        In each case, the deals were structured to appeal to more than onesector of the asset-backed market or to bring in new investors entirely.        Citibank's novel transaction was priced late Thursday through leadmanager Goldman Sachs at 37 bps over Treasury strip of February 2001 andwas quoted at around 37-38 bps over the five-year Treasury bond--on top offive-year credit card securities. Priced at a discount of 74.817237, thebonds yield 5.861%.        The offering attracted around a dozen new investors to the asset-backed market, mainly zero coupon buyers, traders said. "The interestingthing is that this is probably the most liquid zero coupon paper in thatmarket," one syndicate official noted. The 6% subordinate tranche, also azero, was priced 15 bps behind the senior securities by lead managerMerrill Lynch. (Full structure and pricing details will follow next week.)        On Wednesday, Discover basked in the limelight with a five-yearfloater; the issuer tapped into two investor bases, according to anofficial at lead manager Dean Witter. Five-years is short enough for U.S.buyers and although European buyers tend to buy longer-term securities, theDiscover bonds appealed to this sector as well, he noted.        "We put in a $500 million deal and went to $1 billion withoutgiving up anything on the pricing," the official said. It was priced at parwith a coupon of 17 basis points over Libor, and once freed to trade, wasbid there.        At the same time, Salomon Brothers sold two seven-year seniorclasses for Advanta, one fixed and one floating-rate, using a structurealmost identical to the issuer's five-year Series 1995-F in November,except for the maturity and the higher credit enhancement level.        The combined fixed and floating-rate structure "allows us to tapinto two different investor bases," explained Mike Coco, director of creditcard securitization at Advanta. Issuing a fixed-rate bond was especiallyattractive with interest rates so low, he added.        The enhancement level was 100 bps higher than Series 1995-F becauseof the longer maturity. Standard & Poor's "raises the enhancement level forcredit card securities with terms longer than five years," explained RayGalkowski, head of the credit card ratings group at S&P. Although he didnot comment on the Advanta deal specifically, Galkowski said the ratingagency holds that there is an increase in risk the longer the maturity, andthat the five-year term marks a natural dividing point.        The additional support was all within the collateral interest whichwas rated BBB by Fitch Investors Service. Because Fitch did not requiremore enhancement for the longer maturity on the deal, it assigned a higherrating of A+ to the subordinate tranche, according to analyst Mike Dean.        Coco anticipated that Advanta's volume for 1996 would be close tolast year's level of $3 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FASIT CAUGHT IN BUDGET QUAGMIREAs the U.S. budget talks continue, the fate of the Financial AssetSecuritization Investment Trust (FASIT) is hanging in the balance. Whileproponents are optimistic, inclusion of the FASIT in the final legislationis not ensured.        "We're caught in the political crossfire," said Donald B. Susswein,partner at Thacher, Profitt & Wood, who worked on the proposal. The FASITwould extend many of the benefits of the REMIC to non-mortgage assets andwas first proposed as legislation two years ago.        Dampening its chances for passage with the budget package, theFASIT proposal was placed on the Clinton administration's list of"objectionable special interest" provisions in the Budget late last month.However, nine Democratic members of the House Ways and Means Committeeresponded quickly with a letter to White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta,arguing the merits of the FASIT proposal.        "In testimony before the Committee on Ways and Means, Treasurystated that it did not oppose the FASIT legislation," the letter states."Treasury and the Administration have also consistently supported assetsecuritization, included in the context of the Community Development Bankbill." In addition, it concludes, "FASIT is also a revenue raiser."Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996COMMENTS TO FASB FOCUS ON REPOSAs the deadline to comment on FASB's exposure draft onsecuritization draws near, the Board has received about 25 comments, mostlypertaining to repurchase agreements and requesting to testify at a publichearing in February.        Comments on the proposal, "Accounting for Transfers of FinancialAssets and Extinguishments of Liabilities," are due January 22.        According to the commments received, the new rule woulddramatically limit banks' use of repurchase agreements, a major source offunding, especially in light of the Board's recent tightening of financialaccounting standard 115.        The exposure draft was issued around the same time that FASBprovided banks a window to transfer securities currently classified as heldto maturity into the available-for-sale category without a penalty. Thewindow of opportunity in FAS 115, "Accounting for Certain Investments inDebt and Equity Securities," closed at the end of 1995, after which suchtransfers are prohibited.        As a result, a number of banking institutions put longer-term reposinto the held-to-maturity category,  where unrealized gains and lossesneedn't be marked to market. However, the proposed statement would requireany repos with a maturity of three months or more to recorded as a sale,and hence marked to market. Banks would thereby be limited to using reposwith maturities of less than three months to avoid increasing volatility intheir capital bases, and any longer transactions existing when the rulecomes into effect would suddenly have to appear in the income statement.FASB  has noted that the three-month maturity limit on repos is a periodthat was arrived at arbitrarily, largely because the Board believed thatthe vast majority of repo transactions held far shorter maturities. "We'vesince learned that there are more transactions with durations around threemonths than we thought," said Halsey Bullen, the project manager at FASB.The Board will likely reconsider the three-month limit as it continues itsdeliberations.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996CITIBANK'S MASTER TRUST RENAMEDCitibank changed the name of its master trust last week to CitibankCredit Card Master Trust I as part of an effort at the bank to increasename recognition        Since 1991, the trust was known as Standard Credit Card MasterTrust I. All deals issued from the trust will now carry the name Citibank,including its first deal of the year, a $1 billion zero coupon bond lastweek.        With an estimated $44 billion in credit card receivables, Citibankis the largest issuer of Visa and MasterCard credit cards in the world.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996CORRECTIONIn last week's issue, an article on asset-backed returns on page 4referred to a recent research report; that report was published by SalomonBrothers.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FLOATING-RATE SECURITIES WELL-BID AS NEW ISSUANCE BEGINSAfter a two-day hiatus due to snowstorms on the East Coast, newissuance got off to a strong start last week and players were bracing for ablizzard of another sort: another year of credit card issuance.         Despite expectations for increased supply, spreads in thesecondary market held ground, with floating-rate securities enjoyingrenewed demand.        "Once the trigger is pulled on the first deal, others will followquickly," said one rating agency analyst. Indeed, three credit card dealswere priced last week in quick succession: Discover, Advanta, and Citibank.        Despite the addition of $1 billion in new five-year floaters fromDiscover, floaters remained well-bid. The deal was priced "aggressively" at17 basis points over Libor and held at that level once it was free to tradelast week, one investment banker noted.        In general, floaters looked inexpensive compared with fixed-ratebonds on a swap basis, and as a result, dealers and investors were takingadvantage of the opportunity last week, traders said.        Fixed-rate securities suffered neglect as a result of thatopportunity. In addition, one trader said that "investors are apathetic toTreasuries right now and the market in general is backing off."        The five-year, fixed-rate sector, which suffered from oversupply inthe fourth quarter and widened a few basis points as a result, was holdingat around 37 bps to 38 bps over Treasuries.        Advanta's seven-year fixed-rate deal, totaling $220 million, waspriced at 46 bps over Treasury, but was softer when freed to trade, sourcessaid. With interest rates so low, investors were apparently not overlyenthused with longer-term, fixed-rate securities; the floating-rate portionof the Advanta deal went very well, traders agreed.        Home equity loan securities, which had also widened significantlyduring the fourth quarter, tightened at the end of the year and have held,said one trader. Three-year pass-through securities were quoted at between105 bps and 115 bps over Treasury depending on the specific issuer. Three-year tranched paper was quoted at around 85-90 bps.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996CREDIT CARD ABS WEAKER: MOODY'SDelinquencies on securitized credit card portfolios rose in Octoberto 4.23% from 4.17% in September. Overall, "performance continued todecline," said Moody's analyst Ed Bankole, who prepared the credit cardindex (see page 5).        Charge-offs were slightly lower in October but still represent thehighest levels of the year with the exception of September. Thanks tohigher portfolio yield of 18.07%, excess spread moved up to 5.42% from4.80%.Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996CHARMING ABS STEADIER IF UNCERTAINAlthough the retailer faced fears of impending bankruptcy justmonths ago, Charming Shoppes securities could rebound significantly, withSalomon Brothers analyst Paul Jablansky now categorizing the issues as"likely to generate among the best returns in the three-year sector of thecredit card ABS market."        The Bensalem, Penn. based outfit reached a definitive agreementlast month with Congress Financial Corp.  whereby  Congress will provideCharming with a $157 million asset-based working capital facility for aterm of 2.5 years.        Under this arrangement, Charming has successfully restructured $83million of bank debt with existing lenders and substantially extended thetypical 90-day letter of credit.        Recently estimated with a spread over 80bp for a 3-year term,Jablansky says the ABS is now "priced at a level that still heavily weightsthe likelihood of a bankruptcy--and a subsequent early amortization event--during the next 18 months."        Other analysts are not so sure. "It may be compelling, but I'd haveto see a lot of evidence to be convinced," said one source.        "At this point I'd say it continues to be an outlier, pretty hairyand likely to underperform."        In the first nine months of 1995, Charming experienced a comparablesales decline of 22% in its nationwide chain of Fashion Bug and Fashion BugPlus women's clothing stores as rumors of its fiscal troubles drove spreads40-50 bp wide on its single public credit card securitization.        With the new financing agreement, the retailer is "virtuallyassured" of remaining solvent through the offering's maturity, optimisticsources said.        Jablansky adds: "The likelihood (of insolvency) is arguably nogreater than that of other retailers, whose credit card ABS trade atsignificantly tighter spreads...the actual probabilities of any of theseearly amortization scenarios are well below our arbitrary assumption of50%."        Any potential divergence from this forecast, Jablansky argues,would stem from the fact that "the holiday season was not good forretailers overall.        The performance of the retail sector as it influences the bondmarket is something Charming Shoppes will have to face as would any otherretailer."Back to Headline List CopyrightASSET SALES REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996NOMURA'S TRAIN DEAL CLOSELY WATCHED AS EURO PIPELINE BUILDSOverseas securitization engines were sputtering back to life last weekafter the traditional new year's lull.  While the flow of deals is expectedto be thin this early in the new quarter and year, a number of deals areheard to be in the pipeline for later months.        The deal garnering the most interest from securitization desks hasbeen Nomura's zero coupon train lease deal. Expected to receive triple-Aratings from Duff & Phelps, the deal totals about $726 million (ASR12/4/96). The transaction is expected to price this week, but participantswere reluctant to discuss details since it carries a private Rule 144atranche for sale in the United States.        The structure of the deal creates securities from a series of smallgovernment payments of about $9 million each over 98 months. Thosepayments, essentially a series of bullets, are to be bought by investorswho will then typically find their own swap counterparties to gain floatingfunding. Securitization experts expressed concern that the deal's failureto include an internal swap counterparty would lead to illiquidity.        Syndicate desks will be eyeing the 144a structure of the deal inthe coming months with a view toward the larger potential rail leasemarkets in Britain and elsewhere.Goldman Loses Three ABS Pros        The struggle for mandates this early in the season has led to somekey horseraces between premier U.K. desks. The Bank of Kuwait was set toaward its mandate late last week for a second deal. The first from Kuwaitoccurred last year, as Goldman Sachs led a deal which was relatively wellreceived. This time around, Goldman appears to have had some competitors.Chief among them was Lehman Brothers, whose proposal appeared to be in therunning.        The chief reasons for Goldman's failure to win the mandate outrightappeared to be its slew of departures in recent weeks, capped by thisweek's news that the head of securitization John Van Deventer had left. VanDeventer's destination is not known, though it appears he will not bejoining another big firm. Van Deventer's departure, coupled with those oftwo junior analysts last week, added to the perception that Goldman'sresources have been depleted. Executive director Roger Barris will assumeVan Deventer's responsibilities.        The UBK deal itself will be sized at about $100 million poundssterling. It will be a floater, with collateral similar to the last deal.The deal will securitize over 35 commercial mortgages on investmentproperties.Scandinavia Active        Elsewhere, Lehman has won the mandate for another securitizationfrom Sweden.  A consortium representing a large group of Swedish municipalhousing firms has been working with Lehman to establish a conduit-likestructure for future deals. Lehman's Jim Clark, who heads up the assetsecuritization group, was in Sweden last week to discuss the plans. A dealfor a municipal housing firm outside Stockholm is slated for this summer.        A second St. Eric transaction is also heard to be on the horizon.This time around, only one of the three housing firms which participated inthe first transaction will be involved.  Collateral for the deal will belimited to the one loan for the housing firm Svenska Bostader on a numberof housing projects. ABN Amro will return to lead the transaction.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-26IA059-000325-B021-155http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi48.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003438 text/html 34923HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:32:48 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:12 GMTContent-length: 34734Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi48.html Sample Issue Copyright BANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 24, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES THE YEAR AHEAD RETAIL DELIVERY WILL COST YOU IN 1996 (1128 words) STRATEGIES TIPS FOR CONTRACTING TO DEVELOP SOFTWARE (1107 words) MARKETPLACE PROFILE: NETWORK PLATFORM PROVIDER SYNC LINKING LEGACY NETWORKS TO CLIENT-SERVER (502 words) BANK AUTOMATION NEWS BRIEFS BISYS AND BOTTOMLINE PARTNER (102 words) BANK AUTOMATION ON COURSE (69 words) BANK OF AMERICA PICKS ISSC (72 words) BANK OF GRAY AND PROVESA ALLY (81 words) BANK CENTRAL ASIA MOVES TO M&I (69 words) PEOPLE... (50 words) SOFTWARE HUMAN RESOURCES SOFTWARE AIMS TO CUT EMPLOYEE COSTS (303 words) INDEX OF 1995 STORIES 1995 STORIES (1349 words) CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996RETAIL DELIVERY WILL COST YOU IN 1996      Expect to experience growing pains this year as technologyplatforms inside your bank change to facilitate offering new retaildelivery channels to your customers.  But don't expect these channelsto produce profits any time soon.     Almost half of the largest U.S. banks and one-third of thecountry's mid-size banks are operating electronic banking programs ata loss.  The majority cannot determine profitability, the AmericanBankers Association (ABA) said in its "1995 Retail Banking SurveyReport."     The losses were attributed to up-front development costs, whichlikely will continue throughout 1996 as new retail delivery channelsgain consumer acceptance, the report said.     Also in 1996, consultants predict:     *   continued slow adoption of client-server        applications;     *   the call center will become a focal        point of the customer relationship and a        major sales and marketing tool; and      *   continued merging in the bank and vendor markets.Drawbacks of the RDS Boom     Development costs likely will put banks in the red as they try tooffer alternative delivery channels to their customers, consultantssay.  Developing online banking and in-bank connection software isexpensive.  It can cost $300,000 just to get into the newest retaildelivery systems, such as personal computer (PC) home banking andInternet transactions.     In most cases, banks can use some of their existing hardware tooffer new retail delivery channels.  But most of the new applicationsare client-server-based, and the legacy systems cannot provide accessto information in an interactive environment, said David Taylor,executive vice president at the Bank Administration Institute (BAI) inChicago.     These programs must interface with existing business systems,mainframes and each other, said Bob Landry, technology analyst withthe Tower Group in Wellesley, Mass.     Building these platforms so that they can talk to each othermight be expensive but this should be a priority so that banks canmove forward with seamless marketing and accounting efforts, Landrysaid.Security Issues     You need to pay attention to three key security issues as yourbank implements new technology to compete in the retail deliverysystems market, says BAI's 1995 study:  "The Information Superhighwayand Retail Banking:"    *   Authentication.  Can you identify the party requesting a    transaction?    *   Authorization.  If the party is identified, how will the size    and nature of the requested transaction be approved?    *   Security and encryption.  Can you prevent third parties from    improperly accessing private transaction data, such as credit    card numbers? The Client-Server Dilemma    Unexpected implementation and activation problems with client-server technology is adding development and networking problems,analysts told BAN.  It was touted as the technology that could savebanks up to 15 percent in systems development and management costs. But implementation problems have delayed activation and created theneed for extra personnel.    At many banks, expenses related to implementation issues ate upanticipated savings quickly, said David Koto, principal with Brintechin New Smyrna Beach, Fla.  "No savings have been realized yet," hesaid.    But vendors are plugging away with client-server introductions(BAN, Oct. 18, p. 1).  Five companies showed new client-server-basedcore accounting systems at the MicroBanker Expo last year.    An informal BAN poll of about a dozen users and consultants atthe expo revealed that Eastpoint Technologies of Bedford, N.H., andPerot Systems of Dallas are the companies to watch in 1996.    Phoenix International of Maitland, Fla., also is considered oneof the most innovative client-server vendors (BAN, Aug. 9, p. 1), butit has not sold its Retail Banking System outside of the circle ofinstitutions that initially invested in the company.The Growing Importance of Call Centers    Call centers are becoming critical to banks, financialinstitutions and other service-oriented businesses as they work tokeep existing customers, expand their business and save money,consultants said (BAN, Sept. 20, p. 4).  You would be well-advised toupgrade your own call center this year to keep pace with yourcompetitors, consultants said.    Banks selling mature products, such as credit card services, arefinding that keeping existing customers is as important as gaining newones and that having a sophisticated call center is one way ofensuring this happens.  Plus, the call center provides an opportunityto offer both customer service and telemarketing in one swoop.  Savvybanks are using well-trained employees to turn customer servicerequests into opportunities to sell additional products.      Consultants predict the telephone will emerge as a major sellingtool this year.  Merrill Lynch & Co. has 400 branches, $500 billion inassets and a national telephone support system.  "There's a tremendousfocus on call centers" to reduce staff and create better sellingenvironments, Landry added.    Additionally, telephones likely will emerge as the method foraccount creation and verification, says Richard Crone, senior vicepresident at the $50 billion-asset Home Savings of America ofIrwindale, Calif.  Customers may not be going into the branch as muchbut they still need their questions answered.     The emerging importance of having a well-rounded call centerspells growing opportunity for vendors.  For example, Customer Accessof Raleigh, N.C., claims it can manage a bank's call center at asavings of about 20 percent.  The outsourcer was founded in July 1993by four former Citibank managers.  It has two large bank customers inNorth Carolina and plans to open additional offices in other areas ofthe country this year (BAN, Oct. 4, p. 6).    Outsourcing call center management will be attractive to smallerbanks.  But banks also run the risk of losing the bank's customerservice "personality," said Jeff DiFrancesco, with New York-basedPrice Waterhouse.Outsourcing Takes Off    Expect outsourcing to continue its growth in popularity as banksrealize they can't absorb expenses associated with operatingprocessing centers or developing technology, consultants also tell BAN(see related story, p. 4).  Some of the largest outsourcing contractswere signed last year.  Chase Manhattan Bank signed Milwaukee-basedFIserv to a 12-year contract for check processing and check-imagingworth $480 million.  That contract is guaranteed until 1997, but maybe in jeopardy as Chase merges with Chemical Bank, also of New York.    Bank managers are beginning to trust outsourcing more as theywatch these large successful contracts fulfilled, said Arthur Gillisof Computer Based Solutions in New Orleans.  Expect this trend tocontinue in 1996, he said.    It would be surprising if more outsourcing companies merge or goout of business because the most profitable outsourcers are thelargest, Gillis said.    Bank and vendor mergers also are expected to continue in 1996. Columbus, Ohio-based Checkfree, a check processor, already has startedoff the year's mergers with its acquisition of software vendorServantis of Norcross, Ga., to improve its retail delivery service. (Richard Crone, Home Savings, 818/814-5172; Arthur Gillis, ComputerBased Solutions, 504/524-8429; David Koto, Brintech, 904/427-6772; BobLandry, Tower Group, 617/235-5777.)Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996TIPS FOR CONTRACTING TO DEVELOP SOFTWARE    Many banks are hiring vendors to develop bank-branded softwarebecause developing in-house is expensive.    Bank-branded software differentiates products from yourcompetitors' but developing software in conjunction with a vendor hasseveral hidden problems that seem to originate before actual sourcecode-writing even begins.  One- quarter of all major software projectsare terminated before completion, experts estimate.  Studies indicatethat 75 percent of completed software projects are "operatingfailures" and a disappointment to users.    The type of contract you want is the first thing to consider whenoutsourcing software development, said Joseph Auer, president ofInternational Computer Negotiations Inc. (ICN) in Winter Park, Fla. Banks basically have two choices -- resources- or results-orientedcontracts.  The key difference between contracting methods lies in whoassumes responsibility for meeting business objectives, he said.    A resources contract entails hiring staff to work inside the bankto develop the software.  In this scenario, the development is managedentirely by the bank and the bank is responsible if the project fails,Auer said.    The software is developed off-site in a results-orientedcontract.  This type of project is managed by the vendor with the bankcontributing a small amount of resources, such as machine time, data,floor space and access to management.  The vendor retainsresponsibility for the end-product, Auer said.    Savvy vendors create results and resources contracts thatstipulate joint responsibility and accountability, which may soundgood to bank managers who are unable to give up control or who thinkit is a cop-out to outsource development.  But demanding control in adevelopment relationship is asking for trouble because vendors aremore than willing to take the bank's money and give it all theresponsibility for failed programs and bugs, Auer said.  "[Banks] aresaying `please can we be a big target.'"    Negotiate provisions that make the vendor responsible for bugsand performance failure.  This likely will produce a need for aresults-oriented contract, which places the project in the vendor'scourt, he said.Drafting the Right Agreement    "A well-constructed contract should give the system buyer someassurance that desired business results will be achieved within areasonable time frame," Auer said.  "One of the most effectivetechniques for providing this type of assurance is to develop adetailed project timetable based on identified tasks, taskinterdependencies and deliverables to be included in the contract."    A carefully drafted software development agreement will promptthe vendor and the bank to consider issues upfront and preventdisaster later.  This type of agreement also will give the bank legalrecourse against the vendor if something goes awry, says technologylegal expert Dan C. Aardal, partner at Brown Raymans & Millstein inLos Angeles.    Success seems to hinge on thoroughly evaluating bank needs priorto jumping into the development phase.  Include user, performance andmaintenance requirements emanating from this evaluation in attachmentsto the development contract, he said.    Aardal's checklist for development agreements includes:    *  user involvement;    *  bimonthly progress reports;     *  request for proposals guidelines;     *  acceptance testing criteria; and more.    Almost any of these elements can be critical, but severalcommonly neglected provisions are often pitfalls for the bank, Aardalsaid.  For example, ownership of the software should be stipulated inthe agreement so that no dispute arises after the fact, Aardal said.    Make sure your bank owns the source code and has licensing rightsto the software in return for the high price you pay to develop it, hesaid.  These terms should be negotiated into the contract because youwon't own the software automatically just because you paid to have itdeveloped.    The developer may charge a higher price for ownership rights thanfor licensing because it will be the developer's only opportunity tomake money on the software, he added.    Pay the higher price: it will give you peace of mind.  No otherbank will be using the same program or, in the case of home bankingsoftware, offering it to customers in competition with the bank thatpaid for its development, Aardal explained.    One of the most useful provisions you can negotiate is a most-favored customer clause.  Such a bank customer is guaranteed toreceive prices and services that are better or equivalent to thosebeing offered to the vendor's other customers.  Additionally, itguarantees that the most-favored bank's contract will be amended toinclude the same services, refunds or credits granted to new customersthat were given a better deal, Aardal said. Bargain for Warranties    Banks can bargain for a multitude of warranties, too, in thesecontracts.  Standard warranties, protecting the bank against copyrightinfringement and defects in the material and workmanship, should notbe controversial during negotiations, Aardal said.  But other types ofwarranties seem more burdensome to the vendor, although they canprotect your bank better.    One such warranty would guarantee that the licensor is aware ofthe user's business requirements and the intended uses for thesoftware, and that the software will satisfy such requirements and isfit for the intended uses.    This warranty works best if the user has made the initialinvestment of time and effort to describe its business requirementsand intended uses in the contract.  Attach that description as aschedule or exhibit to the software license agreement, Aardal said.    Additionally, a bank with the resources will have prepared arequest for proposals describing those requirements and that the usercan give to competing vendors, he said.    Aardal advises bargaining for these additional warranties:*   Acceptance testing.  Ensure that your bank has the right tothoroughly test the software in-house before making final payment onits development. Include testing procedures in the initial developmentagreement. Tests should include a request that the software system runsuccessfully for about 30 days in a live operating environment.*   Performance.  Specify transaction response time, transactioncapacity, and reliability requirements.  Software should perform inaccordance with description, specifications and documentation of thesoftware set forth in exhibits and schedules in the license agreement. It will be difficult to contend later that the software did notperform a particular function unless the license and relatedspecifications indicated the software was supposed to perform thatfunction.*   Maintenance.  Negotiate maintenance provisions at the same time asthe development agreement.  If you wait until after a development andlicensing agreement is signed, your bank will have little leverage. State in the agreement that the vendor must respond immediately toservice calls or you will be entitled to a free one-month extension ofthe warranty period, or credit against future maintenance costs.  (DanAardal, Brown Raymans & Millstein, 310/789-2100; Joseph Auer, ICN,407/740-0700.) Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996SYNC LINKING LEGACY NETWORKS TO CLIENT-SERVER     Sync Research Inc. wants to capitalize on the financial-institution migration from IBM legacy systems to faster client-servernetworks. (see related story, p. 1).       The Irvine, Calif.-based company believes it can profit fromthese conversions.  Although Sync is not directly targeting banks,company officials said it is aiming to "focus on the IBM-centriccustomer that is looking to migrate to client-server."     Historically, financial institutions have built large IBMnetworks to support their branches.  These networks communicatedthrough numerous leased lines, which are both expensive and limited. With client-server and wide-area-network (WAN) enhancement, such asframe relay; banks can send data at higher speeds.  Data transferbetween legacy systems and client-server networks now can be supportedon one line.    Sync's FrameNode product line is the "translator" that makesvarious communications protocols compatible, including asynchronoustransfer mode (ATM) and ISDN technology.  Depending on the servicesneeded, Sync's FrameNode units can cost from $995 to $5,200 apiece.    FrameNode manages the data that transfers between the old branchterminal equipment and the newer personal computers.    "We provide the glue, so to speak, between the legacy applicationdevice -- the [IBM] 4700 controller or the [automated tellermachine] -- and this new WAN service," said Todd Krautkremer, a vice-president at Sync.  "We connect the old device at the old speed andthe new devices as fast as you want."    Sync, which began as a consulting firm in 1981 and started tobuild products in 1986, began trading on the NASDAQ last fall.  Itwill be releasing its fourth quarter earnings for the first time atthe end of January.    The company's customers include New-York based Chemical Bank andCiticorp., Pittsburgh-based Mellon Bank and San Francisco-based WellsFargo Bank.  However, Krautkremer admits "the smaller banks canbenefit more greatly."  One of Sync's newest customers has only 50branches.Market Strategy    Sync is positioning itself to be profitable even when the legacysystems are dead -- although for many smaller institutions that maytake a very long time, according to industry analysts.    Krautkremer said ATM, frame-relay and ISDN essentially run at thesame speed and the only thing that separates the three services areprices, which depend upon the rates charged by the local telephonecompanies.    For example, frame relay may be more expensive than ISDN inCalifornia but ISDN is more expensive than frame-relay in New York. So, as interstate banking takes effect, branches of a national bank inCalifornia may be using different protocols than branches of the samebank in New York.    "[Telecommunications] carriers are stepping up with intelligentnetworks and providing numerous migration paths," said Krautkremer. "We will be developing technologies that will allow frame relay to betranslated to ATM ... The device on the edge of the network needs tobe able to deal with multiple types of services." **********************Sync Research Inc.7 StudebakerIrvine, California 92718714/588-2070Contact:       Todd Krautkremer.Products:      Frame-relay access platforms and protocol translators.Customers:     Chemical Bank, Citicorp. and Mellon Bank.Source:  EFT***********************Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996BISYS AND BOTTOMLINE PARTNER     Little Falls, N.J.-based BISYS Inc. will use BottomlineTechnologies' BranchGard and CheckGard products in its TotalPlusproduct line.  TotalPlus, which supports more than 400 financialinstitutions nationwide, automates account information.  BISYS'scommunity bank clients now can access BranchGard and CheckGard. BranchGard, developed by Portsmouth, N.H.-based Bottomline, is aWindows-based payment issuing system.  BranchGard allows tellers tocreate personalized starter checks, counter and cashier checks, checkletters, money orders and loan payment coupons at the teller station. CheckGard also supports applications that require high-quality batchcheck printing, such as accounts payable, payroll and interest anddividend checks.  (Liora Bram, Bottomline Technologies, 617/236-0082.)Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996BANK AUTOMATION ON COURSE     On Course Solutions Inc. (OCS) of Orlando, Fla., is expanding itsproduct offerings into bank automation.  The financial consultancywill cover five core areas of automation:     *   data center operations;     *   operational audits;     *   system optimization;     *   process automation; and     *   automation solutions.William D. Goulet, a former vice president of Abington Savings Bank inMassachusetts, will head OCS's new bank automation division.  (LoriSiragua, On Course Solutions, 407/886-7100.) Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996BANK OF AMERICA PICKS ISSC     Financial institutions continue to outsource their informationtechnology departments with San Francisco-based Bank of America's newdeal with Somers, N.Y.-based Integrated Solutions Corp. (ISSC), thelatest example.  It inked a seven-year outsourcing contract with ISSCearlier this month to oversee mainframe operations, applicationdevelopment and business recovery services.  ISSC, a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of IBM , already operates and manages most of Bank ofAmerica's Illinois technology center.  (Ken Neal, ISSC, 914/766-4494,kneal@vnet.IBM.com.)   Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996BANK OF GRAY AND PROVESA ALLY     Gray, Ga.-based Bank of Gray converted its data processingservices to Atlanta-based ProVesa.  Bank of Gray will use ProVesa tomanage more than 10,000 customer and savings accounts.  ProVesaservices demand deposits, savings, certificates, loan applications,integrated general ledger and customer information files.  Bank ofGray, a family-owned institution, has more than $88 million in assets. Provesa provides third-party data processing for more than 40commercial bank clients, ranging in size from $6 million-to-$648million in assets.  (Donny Jackson, ProVesa, 770/246-3720.) Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996BANK CENTRAL ASIA MOVES TO M&I     Bank of Central Asia finished converting its 440 branches,serving approximately 4.6 million customer accounts -- to Milwaukee,Wis.-based M&I Data Services' Deposit System and Customer InformationSystem (CIS).  The bank converted four operating platforms --mainframe, personal computer (PC), AS400 and PC local area network --to one mainframe operating system.  CIS uses IBM's DB2 relationaldatabase management system.  (Lyle Gray, M&I Data Services, 800/236-3282, ext 4-9212.) Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996PEOPLE...     Roel Pieper was named president and CEO of Cupertino, Calif.-based Tandem Computers Inc. Pieper was president and CEO of Tandem'swholly-owned subsidiary, UB Networks, since 1993.  Before UB Networks,Pieper was CEO of UNIX Systems Laboratories, a former AT&T subsidiarywhich was purchased by Novell.  (Sally Smith, Tandem, 408/285-7515.) Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 1996HUMAN RESOURCES SOFTWARE AIMS TO CUT EMPLOYEE COSTS     Human resources (HR) management costs can be held in-check withnew software from Englewood, Colo.-based Jam.LOGIC Designs.     The start-up software company recently released a product to helplarge banks manage their human resources tasks and small banks tocreate a human resources department.     The Windows-based HR Task Counselor is designed specifically forbanks, with features including 107 financial job descriptions, releaseagreements, on-line databases and on-line regulatory assistance.     Since its release in November, at least five institutions,ranging in size from 30 employees to 150 employees, have purchased thesoftware.     BAN has learned one large banking organization will considerendorsing and distributing the product at its next meeting within thenext two months.Pricing     "For small organizations, [HR Task Counselor] is an affordablealternative to hiring an HR manager.  They can't afford to pay $40,000to $50,000 for someone to manage 50 employees," said Jeff Schmitzpresident of Jam.LOGIC.  "For larger organizations, it is analternative to hiring an HR assistant."     One software license for a bank with less than 50 employees willcost $600 to cover first-year maintenance and regulatory updates.  Theaverage sale in the banking arena has been $3,000, according toSchmitz.     Large organizations will input job descriptions and place them onthe network so the entire institution has one set standard.       In addition, each module is user-defined with passwords.  Forexample, marketing managers only can look at the performance reviewsof their employees, not of the entire company.  (Jeff Schmitz,Jam.LOGIC Designs, 800/750-8113.)   ***********************HR Task Counselor ClientsValley Bank         Mega BankBrighton, Colo.     Englewood, Colo.100 employees       56 employees6 branches          4 branchesJulie Durrim:       Roberta Houseley:303/659-3450        303/740-2265Aurora National     Evergreen NationalAurora, Colo.       Evergreen, Colo.35 employees        150 employees1 branch            5 branchesCarol Thomas:       Lynna Kay Sullivan:303/364-7671        303/670-2700***********************Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK AUTOMATION NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 24, 19961995 STORIESKEY:ArticleIssuePageCase Studies/SolutionsThrift Leverages Technology To Be More Like a Bank March 223Trust Company Relies on Consultant In ConversionNov. 13Fidelity and State Street Services Earn Gold AwardsNov. 298Client/ServerHewlett-Packard Steps Up Efforts in Banking IndustryApril 51First Chicago Saves Time and Money with TradeConnectionApril 193Banks Lead Other U.S. Industries in Client/Server... July 128The Hot Technology Companies in Your IndustryAug. 91     Conference ReportsFocusing Marketing Initiatives on Individuals... Feb. 221Security Top Issue... To Surf the InternetApril 54NOAC 1995 Report: NOAC Focuses on TechnologyMay 314Debate over Technology Control Continues at NOACJune 141Start Home Banking Programs NowOct. 41Bankers Evaluate Newest Core Accounting SystemsOct. 181Banking Marketplace Must Move to the Three A'sNov. 151Gates Tries To Alleviate Banker's FearsDec. 131Contracts/MergersOutsourcing Broadens its ReachMarch 81IBM Shows its Stuff With Two Automation DealsApril 194Justice Challenges Microsoft-Intuit AcquisitionMay 31Fiserv, Alltel Top Competition as Big Banks Continue...May 174Microsoft Backs Off, Intuit To Partner with BanksMay 318Bank Consolidation Brings Technological ChallengesJune 294Vendors Benefit from Merger ManiaJuly 124Interstate Banking Advice Offered from the TrenchesAug. 234Now the Real Work Begins for Chase and ChemicalSept. 61How To Save Your Job if Your Bank MergesSept. 63Early, Cloud Acquisition Boosts IBM's Call Center...Sept. 208Document ManagementGet a Grip on Document ManagementFeb. 81Rocky Times for Workflow MarketMarch 88Don't Let the Standards Train Leave Without YouApril 191 HardwareFlat-Panel Technology Provides Space-Saving...Feb. 88Extra Horse Power in Mainframes Gives Banks... Feb. 226Unisys and Intel Offer ServerMay 38Checkmate Scanners Speed Teller Line, Detect FraudJune 148IBM Delivers on AS/400 PromiseJune 281Amdahl Updates Server with CMOS TechnologySept. 68Marketplace ProfileHardware Provider: Sun MicrosystemsMarch 226Software Provider: Associated Software ConsultantsApril 56Data Processing Company: Provesa Inc. April 196Information Services Provider: E.R.I.I.S May 36Middleware Provider: Connecting Old, New Systems ...May 176Database Vendor: Informix Leads in Parallel ProcessingMay 316Workflow Vendor: Intelus Focuses On Vertical ... June 146Database Vendor: Worth Encourages Customer-Based ...June 286Commercial Lending Software Vendor: Baker Hill ...July 126Data Processor: Fiserv To Compete in Home BankingJuly 264Software Vendor: Sterling Leverages Electronic ... Aug. 96Outsourcer: BISYS Diversifies Business ApplicationsAug. 236Software Vendor: Compliance Firm Branches Out ... Sept. 66Software Vendor: Servantis Makes Changes To Compete ... Sept. 206Outsourcer: Customer Access Easing Banks' Call VolumesOct. 46Relational Database Vendor: Red Brick Systems Moves ... Oct. 186Data Processor: First Commerce Finds Niche ... Nov. 16Information Management Vendor: Unisys Relies ... Nov. 156ATM Vendor: Diebold Doing More Than ATM'sDec. 136Software Vendor: Hogan Move To Outsourcing May ... Dec. 274    MiniguideDatabase Marketing VendorsFeb. 223Home Banking ServicesMarch 86Imaging and Document Management ServicesMay 33Platform Automation SystemsJuly 123Platform Automation SystemsJuly 263Interactive Kiosk VendorsDec. 273Networks East-West Bank's New Platform Gives Power ... Jan. 256Disaster Recovery Study Says LANS at Higher Risk...Feb. 84Farmer's Capital Solves Data Transfer Issues... June 283Building Your Bank's Client-Server SystemsOct. 184New ProductsShawmut To Offer TV, Phone Banking This YearJan. 258Online Network To Offer Instant Mortgage Rates... Feb. 228Capital One Bank Provides Interactive Card ApplicationMarch 228New Invoice Imaging Increases Wholesale Lockbox... April 198Cybercash, First Omaha To Test Future of Internet...May 178First Bank-Owned Gateway To Premiere on InternetMay 311Royal Bank Uses IBM Technology in New Check...June 282Standard Register Brings Item Processing to BranchesJune 288Retail Delivery UpdateAug. 238Tandem Customers To Access Channel SpeedNov. 11RDSMeca Software To Help Banks Compete with MicrosoftMay 171Home Banking Race Continues-Microsoft Signs Two ... July 121Retail Delivery UpdateAug. 238Verifone Invests in CyberCashSept. 65Intuit Reveals Quicken for 96Sept. 203Industry's First Bank-owned Internet Gateway ...Oct. 188ATM Technology Secures PaymentsNov. 18Keys To Customer Success: Pricing, Speed of ServicesNov. 158Hardware May Advance Electronic TransactionsNov. 291First Union Smart Card Moves to Market SlowlyNov. 294MasterCard Picks Servantis To Support MasterBankingNov. 295Incumbency Is Greatest On-line Asset of BanksDec. 138Using Interactive Kiosks To Reach CustomersDec. 271SoftwareWindows 95 Delay Hurts Vendors More Than BanksJan. 251IBM's Parallel Visual Explorer Helps Banks See...Feb. 83Eight Banks Adopt Sterling's Electronic Check... March 84Technology Revolutionizes Software LicensingMarch 221Banking Management Software Packages AboundApril 58Small Bank Automating To Compete with Rivals May 34Fulton Uses Profitability Models in Business DecisionsMay 35Texas Bank Makes Servants its Home Banking SoftwareMay 173Banctec, Recognition Merge; Future of Software... May 313Operating System Wars Could Rock IndustryJune 144Home Banking Race Continues-Microsoft Signs TwoJuly 121Banks Ally with Software CompetitorsJuly 261DOJ Conditionally Clears CA's Legent AcquisitionAug. 98Virginia Bank Measures Profit with IPS SystemsOct. 44More Banks Using Windows NTOct. 183Banks Can Save Money with Call Center Speech AgentsDec. 135Call Center Software Becomes Bank SpecificDec. 278StrategiesBanks Experience Mixed Results with Prodigy OfferingJan. 254Get a Grip on Document ManagementFeb. 81Using Customer Database Wisely Will Keep You ... Feb. 224Rocky Times for Workflow MarketMarch 88Banks Earmark Technology Dollars for ... March 224Benchmarking Changes Help Banks Evaluate TechnologyApril 53Wal-Mart Houses Banking BranchesApril 195Meca Software To Help Banks Compete with MicrosoftMay 171Banks Need To Leverage Cyberspace TechnologyJuly 268Credit Unions Offer Lessons for Banks in Customer ServiceAug. 94Chemical Takes Huge Step Toward ImagingAug. 231The Benefits of a DatawarehouseSept. 64Screen Phones Losing Favor with BankersSept. 201AT&T To Focus on Financial IndustryOct. 45Banking Executives Propose More Technology Spending Oct. 48How To Negotiate Your Next Software ContractNov. 14How To Negotiate Your Outsourcing ContractNov. 154Incumbency Is Greatest On-line Asset of BanksDec. 138Tips For Negotiating Your Facilities Management DealDec. 276Telecommunications Screen Phones Losing Favor with BankersSept. 201Banks Using Call Centers To Save Money, Boost ProfitsSept. 204Early, Cloud Acquisition Boosts IBM's Call Center...Sept. 208AT&T To Focus on Financial IndustryOct. 45 Outsourcer: Customer Access Easing Banks' Call VolumesOct. 46Back to Headline List WT03-B37-27IA059-000325-B021-188http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi76.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003601 text/html 41635HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:33:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:22 GMTContent-length: 41446Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi76.html Sample Issue Copyright BANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 7TH CIRCUIT REVERSES DISMISSAL OF LOAN FLIPPING CLAIMS (879 words) 9TH CIR.: NO CLAIM BY SHAREHOLDERS TO RECOVER RECEIVERSHIP LOSSES (495 words) CONVICTION IN ELABORATE REAL ESTATE SCHEME IS UPHELD IN 10TH CIRCUIT (432 words) ORAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN LANDOWNER AND BANK NOT AS BINDING AS WRITTEN (817 words) FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF BOSTON PETITIONS 11TH CIR. FOR WRIT OF MANDAMUS (708 words) INVESTMENT COMPANY MUST PAY RENT FROM COMMERCIAL PROPERTY TO LENDER (670 words) 10TH CIRCUIT AFFIRMS CREDITOR CANNOT EXECUTE UPON MORTGAGES (472 words) DC COURT SUPPORTS BANK'S MOTION TO STRIKE CLASS ACTION ALLEGATIONS (456 words) SECOND CIRCUIT SUPPORTS RECOMMENDATION TO KEEP BANKER OUT OF BANKS (531 words) 10TH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS RETIREMENT FUND'S RIGHT TO KEEP CONTRIBUTIONS (629 words) CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 19967TH CIRCUIT REVERSESDISMISSAL OF LOANFLIPPING CLAIMSThe Seventh Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 14, by a 2-1margin, overturned a Chicago federal judge's order dismissing aputative RICO class action brought against a finance company foralleged loan flipping practices.  Emery v. American GeneralFinanceInc., No. 95-1037 (7th Cir.).The majority found that the plaintiff had sufficiently allegedherpredicate claims of mail fraud so as to survive a motion todismiss.Verna Emery first approached American General Finance for a loaninJuly 1992.  The lender issued her a three-year loan for $1,983;thefinance charges over the term of the loan amounted to $1,327.American General sent Emery a letter the following January,statingthat she was entitled to borrow an additional $750.Seeking an additional $200, Emery responded to the offer;AmericanGeneral's branch manager gave her forms for the refinancing ofheroriginal loan with additional funds advanced.  Emery signed a newnote for $2,399 with a finance charge of $1,641.  Emery's monthlypayments increased by roughly $20, effectively costing her $1,200for the right to get $200 immediately.  (Such disclosure was notrequired by the Truth in Lending Act, the Seventh Circuit noted,asthe statute regards such transactions as a reborrowing of theoriginal loan amount.)Emery filed her action in the Northern District of Illinois,alleging that the lender engaged in a pattern of soliciting itscustomers by mail for the loan of additional funds, withoutinforming them that the costs of refinancing are far greater thanthose connected with taking out a separate loan.The trial court granted the defense's dismissal motion inDecember1994, concluding that the plaintiff failed to identify anyspecificfalse statement of material fact allegedly made by the defendant.The lower court also found that the plaintiff failed to cite toanycase holding a failure to disclose actionable under the federalmail fraud statute.In a review authored by Chief U.S. Circuit Judge Richard A.Posner,the Seventh Circuit stated that "all the [mail fraud] statutepunishes is deliberate fraud."  While having no quibble with theproposition that mere failure to disclose does not constitutemailfraud, the panel stated that "[w]hether a failure to disclose isfraudulent depends on context."Judge Posner wrote that the panel does "not of course know thestate of mind of the employees of American General Finance whodrafted the letter to Emery and its other customers; nor can theplaintiff have more than an inkling until she has an opportunitytoconduct pretrial discovery."  In viewing the letter in thecontextof the complaint's allegations, the court continued, "the letterisseen to be replete with falsehoods and half truths."With respect to the lower court's finding that Emery failed toallege a violation of the Truth in Lending Act, the panel stated,"Suppose Emery were blind.  Or retarded.  Would anyone argue thatshoving a Truth in Lending Act disclosure form in front ofherfacewould be a defense to fraud?  The allegation is that she belongstoa class of borrowers who are not competent interpreters of suchforms and that the defendant knows this and sought to takeadvantage of it," Judge Posner wrote.As to the lower court's finding that Emery failed to plead afiduciary relationship between herself and the defendant, thepanelwrote that "it is not true that if you are not a fiduciaryanythinggoes, short of false statements.  A half truth, or what isusuallythe same thing a misleading omission, is actionable as fraud,including mail fraud if the mails are used to further it, if itisintended to induce a false belief and resulting action to theadvantage of the misleader and the disadvantage of the misled."The panel stated that it was not deeming loan flipping to befraudor that the defendant engaged in fraud.  "All we know is that theallegations of fraud are sufficient to withstand a motion todismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim.  There is astate of facts consistent with the complaint that if proved wouldestablish a violation of the mail fraud statute, and no more isrequired at this stage for the suit to continue."Judge Posner did find meritorious the defendant's alternativearguments that Emery failed to plead mail fraud with FRCP 9(b)particularity.  The panel found Emery's allegations of the fraudperpetrated upon her sufficient, but that she only generallyaverred that American General did the same to other customers.The panel wrote that a Rule 9(b) dismissal would have beenproper,but that Emery should have been given the opportunity to amendhercomplaint.  The appellate panel then reversed and remanded.Judge William J. Bauer concurred in the judgment.Dissenting, Judge John L. Coffey stated that "[t]he cases inwhichthis court has held that  non-disclosure' may be deemedfraudulentall involved a special circumstance of some kind....  There werenosuch special circumstances in this case.  AGF, as Emery'screditor,was not a fiduciary....  AGF did not engage in a  wide variety ofdeceptive actions,' nor can its conduct vis-a-vis Emery be fairlydescribed as an  elaborate attempt at concealment.'"Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 19969TH CIR.: NO CLAIM BYSHAREHOLDERS TO RECOVERRECEIVERSHIP LOSSESA group of bank shareholders, charging the Federal DepositInsurance Corp. with fraud on the court, will not be able torecover funds they lost when the agency took over receivershipfroma failed bank, a panel of the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appealsheld Dec. 26.  Herring et al. v. Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.,No. CV-93-00127-EHC (9th Cir.).The circuit court affirmed a decision of the U.S. District Courtfor the District of Arizona, stating that a party with nointerestin the litigation generally has no standing.In September 1981, the Arizona Superintendent of Banks placedSouthwestern Bank in receivership.  On May 1, 1990, the FDIC, ascourt-appointed receiver, petitioned the Arizona Superior Courttoenter an order approving payment of a final liquidating dividend,payment of interest on claims, sale of any newly discoveredassets,disposal of Southwestern's books and records and termination ofthereceivership.The shareholders, Morris Herring, Raymond Herring, James N.Corbett, Luis Valenzuela, Armando Alfaro and Sherman Montgomery,who had invested in the Southwestern Bank, filed objections,complaining of faulty accounting and insufficient informationregarding the receivership and alleged $530,124 loss.  Theshareholders requested the court to order a more specificaccounting or allow shareholders leave to examine thereceivership.After hearings and the filing of post-petition briefs, theSuperiorCour overruled the shareholders' objections.  The court held thatthe disputed item of $530,124 consisted of losses sustained ontheliquidation of assets and that the FDIC was not subject tosurcharge for this amount.  The court further held that the FDICwas entitled to interest on its own claim, but that thereceivership funds were insufficient to cover the FDIC's claimevenif the $530,124 was disallowed.  On Aug. 14, 1991, the courtterminated the receivership.After being turned down by the state Supreme Court to reviewtheirpetition that the FDIC perpetrated a fraud on the court, theshareholders filed with the Arizona Superior Court an independentaction pursuant to Rule 60(b) to set aside the judgment for fraudon the court.  The FDIC removed the case to federal districtcourt.The shareholders alleged that the FDIC knowingly submitted falseaccounting figures when it petitioned the court to terminatereceivership and presented perjured testimony to the courtconcerning a bank receivership asset account labeled "otherassets/judgments."The FDIC moved for summary judgment.  Following briefing and oralargument, the district court granted summary judgment on twogrounds: (1) that res judicata and collateral estoppel barred theshareholders' action, and (2) that the FDIC committed no fraud onthe court.The circuit court found that, because the shareholders cannotrecover their funds, they have no standing.  The panel affirmedthedistrict court's finding of summary judgment on their fraud onthecourt claim.The shareholders were represented by Conrad Herring of San Diego.The FDIC was represented by Lawrence G.D. Scarborough of Brown &Bain in Phoenix.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996CONVICTION IN ELABORATEREAL ESTATE SCHEME ISUPHELD IN 10TH CIRCUITOver the pleas of the defendants, the 10th Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals on Jan. 5 upheld their multicount convictions in districtcourt arising from a complex real estate fraud, including mailfraud, wire fraud and making false statements in connection withthe scheme.  United States v. Austin et al., No. 91-CR-147(10th Cir.).Defendants Donald Austin and James Grandgeorge claimed that theU.S. District Court for the District of Colorado-imposedrestitution of $12,618,772 was too high.  Based upon defaultedloans, the district court determined the victims of the schemelostmore than $20 million.  The district court also sentenced Austintoa term of 27 years and Grandgeorge to a term of 23 years.  Eachwasgiven a sentence of five years' probation following release.The essence of the scheme was to purchase properties fromlegitimate sellers.  The defendants recruited numerous people toact as "strawmen buyers," who secured mortgages from U.S.MortgageCo. which were, in turn, insured by the U.S. Department ofHousingand Urban Development (HUD).  Despite HUD's requirement that eachpurchase be funded with a minimum of 15% downpayment by thepurchasers, no such investment was made by the strawmen.Closing documents were drawn, however, which falsely stated thedownpayments were made.  The defendants paid the strawmen $1,000for each of the transactions in which they participated.Althoughthe defendants assured the strawmen the defendants would beresponsible for the payment of loans to the properties, no suchpayments were made, and the properties went into foreclosure.The defendants incorporated Fidelity Escrow Services, which theyused as an independent entity in connection with the salestransaction to give the transactions the appearance oflegitimacy.The use of Fidelity convinced the loan closer on the strawmenpurchases to believe the downpayments were paid by the purchasersin cash or certified funds.The defendantsalso arranged for all loans to be handled throughU.S. Mortgage, which was able to charge high interest ratesbecausethe purchasers had no real interest in the properties.  The highinterest rate and the prospect of HUD insurance made the loansattractive to secondary lenders.  The processing of the loansgranted by U.S. Mortgage to the strawmen was done by three peoplewho were paid kickbacks by the defendants.  Although thedefendants' scheme involved hundreds of properties, 157 wereidentified in the indictment.Austin contended that the district court erred in imposingrestitution upon him because there was no proof of his ability topay.  However, the 10th Circuit concluded that Austin did littletoprove this claim.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ORAL AGREEMENT BETWEENLANDOWNER AND BANK NOTAS BINDING AS WRITTENSince the alleged oral agreement between a landowner and her bankto prevent foreclosure on her properties contradicts the terms ofthe written agreement between the two parties, a Californiaappealscourt on Dec. 22 affirmed a trial court's grant of summaryjudgmentto the bank to foreclose on the property.  Howard v. FirstNationwide Bank, No. A067566 (CA Ct. App., 1st Dist.).The California Court of Appeal, First District, concluded thatsince an alleged oral agreement between Ruth Fairley Howard andKeith G. Becher, a First Nationwide Bank (FNB) liquidationsupervisor, directly contradicted the terms of the writtenagreement between the two parties, Howard's appeal to seek areversal of the summary judgment by the Alameda County SuperiorCourt is without merit.In 1986, Howard and her husband, Mark Howard, a commercial realestate broker who was then in the business of buying and sellingproperties for his own account, borrowed $210,000 from FNB topurchase commercial property in Richmond.  The Howards executed astandard promissory note and deed of trust on the property,agreeing to pay off the loan in monthly installments and givingFNBthe usual right to foreclose on the property if they failed to doso.In 1989, Mark Howard died of cancer.  The plaintiff spent twoyearscaring for him and her mother, who was also terminally ill.Howardalso struggled with her own condition, lupus.  During thisperiod,the Howards' financial properties fell into disarray.  Paymentswere not made to lenders, including FNB.  In June 1988, Howardfiled for bankruptcy.Despite filing for bankruptcy, Howard continued to make paymentsonthe loan to FNB for the next five months.  When the paymentsstopped in November 1988, the bank moved for an order lifting theautomatic stay in the bankruptcy action so that it could beginforeclosure on the loan's collateral.  Howard agreed to thedissolution of the stay in exchange for FNB's agreement to deferforeclosure for two and one-half months.Howard resumed making payments on the loan for almost a year, butagain fell into default.  In November 1989, FNB sent her astandardlate notice, giving her 30 days to bring the loan current.  WhenHoward did not respond, FNB waited more than two months beforeissuing a notice of default and electing to sell the property.Thenotice gave her three months to avoid foreclosure.After the plaintiff did not bring the loan current, FNB scheduledthe trustee's sale for Aug. 8, 1990.  Howard asked for anotherpostponement and brought Fred Mangrum, a real estate broker andfriend, with her to meet with Becher.  They asked him to postponefor sale for one month.Howard said Mangrum would buy the Richmond property, with theproceeds to pay off the loan and put the remainder of herfinancialaffairs in order.  Although Mangrum had expressed an interest inbuying the property since the preceding January, a definitivesaleprice had not been set nor any written sales agreement executed. FNB, through Becher, and Howard agreed that if she paid theescrowarrears by Aug. 7, 1990, FNB would postpone the scheduled salefortwo weeks until Aug. 22.  Also, if Howard would then pay one-halfthe loan arrears by Aug. 22, FNB would postpone the sale anadditional 30 days, until Sept. 21.Howard paid the first installment.  The day before the secondinstallment was due, Mangrum informed FNB that she could not payeven one-half the next installment and needed anotherpostponement.FNB agreed to postpone the trustee's sale if  Howard adhered to apayment schedule.Although the prior extensions had not been memorialized in awriting signed by Howard, Becher at this point insisted that therevised payment schedule must be written and signed by theplaintiff.Contrary to Becher's testimony, Howard testified that, sometimeprior to execution of the written agreement, Becher told herthat,in return for three payments totaling approximately $14,000, FNBwould "cancel" the foreclosure and await the sale of the propertyto Mangrum.On Nov. 19, 1992, Howard filed her complaint against FNB andBecher.  The complaint alleged claims for fraud, breach of oralcontract, intentional interference with contract, unfair businesspractices and intentional infliction of emotional distress.The pivotal allegation of the complaint was the existence andbreach of the oral agreement to "halt the foreclosure" in returnfor partial repayment of the loan balance.The defendants filed an answer on April 6, 1003, denying all oftheplaintiff's allegations and raising numerous affirmativedefenses,including various statutes of limitations.On June 24, 1994, after conducting discovery, defendants movedforsummary judgment on numerous grounds, including the contentionthatplaintiff's claims were barred by the parol evidence rule andapplicable statutes of limitation and were substantively withoutmerit.The court affirmed the judgment.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FIRST NATIONAL BANK OFBOSTON PETITIONS 11TH CIR.FOR WRIT OF MANDAMUSThe 11th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Nov. 30 granted theFirstNational Bank of Boston's petition for a writ of mandamus,instructing the U.S. District Court for the Southern District ofFlorida to recall the remand and reinstate its case against aFlorida man in a dispute over a consumer loan.  In re FirstNational Bank of Boston, No. 95-5008 (11th Cir.).The petition for the writ required the circuit court to decidewhether a district court can remand a case sua sponte within the30-day period following removal notice provided in 28 U.S.C.Section  1447(c) for motions to remand.The district court remanded the case to state court during thistime period.  Because the circuit court concluded that the 1988amendments to Section 1447(c) precluded the district court fromsuasponte remand, the court granted the petition.The origin of the present petition is the related federal casefiled in 1989 by Society for Savings in the U.S. District Courtforthe Southern District of Florida, concerning a consumer loansecured by a motor yacht extended to Jerome H. Rogers (SocietyforSavings v. M/Y "CONJA", No. 89-6167-CIV-PAINE [SD FL]).That case was settled by surrender of the vessel to Society forSavings and the agreed payment of $13,000, representing thedifference in the value of the vessel and the outstanding debt.Thereafter, various credit reporting agencies showed this loan asa bad debt.In 1995, Rogers sued petitioner First National Bank of Boston inthe 15th Judicial Circuit for Palm Beach County, which he allegedis the successor to Society for Savings with offices in PalmBeachCounty, FL, and claimed damages exceeding $15,000 for Bank ofBoston's failure to correct credt information relating to Rogers(Rogers v. Bank of Boston, No. CL 95 347AB [FL Cir. Ct., PalmBeachCty., filed Jan. 17, 1995]).Subsequently, Rogers filed a settlement demand, requestingcompensatory and punitive damages of $650,000.  Bank of Bostonfiled an amended answer and affirmative defenses that denied thematerial allegations of the complaint, including the allegationthat Bank of Boston maintained an office in Palm Beach County.On June 13, 1995, Bank of Boston removed the case to the U.S.District Court for the Southern District of Florida pursuant to28U.S.C. Section Section 1441 and 1446, and asserted completediversity (Rogers v. Bank of Boston, No. 95--8366--CIV--NESBITT[SD FL, filed June 13, 1995]).Bank of Boston represented that it is a national bankingassociation with its principal place of business inMassachusetts,making it a Massachusetts citizen, and that the amount incontroversy exceeded $50,000 in compliance with 28 U.S.C. Section1332(a).On June 19, 1995, the district court sua sponte remanded the caseto the 11th Judicial Circuit for Dade County.  The district courtdetermined that Bank of Boston's failure to reveal the state inwhich it is incorporated constituted an inadequate showing of itscitizenship for diversity jurisdiction.  The court's order wasfiled on June 22, 1995, and the case was closed.On June 28, 1995, Bank of Boston moved for reconsideration andvacation of the district court's remand order and for leave toamend its notice of removal.  The bank explained that, as anational banking association, it is not incorporated under anystate's law and that its citizenship is determined by itsprincipalplace of business.The bank also filed an amended notice of removal, stating thisexplanation of its citizenship and clarifying that it maintainsnobranch offices in Florida, although its independent subsidiarymortgage corporation maintains at least one branch office inFlorida.On July 21, 1995, the district court entered an order strikingBankof Boston's motion for reconsideration and leave to file anamendednotice of removal because it no longer had jurisdiction over thecase.The bank then petitioned the court for a writ of mandamusdirectingthe district court to recall its remand and to reinstate the caseon its docket.Pursuant to Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 21(b), thecircuitcourt directed the district judge to respond to Bank of Boston'sargument that the district court's remand was unauthorized under28U.S.C. Section 1447(c).Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996INVESTMENT COMPANY MUSTPAY RENT FROM COMMERCIALPROPERTY TO LENDERIn a diversity suit appeal, the Seventh Circuit U.S. Court ofAppeals on Dec. 12 reversed a decision by the U.S. District Courtfor the Northern District of Illinois, ruling that an investmentcompany must pay Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Co. rent money ona commercial property.  Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Co. v.Harris Trust and Savings Bank et al., No. 95-1884 (7th Cir.).The district court ruled that defendant Kaiser Investments couldrefuse to pay on the grounds that a provision in a "Borrower'sAffidavit" requiring the indemnification of rents before theappointment of a receiver when the trust defaulted was madeunenforceable by the "rents and profits rule."The case was remanded to the district court for furtherproceedingsconsistent with this opinion.In 1986, Fidelity made a $3.6 million loan to an Illinois landtrust that held title to a commercial property.  The trustee wasanIllinois bank and the beneficiary of the partnership, KaiserInvestments.The loan was secured by a mortgage on the property, but iaddition,Kaiser Investments executed a "Borrower's Affidavit" thatcontaineda number of warranties and representations designed to induceFidelity to make a loan.One of the paragraphs of the affidavit states that"notwithstandinganything to the contrary contained in the Loan Papers...Borrower(Kaiser) shall be and remain personally obligated and liable for,and shall indemnify Lender against the Property for any periodsubsequent to an event of default, and shall pay over the same tothe Lender upon receipt, except to the extent that the same havebeen applied in payments of any amounts due Lender under the Noteor other Loan Papers."The trust defaulted on the loan in February 1993, and in July ofthat year, having sent a notice of default the preceding month,Fidelity brought this suit against the bank and KaiserInvestments.The suit asked for foreclosure and other relief, including theappointment of a receiver and indemnification for any rentscollected after the default.  The district court appointed areceiver in September 1993, and the receiver began collecting therents.  Later, the court decreed foreclosure, and the propertywassold at a price that left Fidelity with a loss of more than $1.3million on its loan.U.S. District Judge James B. Moran held the refusal proper on thegrounds that the provision in the affidavit requiredindemnification by the "rents and profits rule."According to Illinois common law, this rule forbids a mortgageetoenforce a provision of a mortgage assigning rents or other incomeof the mortgaged property to him until the mortgagee takespossession of the property.  The judge, therefore, dismissed theclaim and, since other claims in the case had already beenresolved, the dismissal was the final order in the case and wasappealable.However, Chief Circuit Court Judge Richard A. Posner ruled onappeal that the indemnity agreement in the Borrower's Affidavitwas"separate" from the loan papers, and that the borrower, Kaiser,wasnot technically the mortgagor, affects the applicability of therents and profits rule.Judge Posner stated that the rule would be a joke if it could beavoided by designating certain papers involved in the loan "theloan papers" and reciting that the assignment of rents was notamong them.  He said it would also be a joke if, as in this case,that of an Illinois land trust, only the trustee was forbidden tomake an enforceable assignment of rents.In an Illinois land trust, which is becoming a common mode ofownership in Illinois and other states, property that is subjecttoa mortgage is "owned" by a trustee whose only function is to holdtitle, leaving management and control of the property entirely inthe hands of the beneficiary of the trust.The agreement between the two parties was that Kaiser was to payover the rents to Fidelity upon receipt of the rents by Kaiser.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 199610TH CIRCUIT AFFIRMSCREDITOR CANNOTEXECUTE UPON MORTGAGESA ruling that a default judgment creditor is not entitled toexecute upon mortgages in Texas owned by the Government NationalMortgage Association (GNMA) as a matter of law was affirmed Dec.18by the 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals.  Pipkin v. MortgageCreditcorp, Inc. et al., No. 94-6443 (WD OK).The opinion involves the question of whether a default judgmentcreditor may divest the interest of GNMA in certain Texas realestate mortgages solely because GNMA failed to record itsinterestin the mortgages in adherence to the law.Plaintiff Roger W. Pipkin III appealed the district court's grantof summary judgment in favor of GNMA and its mortgage services,Midland Mortgage, Co., MidFirst Bank and Northwest Bank(collectvely, the Midland Group).  The district court held thatTexas law was superseded by GNMA's enabling stature and thatPipkinwas not entitled to execute upon Texas mortgages because GNMAownedthe mortgages as a matter of law.Pipkin is the judgment creditor of defendants MortgageCreditcorp,Inc. and Westmark Mortgage Corp. (the Westmark Parties), twodefunct mortgage serving companies.  In 1994, Pipkin obtained a$4.8 million default judgment against the Westmark Parties inTexasstate court.  That court then entered the post-judgment orderinstructing the Midland Group, the defendants-in-intervention andthird-party plaintiffs, to turn over to Pipkin several Texas realestate mortgages the court deemed "nonexempt assets of theWestmarkParties.To execute his judgment on the Oklahoma-based Midland Group,Pipkinfiled the post-judgment order in Oklahoma City.  Subsequently,theMidland Group obtained a stay of execution from the state courtandfiled a petition in intervention naming GNMA as third-partydefendant.  GNMA removed the case to the U.S. District Court forthe Western District of Oklahoma.GNMA and the Midland Group then moved for summary judgment,arguingthat the mortgages sought by Pipkin were owned by GNMA, not theWestmark Parties.  Pipkin countered that, under Texas law, theWestmark Parties continued to own the mortgages because GNMAfailedto record its interest in the mortgages.The district court granted GNMA's and the Midland Group's motionson the ground that GNMA's enabling statute, 12 U.S.C. Section1721(g), expressly preempts any Texas law limiting GNMA'sownershiprights in the mortgages.Under Section 1721(g), Congress vested GNMA with broad powers tocarry out the congressional objective of establishing andencouraging a secondary market for home mortgages, the districtcourt said.Pipkin contended, however, by virtue of the Texas recordingstatuteand GNMA's failure to record its interest in the pooledmortgages,the Westmark Parties own those mortgages under Texas law.  As ajudgment creditor of the Westmark Parties, Pipkin argued, he isentitled to execute on those mortgages.The circuit court was not persuaded by Pipkin's argument andaffirmed the district court's decision.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996DC COURT SUPPORTS BANK'SMOTION TO STRIKE CLASSACTION ALLEGATIONSIn a memorandum filed Dec. 26, the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia decided in favor of NationsBank Corp. anddenied class action status to a pending fair lending lawsuitagainst the bank.  Lathern et al. v. NationsBank Corp. et al.,No. 95-CV-1805 (NHJ) (D DC).The judge had harsh words for the plaintiffs' counsel, theWashington Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights and Urban Affairs(WLC) for failing to timely move for class certification in aprioraction.The bank asked the court that the class allegations be strickenentirely.This action began Sept. 21, 1995, when plaintiffs filed acomplaintcontaining class action allegations under the Fair Housing Act,theEqual Credit Opportunity Act and the Civil Rights Act of 1866.However, by failing to move for class certification by Dec. 20,1995, which was 90 days from the date on which the classcomplaintwas filed, the plaintiffs violated Local Rule 203(b).Accordingly, the court decided, the plaintiffs' class actionallegations should be stricken in their entirety.John Relman, director of the fair housing project at the WLC,saidhis organization had not missed the deadline, but refused toelaborate.  He did say WLC's position will be explained in afuturecourt filing.Class action status is important to the WLC's case against thebank, which alleges that NationsBank discriminated againstborrowers.  At the heart of theissue is money.  If the classactionis fought in court, NationsBank would have more to lose.  Withoutclass action status, the case involves 13 plaintiffs and nineloanapplications, and the awards would be less.  As a class, the WLCwould ask NationsBank to compensate all affected consumers, whichwould increase the bank's costs.In its memorandum, the court stated that WLC had since Dec. 13,1994, the date of its initial press conference announcing itscampaign to solicit plaintiffs for its class action against thebank, to construct its legal argument.To achieve this goal, the WLC used a variety of methods toattractplaintiffs, including an "800" hotline number, press statementsandconferences, and print and radio interviews.Despite this effort, the court stated that WLC was only able toattract an additional 11 plaintiffs since the suit was filedSept. 21.The court said that if the plaintiffs feel they have individualclaims, they should litigate them as such.  Also, the court heldthat NationsBank should not be subjected to any furtherprejudicialadverse publicity tied to promises of class action litigation.NationsBank is represented by Robert S. Bennett, Richard L.Brusca,Andrew L. Sandler and Heidi L. Mason of Skadden, Arps, Slate,Meagher & Flom of Washington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SECOND CIRCUIT SUPPORTSRECOMMENDATION TO KEEPBANKER OUT OF BANKSThe Second Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals ruled Jan. 2 that itsupports a prohibition order by an Acting Director (AD) for theOffice of Thrift Supervision against a former bank executive asproper and a matter of law.  Cousin v. Office of ThriftSupervision, Nos. 94-4206 and 94,6070 (2nd Cir.).Also, Michael Cousin's petition for review of the final decisionand order of Jonathan L. Fiechter, AD for the OTS, prohibitingCousin from further participating in any manner in the conduct ofthe affairs of any banking institution regulated by the OTS.Since the petition for review of the final decision and order isdenied, the circuit court dismissed as moot the appeal of thedenial of declaratory judgment.In August 1990, Cousin, then chairman of the board and chiefexecutive officer of Cross County Federal Savings Bank, waschargedin federal court with several counts of bribery.  The OTS wasinformed of the charges and, two days later, issued a temporarysuspension and prohibition from participation in the affairs ofCounty Federal.Cousin then sought to have the criminal indictment against himdropped in federal court, asserting that he was neitherphysicallynor mentally fit to stand trial.The district court agreed to dismiss the indictment againstCousinbecause he was not physically capable of standing trial; however,included in the order dismissing the charges against Cousin,datedMay 25, 1992, was language -- agreed to by Cousin's attorney --tothe effect that the dismissal of the indictment did not amount toa dismissal on the merits (Cousin v. Office of ThriftSupervision,840 F.Supp. 8,9-10 [ED NY 1993]).The language was specifically included in the order to ensurethatthe dismissal was not construed as requiring the discontinuationofthe OTS's temporary suspension and prohibition  against Cousin.After his physical recovery, Cousin informed the OTS that he wasfit to reenter the banking world.  Despite the explicit languageinthe order dismissing his indictment, Cousin thereafter sought adeclaratory judgment in the district court that his indictmenthadbeen dismissed on its merits and that, as a matter of law, theOTStemporary suspension was required to be lifted.In light of the language in the order dismissing his indictment,the district court dismissed Cousin's suit on waiver grounds.Cousin then appealed the district court's dismissal f his action.On May 13, 1993, the OTS instituted a proceeding to permanentlyprohibit Cousin from further participating in any manner in theconduct of the affairs of any banking institution regulated bytheOTS.  In support of the permanent prohibition, Cousin was chargedwith bribery and aiding and abetting bribery.He responded to the OTS claims, asserting a number of affirmativedefenses that focused primarily on entrapment.A hearing of the claims was held before Administrative Law JudgeWalter J. Alprin in September 1993.  On March 31, 1994, the ALJissued his recommendation, disqualifying Cousin from furtherparticipation in the bankingindustry.OTS was represented by Geraldine R. Gennet, Office of the ChiefCounsel, OTS, Washington, DC.  Cousin was represented by RamseyClark, New York City.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK & LENDER LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 10, 199610TH CIRCUIT UPHOLDSRETIREMENT FUND'S RIGHTTO KEEP CONTRIBUTIONSThe 10th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 28 reversed adecision by the U.S. District Court for the Northern District ofOklahoma, ruling that the lower court's decision to award amultiple-employer pension benefit plan to the plaintiff violatedthe exclusive benefit rule of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (ERISA).  Resolution Trust Corp. v.FinancialInstitutions Retirement Fund, No. 95-5016 (10th Cir.).The issue presented by this case is whether the Resolution TrustCorp., as successor to a failed thrift institution, can recoveranactuarial determined sum known as Future Employer ContributionsOffsets (FECO) attributable to the failed thrift as an employerina multiple-employer pension benefit plan under ERISA.The district court treated the FECO as discrete funds and awardedthem to RTC under a common law unjust enrichment theory.Financial Institutions Retirement Fund (FIRF) is amultiple-employer pension benefit plan under ERISA.  The fund isasingle plan, meaning all of its 360 participating employers payinto, and all of its approximately 35,000 employees benefit from,a single fund.Because of favorable market conditions in 1987, FIRF declared theplan had reached "full funding," suspended further employercontributions and advised its overfunded employers, includingSooner Federal Savings and Loan Association, that the FECO wouldbeused to offset the employers' future funding obligations to theplan.When Sooner became insolvent in 1989, the RTC, Sooner's receiver,sold some of its assets to a successor savings association,excepting any interest in, or claims against, FIRF.   Because ofits liquidation, Sooner was deemed to have withdrawn from FIRF.Atthe time of its insolvency, the value of Sooner's FECO credit wasapproximately $4.1 million.RTC brought the instant action against FIRF in 1989 to obtainpayment of the FECO credits, asserting a common law unjustenrichment claim.  In response, FIRF claimed it was prohibited byERISA from distributing the FECO credits to RTC or to anyemployerfor nonpension-related purposes.  Judgment in the amount of $4.6million was entered in favor of RTC, and this appeal ensued.On appeal, FIRF contended ERISA's "exclusive benefit" ruleprohibits the use of FECO balances for nonpension purposes.The 10th Circuit agreed, citing Patterson v. Shumate, 504 U.S.753(1992), which denied the inclusion of pension benefits in abankruptcy estate.  The court also agreed with FIRF, citing toGuidry v. Sheet Metal Workers National Pension Fund, 493 U.S. 365(1990), which reversed the imposition of a constructive trust onaconvicted union official's pension benefits.The circuit court found it evident that the exact amount of theFECO constantly varies in concert with he values of theinvestments comprising the body of the fund.  Yet, the districtcourt found the FECO are neither hypothetical nor theoreticalbecause FIRF itself has stated that FECO assets are fund assets.For this reason, RTC contended, the FECO are tangible assets ofthefund.  The court ruled that RTC's argument missed the mark.  Thequestion of whether the FECO credits are needed for the paymentofbenefits can only be determined once the plan as a whole has beenterminated.Until then, FIRF must anticipate that there could be dramaticchanges on either side, the court held.The court concluded that RTC's removal of the FECO credits couldpotentially destabilize FIRF.  Furthermore, the district court'sdecision leads to the prospect of further diminution of the bodyofthe plan because other employers may be encouraged to leave theplan and remove their FECO credits, the court said.RTC was represented by Thomas C. Morrison of Patterson, Belknap,Webb & Tyler LLP in New York City.  FIRF was represented byRichardB. Noulles of Gables, & Gotwals in Tulsa.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-28IA059-000325-B021-237http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi93.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003635 text/html 87210HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:34:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:33 GMTContent-length: 87021Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi93.html Sample Issue Copyright BANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES UK: DIRECT LINE'S FAMOUS LITTLE RED TELEPHONE KEEPS ON RINGING (510 words) ITALY: ROYAL REVOLUTION IN LOMBARDY (343 words) US CARD ISSUERS SPONSOR SPORTS (347 words) PROFILING TODAY'S INTERNET USER (367 words) ADVANCE BANK AHEAD IN AUSTRALIAN INTERNET RACE (506 words) NAB OFFERS LOAN APPROVAL OVER PHONE (301 words) CCF LAUNCHES REMOTE `BRANCH' SERVICE (452 words) SOCIETE GENERALE REMOTE SERVICE EXTENDED (410 words) BANKS FUEL DIRECT MAIL BOOM (252 words) FIRST DIRECT WINS SERVICE AWARD (349 words) RBOS DEFENDS ITS TESSA (303 words) SPAIN: BANKS OPT FOR ALTERNATIVE DISTRIBUTION (324 words) PORTUGAL: MUNDIAL GETS IMAGE OVERHAUL (352 words) VIDEOCONFERENCING AT IMPERIO (334 words) GERMAN BANKS RULE OK (780 words) BFG BANK STIRS GERMAN MARKET (1030 words) TAKING OFF THE FRILLS (885 words) FEATURE DESIGNING YOUR ON-LINE OFFERING (2445 words) CAPTURING THE CUSTOMERS (2208 words) THE FUNDAMENTAL FLAWS (655 words) CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UK:  DIRECT LINE'S FAMOUS LITTLE RED TELEPHONE KEEPS ON RINGINGDIRECT LINE, the direct insurer founded in 1985, is back in theheadlines again. The latest official statistics show it has grown tobecome the leading comprehensive motor insurer in the UK - and by along way!The insurer, whose distinctive red telephone logo has become ahousehold name in just ten years thanks to inspired brand management,has seen its market share grow from 4.8 percent four years ago to 11.2percent, according to the latest figures from Datamonitor."This phenomenal growth has been due to the development of a strongbrand image and a policy of undercutting the prices of most of itsclosest rivals by leaving out the middleman - the broker," states thereport from the London-based research and management consultancy.Datamonitor based its research on end-1994 returns filed by insurancecompanies with the DTI (Department of Trade and Industry) and,according to Direct Line's Adrian Webb, the gap between it and itscompetitors has further widened since then."We have now attained a figure of 2.2 million motor policies - nearlytwice as many as our nearest rival," Webb told BMI.This rapid rise in market share can be attributed in part to the highlycompetitive rates offered by Direct Line - it claims to have expensesof 11 percent, compared to an industry average of 25 percent, and itpasses much of its economies onto the customer.However, insurers like Eagle Star and Norwich Union have launched theirown direct insurance operations with competitive rates, and Direct Linenow finds itself competing directly with these as well as ChurchillInsurance and others. So, how does it continue to gain ground sorapidly, at the expense of its rivals? Many have attributed its successstory to the memorable brand image, described by one corporate imageconsultant as "a marketing director's dream"."A strong brand is one of the most important elements we have going forus," Webb said. "There is a huge awareness of the Direct Line brand inthe market. I think that when people are thinking of phoning around fora quote, ours is one of the first names that springs to mind."Webb attributes this success to a strong branding strategy, and ongoingbrand advertising on radio, TV, and in the national press. "We haveongoing campaigns to build brand awareness, or rather to build on thebrand awareness that already exists," he said. "Direct Line has been oneither TV or radio almost every day since 1990." The overall marketingbudget for 1995 was #25 million ($38.64 million).Direct Line's foray into the home and contents insurance market hasalso been, to say the least, a great success. It had been offering suchpolicies since 1988, but in quite a"subdued" way until 1992 or 1993when Direct Line put its weight behind the marketing of this section ofthe business. The company is now the largest household insurer in theUK.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ITALY:  ROYAL REVOLUTION IN LOMBARDYROYAL INSURANCE of the UK launched its direct selling operation inLombardy on January 15, in a bid to provide direct motor insurance tocar owners in the Greater Milan area. The launch was preceded andaccompanied by a major marketing campaign, using the slogan"Rivoluzione Inglese" (English Revolution), a play on the initials ofthe UK insurer.Royal declined to disclose the campaign budget "for reasons ofcompetition", but the first phase of the campaign began after Christmasand ran until the launch date, with teaser posters appearing in theMilan Metro, in bus shelters, on buses, and in other outdoor sitesaround the region.The second phase got under way on the launch day, when new postersgiving a direct response number were accompanied by radio spots andadverts in the national dailies."In Italy, it is illegal to refuse motorists insurance," a spokesmantold BMI. "So, basically, we are targeting the 25-60 age group, withbetter risk profiles. The 1.5 million drivers who fit that profile inthe Greater Milan area - that's the pool we will be fishing in."According to Royal, market research undertaken after the liberalisationof the Italian insurance market last year showed that while customerswere generally content to deal with agents, a growing number wanted theoption to deal direct with their insurer.The new operation is closely modelled on Royal's other direct writingoperations in the UK and Spain, and fits into the insurer's strategy ofdeveloping multi-channel distribution of personal lines business.Customers will have a choice between receiving a quote by phone or, fora more personal service, going along to Royal's drive-in basement atits headquarters where they can deal directly with sales people,inspectors and claims assessors.Royal's strategy is to use this initiative as a testing ground, thespokesman said, at least for the short term."When we see how this goes,we may in the future consider further expansion in Italy."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996US CARD ISSUERS SPONSOR SPORTSCREDIT CARD issuers and organisations are spending millions onsponsorship, particularly of sporting events, in order to enhance theirbrand image.The latest industry deal saw MasterCard sign a $2 million exclusivedeal with the National Hockey League last month, while it continues topromote its gold cards at high profile golf tournaments like the PGAGrand Slam and the Colonial. Three more important golf sponsorshipdeals are on the cards, according to a MasterCard spokeswoman.MasterCard is also heavily involved in soccer events, and is reportedto have already paid $10 million to sponsor the 1998 World Cupchampionships in France - a four-year package of associatedsponsorships leading up to the championship which is said to be worth$40 million. MasterCard and its members spent a combined $75 million inrelation to World Cup 1994 in the US.Visa too is extremely active in the sponsorship field, and is reportedto have spent between $30 million and $35 million on sponsorship rightson the National Football League, the Elton John tour and somedestination deals.American Express signed on with the National Basketball League in May,paying $30 million for three years, as well as signing a sponsorshipdeal with the Dallas Cowboys football club to be the official card ofTexas Stadium, despite Visa's sponsorship supremacy over the footballleague as a whole.Cards sponsorship activity dates back to the 1984 Olympics whenAmerican Express was a leading sponsor, but Visa subsequently took overin 1988, and has had great success exploiting its exclusive Olympicssponsorship rights. Such high profile sponsorship opportunities don'tcome cheap, however. Visa reportedly paid $40 million for the 1992 and1996 Olympics.Credit card companies are not alone in their enthusiasm for sponsorshipas a marketing tool. Sponsorship will top $5.4 billion in the US nextyear, said Jim Andrews, vice-president of IEG, a consultancyspecialising in sponsorship. That is 15 percent higher than the $4.7billion forecast for the whole of 1995.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PROFILING TODAY'S INTERNET USERA JUST-PUBLISHED survey allows us to draw a profile of today's typicalEuropean Internet user, and gives pointers as to what is likely to grabhis or her (although the ladies represent only 12 percent of users forthe present) attention when surfing the Net.According to the survey by Durlacher Multimedia of London The Internetin 1996: An investment perspective, the average Internet user is agedbetween 22 and 36 with an annual income of between #13,000 ($20,000)and #20,000. He spends between six and ten hours a week on theInternet, has probably made one purchase through the World Wide Web,and would be more likely to do so if happier with the security issue.Durlacher claims its 190-page report is the "first substantialEuropean-orientated survey of the Internet", and would like to see itbecome a benchmark for subsequent studies. Its findings are numerousand varied."The World Wide Web is doubling in size every three months," saidGeoffrey Chamberlain, chief executive of Durlacher Multimedia."Approaching 100,000 Web sites are forecast by early 1996."The authors concluded from their research that the first wave ofsuccessful Internet-related businesses will include Internet accessservice provision, Internet software applications provision andInternet consultancy. The second wave will be dominated by contentprovision, including provision by the financial services institutions.The study also forecasts that by early 1996, 33.4 million users will beconnected to the Internet, and that by 2002, more than 200 millionpeople worldwide will be connected to at least part of the Internet,with 150 million subscriptions to on-line services.Security comes up again as an issue. Of 250 respondents, 23 percent hadmade one or more purchases via the Web, and 87 percent expressedinterest in doing so. Fifty-seven percent stated that improved securitywould certainly encourage them to shop via the Web. The authors believesecure transaction standards will be set before the end of 1996.According to the report, analysts expect worldwide on-line advertisingto be worth $200 million in 1996, and to top $1 billion by the end ofthe next decade.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ADVANCE BANK AHEAD IN AUSTRALIAN INTERNET RACEADVANCE BANK, Australia's sixth-largest bank by assets, is living up toits name with its latest service offering to customers. It has justbecome the country's first bank to allow customers access to theiraccounts via the Internet. Other banks are offering product informationservices on the Net in Australia.The 300,000 or so customers of Advance's Quickphone service can nowaccess their accounts with their Advance card number and Quickphone PINwhen they enter the bank's World Wide Web site.The bank is not only hoping for a large response from existingcustomers, but hopes also to catch the eye of potential new customerswho will be able to view a demonstration when they call up the AdvanceWeb site.Transfer fundsAt first, the service will just allow business and personal customersto call up account information, but the plan is to enhance the facilityso as to allow customers to transfer funds between accounts, make loanrepayments and see a full month's statement.Australian banks have been cautious about providing Internet bankingbecause of the security issue, and have tended to sit back and wait forthe US to lead the way as regards developing security technology. Withreportedly over 900,000 Australians now regularly surfing the Net,however, many banks have opened sites on the World Wide Web over thepast year.These pages generally contain advertising-type information as opposedto any real banking service. In other words, at present, most banks areusing the Internet mainly as an advertising medium.One of the more high profile initiatives, Priority One, was set up byAMP in October to offer home loans from the World Wide Web. Itreportedly received 7,000 queries in the first six weeks, but itadmitted that the conversion rate of Internet inquiries is lower thanfrom traditional inquiries.Web presenceBack in September, Westpac launched a Web site containing loaninformation. National Australia has its presence on the Web, and theCommonwealth Bank is developing sites both on the Web and on theMicrosoft Network. In December, St George announced its Internet sitewhich it claims is more "interactive" than other bank pages.With the assistance of Techway, a leading Australian informationtechnology company, Advance is confident that security is not aproblem. All customer information is encrypted for transmission in bothdirections over the Internet so the information remains secure, itclaims."[Techway] has studied worldwide trends in all aspects of security onthe Internet and it can confidently claim to have secure Internettransaction software that sets world class standards," a spokesmansaid.Although Advance has beaten its rivals to the post as regards providingan Internet banking service, the initiative will not provide the bankwith an exclusive advantage in the market. Techway is also"talkinginformally" with several others, and seems determined to market itstechnology to two or three of Advance's rival banks.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NAB OFFERS LOAN APPROVAL OVER PHONENATIONAL AUSTRALIA Bank, the country's largest bank by assets, haslaunched what it describes as "the first concerted move into telephonebanking in Australia", offering a special telephone loans service forpersonal customers.The bank claims that its customers can now have a home loan approved inless than 25 minutes. The service also offers approval for creditcards, personal loans and term deposits over the phone, typically inaround 15 minutes, according to NAB. It is available to customersanywhere in Australia seven days a week between 8am and 9pm.Until now, Australian banks have provided customers with inquiryservices and basic transactions over the phone, the bank claims.Indeed, NAB itself already offers these various possibilities throughits telephone banking service."This new service ushers in true telephone banking, whereby customerscan be provided with major services over the phone," said managingdirector Don Argus.National Telephone Bankers - as the service is called - uses acomputer-based credit assessment system, developed by the bank over thepast two years, allowing the "National Telephone Banker to give orrefuse loan approval in a matter of minutes."A decision is made during the initial phone call in almost all cases,"Argus said."The National is the only bank offering this level ofconvenience."If a loan is approved, all that remains is for the customer in questionto call into a branch, have his or her income verified, and sign theloan documents.The launch of the service follows a six-month pilot in New South Walesand South Australia, which exceeded all expectations, with operatorsfielding over 1,000 calls a day. NAB expects to approve over 7,000loans in the first year in service.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CCF LAUNCHES REMOTE `BRANCH' SERVICEFRANCE'S CCF has launched a new remote banking service, Banco PC. It isthe first European banking management software program developed on aPC, according to the bank. This interactive banking service goes farbeyond a simple data transfer on personal finance software. CCF definesit as a real bank branch accessible by PC - a new remote banking formatwhich gives CCF an even broader range of services.Banco PC is built around three main services: Banco PC Branch,("Agence"), Banco PC Self Management, "Libre Gestion") and Banco PCBudget. A fourth service is still in development - Banco PC Boutiques(retail shops).Banco PC Branch is a remote banking service via PC using the concept ofcombining a bank branch graphic with a windows environment. It givesaccess to basic banking services such as account balances, deposits,credit lines, and so on, in the visual environment of a bank branch.Banco PC Self Management can transfer a bank statement directly to aspread sheet such as Excel or Lotus 1,2,3. This eliminatestime-consuming data entry or downloading from the Minitel. Banco PCBudget allows the client to follow a budget using a personal financialmanagement software program. The CCF has signed an initial partnershipagreement with Intuit for its budget management program Quicken. Thanksto this agreement, CCF clients using Quicken can record their bankingoperations onto their respective Quicken documents to facilitate thesupervision and analysis of their spending.CCF plans to add other partners to its initial software agreement.Banco PC Boutiques will give CCF clients the possibility of shoppingdirectly from their PC, much as they are already doing through theMinitel (Bancoscope).The range of Banco PC services are accessible through a PC with awindows environment, equipped with a modem and a telephone connection.Banco PC services cost Fr29 ($5.89) monthly for the first service (anyof the four mentioned), and Fr10 for each additional service, with amaximum monthly charge of Fr49 (tax included). The Banco PC software isfree of charge, as is the service help-line.To aid its clients in equipping themselves, CCF offers an internalhigh-speed modem at a cost of Fr1,000 (the average retail price isFr1,500). For their clients who don't have a computer, the multimediaIBM Aptiva can be obtained with direct delivery from IBM.This evolution of CCF's long-distance banking services demonstrates itswillingness to respond to the changes in consumer demand and,therefore, its clients' needs. Currently, 10 percent of Frenchhouseholds have computers and by the year 2000, it is expected that 40percent will be fully equipped.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SOCIETE GENERALE REMOTE SERVICE EXTENDEDSOCIETE GENERALE'S 680,000 clients in Paris and Hauts de Seine (one ofthe more affluent regions in the Paris area) have received along withtheir December bank statement the announcement of the new telephoneremote banking service, Vocalia Service, complete with phone number andthe necessary code number.In November, Societe Generale decided to go ahead and launch VocaliaService without the agreement of the unions. The 680,000 clientsconcerned are able to reach a "teleoperator" from Tuesday to Fridayfrom 8am to 9pm, and on Mondays and Saturdays from 9am to 5pm. This isthe first service available following a pilot which was carried outwith the 120,000 clients of six branch groups in the Paris area, andusing different operating times (5pm to 9pm from Tuesday to Friday and9am to 5pm on Saturdays). As of the second quarter of 1996, thisservice will be extended to all 3.5 million Societe Generale clients.The appointed teleoperators belong to the Societe Generale staff.Previous to the launch of the service, most operators worked in thebank's network as client managers and were then trained to work on thephone.A Societe Generale spokeswoman insisted that this new service is theresult of developments predating Compagnie Bancaire's Banque Directeentry onto the market."We launched the first platform with essentially Parisian groups,practically at the same time as Banque Directe was launched," shesaid."It is therefore a fully-developed project in Societe Generale,and not just a reaction to Banque Directe." At present, the serviceonly concerns Paris and the Paris area.The French unions involved have refused to accept any agreementconcerning working on a rota basis. In order to bypass this obstacle,SocGen management decided to have Vocalia Service set up two separateplatforms enabling the service to operate on a timetable of more thaneight hours. Each platform is situated in a different location to avoidhaving to set up any form of relay or rota teamwork. The 1937 decree onbank's working hours is thus respected.Despite this, the CFDT (Confederation Francaise Democratique duTravail, one of the French unions) tried to stop Vocalia Service frombeing launched in this fashion, by going to court.The court, however, dismissed the case, and there was no appeal. Theservice, which had been on hold pending the decision, was launchedimmediately afterwards.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BANKS FUEL DIRECT MAIL BOOMBANKS MADE a considerable contribution to the strong growth in directmailings last year, resulting in another record quarter for direct mailvolume. This was one of the findings of recent research from the DirectMail Information Service (DMIS) in London.It was a good year all round for the direct mail industry. Figures fromthe DMIS show that between July and September 1995, direct mail volumehit 700 million items - up 4.2 percent on the same period in 1994.Second only to the retail sector - which saw an increase in direct mailvolume of 25 percent - the banking sector increased its volume ofdirect mailings by 21 percent to 202 million items for the same threequarters.Expenditure on direct mail in the July to September 1995 period was up3.5 percent on the previous year, at #264.2 million ($400 million).With only the final quarter figures to come, the DMIS expectsexpenditure to hit the $1 billion mark for the second year in a row -total expenditure was 1.05 billion in 1994.DIRECT MAIL VOLUME                   % share 12  % share 12  Percent     Volume 12                   months to   months to   increase    months to                   Sept 1994   Sept 1995   in volume   Sept 1995 (m)The four fastest growing sectorsRetail              8.9        10.4        25          293Banks               6.3         7.2        21          202Manufacturers       9.9        10.8        16          302Mail order         27.5        28.7        11          805Source: DMISCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FIRST DIRECT WINS SERVICE AWARDFIRST DIRECT, the UK's first direct bank, has won the 1995 CustomerChampion Award, as well as the Best Financial Customer Service award,presented by Unisys and The Sunday Times."We were delighted to be recognised for the standard of customerservice we offer," customer services project manager Amanda Stott toldBMI. "From the launch of First Direct, we have always set out to be thebest in the world, and customer service has been a key priority."Stott outlined various initiatives which are designed to ensure thatcustomer satisfaction remains high at First Direct. QUEST (QualityUndertake Every Single Time) is a staff suggestion scheme, which allowsmanagement to get feedback from those working directly with thecustomers, and to get ideas from the customers themselves."Action Teams" exist too in every department, where members of staffget together regularly and have "brainstorming" sessions.Regular customer satisfaction surveys are also an important way ofmonitoring consistency, according to Stott. Once new customers havereached the end of their "welcome period", questionnaires areautomatically sent out, so as to catch any problems early on in theprocess. These new arrivals are asked how the account opening processwent; if they had any problems; and, if so, were they dealt withswiftly and effectively. The responses to these questionnaires aremonitored monthly.What is more, each quarter, a survey of established customers iscarried out, involving a mailing of 10,000 or so questionnaires. FirstDirect itself carries out the survey for the first three quarters, andhas the final quarter executed independently by NOP.That said, many banks carry out similar initiatives and yet customersatisfaction is low. Where are they going wrong?"We had the added benefit of starting from scratch, of starting with aclean slate," Stott mused."We carried out extensive market research onthe banking industry, and we were very careful when recruiting.Remember that, as the banks move towards customer service, they arehaving to re-educate their people's thinking."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RBOS DEFENDS ITS TESSAROYAL BANK of Scotland has defended the performance of its TESSAfollowing a damning article, headlined Royal rip-off, that appeared inthe latest Which? - the magazine published by the British ConsumersAssociation."Savers who put their money in the Royal Bank of Scotland TESSA mayfind they get less than they bargained for - around #250 [$388] less,"states the article in question. The magazine criticises the Royal BankTessa because interest is not compounded, but rather is credited to theaccount at the end of the five-year term."What Which? has failed to do is to look at the whole picture," saidFrank Kirwan, UK director of retail banking at the bank. "Theassociation has only looked at one element of our return, and forgottenall about the additional bonuses we offer. What matters to the customeris not the method of calculation, but the total return investorsreceive on their savings."Independent surveys show that the overall return to savers on theRoyal Bank TESSA is one of the best available from a high street bank,and ahead of many of the leading building societies. Indeed, researchby Moneyfacts and Blay's place it second to the TSB and ahead of the`Big Four'."Kirwan pointed out that the TESSA was designed for those investors whoheld them to maturity."It was always meant to be a long-term savingsmedium."He cited the Moneyfacts research, which placed Royal's TESSA second toTSB as regards return. Assuming that the TESSA was opened at launchwith the maximum investment of #3,000 and that maximum contributionshad been made on the anniversary of each year after that, the projectedmaturity value would be #11,870, compared to TSB's figure of #11,904.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SPAIN:  BANKS OPT FOR ALTERNATIVE DISTRIBUTIONAS A RESULT of new banking legislation introduced in July 1995, anumber of Spanish banks have begun to explore the possibility ofdeveloping tied agents networks to supplement their traditionaldistribution channels. Bankinter is one of those to pilot such aninitiative.Although banks have used financial advisers and insurance agents tomarket financial products in the past, no legal framework which definedand regulated the role of financial agents previously existed.The new law defines financial agents as mediators who, without beingemployees of the bank, habitually carry out determined bankingactivities on its behalf. The legal text stresses that financial agentsmust respect the same standards of transparency as banks, and cannotrepresent more than one bank or consolidated financial group, noroperate through sub-agents. That said, it is the bank or financialgroup that will be held responsible for any failure by the agent tocomply to banking standards and regulations.This introduction of the financial agent is as a result of EClegislation which allows banks to operate in other member stateswithout being obliged to have a banking presence there. However, it isthought that tied agents networks might also prove a popular option forthe smaller domestic banks. Combining an agent network with a telephonebanking service could be an effective way for banks to reach a widermarket, at a relatively low cost.Bankinter, one of Spain's most dynamic second-tier banks, has alreadybegun to recruit financial agents on an experimental basis and,according to a bank spokesman, hopes to have drawn up a definitenetwork plan within the next two months.Bankinter, which has a very small network - 253 branches -compared toits rivals, hopes tied agents will help it to expand rapidly in regionswhere it has no branch presence, as well as reinforcing its existingbranch network.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PORTUGAL:  MUNDIAL GETS IMAGE OVERHAULCIA SEGUROS Mundial Confianca, one of Portugal's largest insurers, iscurrently undergoing a radical image overhaul in a programme that willhave cost the institution an estimated Esc400 million ($2.67 million)by the end of 1996. Mundial Confianca is the country's third-largestnon-life insurer and its eighth-biggest life insurer.The basic aim of the company's new image is the portrayal of stability,and at its core is the slogan "Live safely because life is a rollercoaster". The company has also changed its emblem from red and brown toblue and yellow."The old emblem was 15 years old and no longer reflected our corporateidentity," explained Paolo Bracon, Mundial Confianca's head ofmarketing, adding that the new colours are also those used by BancoTotta e Acores (BTA) and Credito Predial Portugues (CPP), both of whichare controlled by the owner of Mundial Confianca, Antonio Champalimaud."We want to show our customers that we are part of a much largerprivate financial grouping."The launch of the new look, at the end of 1995, was accompanied by amajor publicity campaign using all forms of media advertising. Thecampaign, which was designed by marketing company Neovox, is tocontinue throughout 1996 and, according to Bracon, the company will beusing this opportunity to launch a whole range of new productsthroughout the year, aimed principally at the personal lines sector."We are not looking to corner any particular segment of the market,however," he said. "We are a universal insurance company which cancover the needs of the entire market. So, while this year we will beconcentrating on one particular area, we will not be doing so at theexpense of other areas." Indeed, a whole range of Mundial Confiancaproducts will soon be available in all BTA and CPP branches. MundialConfianca already markets its products through another bank owned byChampalimaud, Banco Pinto e Sotto Mayor."This will allow us to greatlyincrease the number of clients, which currently stands at about600,000," Bracon said.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VIDEOCONFERENCING AT IMPERIOPORTUGAL'S LARGEST insurer, Cia seguros Imperio, has launched avideoconference booth network in 20 of its branches across the country- a first for Portugal, it claims.The new interactive system, called "Video Servicio-Imperio 24", allowsa client to communicate at any time of the day or night with a customerservices officer in the specially-designed booth which is equipped withonly a computer screen and a telephone receiver. It also has a backupsystem whereby the client can obtain information without having tospeak directly to the officer, simply by touching the screen."The system allows a client to get up-to-the-minute information on anyof our products: how much it will cost to insure the contents of hishouse or how much his automobile insurance has gone up, etc," saidImperio's marketing director, Eugenia Coimbra. "The client can also useit to make an appointment with one of our agents. However, the realpoint of the new system is not just to complement our existingservices, but rather to introduce a human factor."Pilot trials on the booths revealed that many people initially feltextremely uncomfortable in them, but Imperio said it does not view thisas a real problem, "as the reaction to Multibanco booths was much thesame when they first appeared". Its primary targets are executives andeducated people "who don't like to stand in queues and are not afraidof new technology".Financially, the system has a clear advantage for the company, Coimbrasaid."It allows us to provide a 24-hour customer service with a minimumof staff and reduces the work-load of our staff during office hours."Imperio plans to increase the number of these booths in its branches to80 by the end of 1996 alone, and the long-term strategy is to have themfitted in all its branches. Similar booths are also to be fitted intoBanco Mello branches, which controls Imperio.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GERMAN BANKS RULE OKRecent research commissioned by the German Bankers Association suggeststhat customer satisfaction with the banking industry there is high. AnnO'Dea analyses some of the findingsAROUND 88 percent of customers are satisfied with the service theyreceive from the German banking industry. This is one of the findingsof a representative study carried out by IPOS (Institute forPractically-oriented Social Research) of Manheim, and commissioned bythe German Bankers Association (Bundesverband deutscher Banken).This represents a rise in satisfaction of 4 percentage points, whencompared to a similar survey carried out by IPOS in the spring of 1995,and will be a relief to banks at a time when many European banks arecoming in for severe criticism from their retail customers.The recently-published results are based on 1,303 interviews, made bytelephone from October 30 to November 2 1995. The total of those whowere questioned is "a representative sample of voting citizens inGermany", the association said.The respondents were questioned on various points: the level of trustin their service providers; analysis of competence; location of theiraccounts; judgment of performance; standard of personal advice;confidentiality; influence of banks on the economy, specifically onpolitics.There was little fluctuation in satisfaction levels between differenttypes of institutions; commercial banks, savings banks and co-operativebanks. According to the association, this general satisfaction suggeststhat the financial service providers take justified criticismseriously, and are making an effort to improve. Those who confirmed inwriting that they are receiving an improved personal service rose from28 percent in the spring, to 33 percent in November.Customers were also asked to comment on the perceived competence of thebanks and, in this area, the commercial banks have the edge. While 57percent were of the opinion that there is no difference betweeninstitutions in this respect, and 19 percent left the questionunanswered, 14 percent believed that commercial banks display thegreatest competence. Only 5.6 percent pointed to savings banks and 4.4percent co-operative banks.As regards the standard of personal advice (see table 2), over half therespondents said the level has "hardly changed", but 32.6 percentbelieved it has improved.The findings on standards of personal advice contrasted significantlywith results of a recent survey by watchdog Finanztest (see BMI 63)which suggests that most retail banking customers are given scanty andill-considered advice.Researchers posed as would-be customers seeking advice, and visited thebranches of 21 different banks. The result? One-third of the 147 advicesessions were rated as "unsatisfactory" or"poor". This of coursesuggests that customers would be less aware of the shortcomings of onebank's investment advice than would be the various financial watchdogs.Customers were also asked if they felt that information on citizens'financial relationships was kept confidential by the banks and savingsbanks in Germany. While 46.5 percent believed it is, a significant 45.8percent did not.Respondents also answered questions on how they perceived the influenceof the banks on the economy and on politics. While 4.1 percent said itis not enough, and 30 percent said it is just right, over 50 percent ofrespondents felt that banks have too great an influence on the economy.Again, a high 44.6 percent of respondents felt their financialinstitutions have too great an influence on politics.TABLE 1: CUSTOMER SATISFACTION (OCTOBER 1995)Question: How satisfied are you with the services provided by your          bank or savings bank?                        Pri-   Collec-  Sav-                        vate   tive     ings   Post          NoPercentage       Total  banks  banks    banks  banks  Other  accountOWN MAIN ACCOUNTNumber           1,255  167    294      620    70     54     50WITH SERVICE:Very satisfied   24.0   26.0   31.5     21.5   25.5   23.5    8.8Satisfied        64.1   64.1   59.6     66.9   68.0   67.3   51.0Dissatisfied      7.2    5.7    7.3      8.2    5.1    6.3    2.7Very dissatisfied 2.3    3.1    1.1      2.8    1.4    2.9    1.6Don't know        1.5    1.1    0.5      0.6      -      -   18.7Source: IPOS/Bundesverband deutscher BankenTABLE 2: STANDARD OF PERSONAL ADVICE (OCTOBER 1995)Question: What do you think? has personal advice in your bank          improved, worsened or not changed much at all?                        Pri-   Collec-  Sav-                        vate   tive     ings   Post          NoPercentage       Total  banks  banks    banks  banks  Other  accountOWN MAIN ACCOUNTNumber           1,303  156    310      671    51     49     66PERSONAL ADVICE IS:Better           32.6   32.9   35.0     33.9   25.2   29.1   16.9Hardly changed   51.1   49.5   48.5     54.0   49.6   51.8   38.9Worsened          9.2   13.8    8.9      8.5   15.3    9.8    1.8Don't know        6.2    3.8    7.6      3.6    9.9    9.3   25.2Source: IPOS/Bundesverband deutscher BankenCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BFG BANK STIRS GERMAN MARKETBfG Bank believes Germany is seeing a trend towards lower bank charges,and has decided to anticipate that trend with free banking. BMI takes alook at the bank's marketing strategyTHE FIRST nationwide German bank to introduce free banking hopes todouble its market share within two years and use cross-selling tocompensate for the lost bank charges.After carrying out extensive market research on a new strategy for itsretail banking business, BfG Bank has come up with a non-traditionalresponse. Rather than reducing its cost base and establishing astand-alone direct bank, the medium-sized institution has decided torely on the strengths of its existing branch network and offer freebanking across the board.Above all, BfG hopes to increase its market share - which is currentlyjust under 1 percent - to 2 percent in just two years. "The savingsbanks [Sparkassen] and co-operative banks have the dominant positionwith an 87 percent market share," said Paul Wieandt, chairman of theboard of managing directors. "Therefore, BfG Bank has to offersomething different from its competitors - and where it counts - inorder to have an impact on the market."Free banking may be old hat in other markets, but BfG's idea hascreated a stir in Germany. Although no-fee accounts have been triedbefore by small regional banks, BfG is the first nationwide institutionto attempt it. Last year, one of the big banks, Bayerische Hypotheken-und Wechsel-Bank (Hypo-Bank), offered free banking for an introductoryperiod of six months but had little success, probably because of aflawed marketing strategy (see BMI 61). By contrast, BfG intends tomake its free banking service permanent.Known as BfG plus, the new BfG current account offers an unlimitednumber of free transactions, personal advice in BfG branches, use ofATM machines, Eurocheques, an EC card and a Visa card. Unusually forthe German market, there is no additional charge for telephone bankingservices and no extra fees on overdrawn accounts, as long as thecustomer adheres to the agreed overdraft limit (except creditinterest).BfG admits that free banking will be a loss-maker unless the serviceattracts a substantial number of new customers (60,000 in the firstyear alone) and earns new income from cross-selling. In the past, BfGcurrent account customers have opted for an average of two furtherproducts from the bank and its allfinanz partners.Thus, the success of the venture depends crucially on the selling andadvisory skills of branch-based staff, and, consequently, BfG isplanning to improve its expertise. "Our advantage is the bank's size,"Wieandt said. "As a medium-sized bank . . . we are able to come up withinitiatives and new products which small regional banks could notafford to offer and which would be too expensive, i.e. unprofitable,for our large competitors."BfG has a network of 178 branches, compared with the 1,000 or sobranches run by its largest competitors such as Commerzbank andDeutsche Bank. That network was slimmed down during a restructuringseveral years ago.Free banking is also BfG's long-term response to a range of strategicchallenges, which Wieandt mapped out:- Branch-based banks such as BfG are under threat from non andnear-banks, which already control 10 percent of the retail financialservices market, and from direct banks, which Wieandt believes willgrab 15 percent of the market within five years.- Germany is over-banked and over-branched. It has one branch for every1,500 people, compared with 2,500 in the UK. By the year 2000, BfGexpects less than half of all transactions to be done in a branch,compared with around 60 percent at present.- Customers are increasingly responsive to price and quality. There isa trend towards lower bank charges, and BfG has decided to anticipatethat trend with free banking. "We aren't reducing bank charges, we'rebringing them down to zero," Wieandt said.- It is apparently no longer true that Germans are loath to switchbanks. BfG's market research has indicated that 70 percent of retailcustomers would consider changing to another bank, and around half ofthem would be motivated by lower charges.- Telecommunications are forcing the face of innovation in the Germanbanking market. Customers are increasingly receptive to telephonebanking, direct banking, electronic cash and PC banking.- Many direct banks and credit card issuers now pay interest on creditbalances:- Customers can reduce bank charges by making voucherless paymenttransfers."The transformation of the banking market has not left the retailbanking business untouched. It has long since made the transition fromseller's to buyer's market," Wieandt said.BfG has begun to build an innovative reputation over the past couple ofyears. It was one of the first German banks to introduce telephonebanking, and, in 1993, it successfully launched an account combiningbranch-based services and telephone banking. This month, the bank hasintroduced the mail-order sale and home delivery of traveller's chequesand cash in foreign currency. Furthermore, there are plans to establisha direct broker in the spring.Previously labelled the"trade union" bank and regarded as highlytraditional in strategy and marketing, BfG Bank was owned by aunion-controlled holding before its sale to Credit Lyonnais in 1992.The CL-BfG deal was the first sale of a large German bank to a foreigninstitution.At the time, market observers suggested that many German banks,weakened by low profitability, would have to decide whether they wantto make a serious commitment to universal banking or whether to lookfor a niche strategy. BfG now seems to have decided to focus on retailbanking, which has always been one of its most important businessareas.According to Wieandt, more than half of all claims on non-banks areloans to retail customers. On the liabilities side, 40 percent ofclaims from non-banks are deposits by retail customers. Moreover, theretail banking division contributes more than half of interest andcommission earnings.Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TAKING OFF THE FRILLSFollowing calls from the Prices Surveillance Authority for theabolishment of fixed account-keeping fees, the Big Four Australianbanks have announced basic no-frills accounts. BMI reportsTHE BIG Four retail banks in Australia have all announced the launch ofnew basic "no-frill" accounts in the past few weeks.Banks had been set a December 31 deadline to respond to the - nowdefunct - Prices Surveillance Authority's (PSA) inquiry last summerinto bank fees and charges, which resulted from public disquiet overtheir high level.Among the PSA recommendations resulting from the inquiry is a greateruse of a "user pays principle" rather than fixed account-keeping fees.The authority also called for a "basic" account with no account-keepingfee and a number of "free" debit transactions per month before any feeswere applied.While each of the Big Four abolished the fixed monthly account-keepingfees from their new offers, the other features differed from one bankto another, and were greeted with varying reactions among consumerbodies and the powers that be.The Australian Consumers Association judged National Australia Bank(NAB) to be the only one of the Big Four to have introduced anacceptable basic transaction account. The product efforts from WestpacBanking Corporation, ANZ Banking Group and the Commonwealth Bank wereall judged as "could do better".NAB is pleased with the reception its new fees structure obtained, asit feels that the changes "reflect the views of current customers andthe outcome of government and community consultation"."We have listened to the concerns expressed about affordability, accessand the need for a more equitable approach," said Allan Diplock, chiefgeneral manager of NAB. "The outcome is a range of options that provideflexibility for customers and the opportunity to manage accounts in away that will ensure no fees are paid." This fits in well with the PSAwish to apply the "users pay" principle, thus not penalising those whocarry out a small number of transactions per month.The number of free transactions is one of the major bones ofcontention. NAB is offering eight free transactions monthly tocustomers with the `basic' account, after monitoring customer research,while the other three allow only six."Our records show that in a typical month less than 10 percent of ourcustomers with balances below A$500 would have more than eightwithdrawals," Diplock said. "That is why we've set the free withdrawallevel at eight."A spokeswoman for the association is also critical of the fees ofbetween 40 cents and 65 cents charged by Westpac, ANZ and CBA forexcess electronic transactions, particularly in view of NationalAustralia Bank's modest 25 cent fee.ANZ's basic Access Simplicity account came under pressure from thefederal treasurer who refused to comment on the account the day it wasannounced, whereas he had expressed satisfaction when NAB, CBA andWestpac made their announcements.ANZ is charging a higher than average fee for excess over-the-countertransactions - A$1.25 - but, according to a spokesman, this is designedto encourage customers to use an ATM or other electronic service,rather than branch transactions which cost the bank much more. CBA'seven higher fee of A$1.50 for the same excess came under fiercecriticism from the Consumers Association.However, Allan Fels, chairman of the Australian Competition andConsumer Commission, which took over the functions of both the PSA andthe Trade Practices Commission, recognised that all the Big Four bankshave "made moves in the right direction". The commission must now carryout an assessment of the fees structure and report back to thetreasurer, probably before March next.But how are the banks faring with the loss of revenue from cuttingfixed monthly bank charges? "You need to remember that while we losethe A$2 or so monthly fixed fee, we have also added the 25 cents chargefor excess transactions, which did not previously exist," said aspokesman for NAB."That will help offset the account-keeping fees, andoverall we believe the process will be revenue neutral."Another new charge at NAB is the 75 cents fee for withdrawing cash froman ATM outside the bank's own network. But customers need not fear -the bank is busy sending out explanatory literature to all 3 millioncustomers.Westpac too is going to great lengths to ensure its customers are wellinformed as to the new accounts it is offering. A sum of A$3 millionhas been spent on direct customer communication involving direct mailand advertising, in order to convey the changes to its 1.5 millioncustomers. Westpac had a time limit in that it launched its new rangeof accounts on January 15 - the remaining three will all see start-upin March.AUSTRALIA'S "BIG FOUR" - NEW BANK FEESThe `Basic' Account                        NAB   Westpac CBA   ANZCheque book                                Yes   No      No    NoAccount-keeping fee                        No    No      No    NoFree withdrawals/month                     8     6       6     6Charge per excess electronic transaction   25c   65c     45c   40cCharge per excess branch transaction       $1    $1      $1.50 $1.25Comes into force 1995                      March Jan 15  March MarchSource: Lafferty Group/The banksCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DESIGNING YOUR ON-LINE OFFERINGWhen it comes to on-line delivery, there is an increasing awareness ofthe necessity for the banking industry to act now or be left behind.BMI examines recent research on the issueBANKS HAVE seen their market share drop over the past two decades, asnon-bank financial companies, like mortgage providers, brokerage firmsand mutual funds, have poached some of their most profitable customers.According to the just-published second volume of The InformationSuperhighway and Retail Banking, a joint report from the BankAdministration Institute (BAI) and the Boston Consulting Group (BCG),banks face the same risks from emerging on-line providers, unless theycan effectively use their key assets - customer relationships andcustomer information.In developing their on-line strategies, banks will have to consider atleast three options: remaining an integrated player, becoming thecustomer's agent, or specialising as a product manufacturer. This isone of the conclusions of the study."In all likelihood an individual bank's strategy will be a hybrid ofthese three primary options," says Richard Hartnack, vice-chairman ofUnion Bank, and chairman of the Centre for Banking Issues andStrategies at BAI. "In addition, alliances among banks to aggregatetheir collective capabilities and scale will play an important role."When volume I of the report was published in the summer of 1995 (seeBMI 62), many banks still showed little interest or activity in on-linedelivery. However, as predicted by the authors at that time, the use ofon-line services and the Internet has grown significantly.The following are some of the more significant developments since thefirst part of the report was published, according to the authors:- A marked increase in the number of banks that have signed agreementswith entities focused on on-line delivery, such as Microsoft, Intuit,Visa Interactive and MasterBanking;- A significant increase in the number of banks that are staking outpositions as content providers on the major on-line services;- An explosion in Internet Web sites, by bank and non-bank playersalike;- The joint purchase of Meca Software by BankAmerica and Nationsbank;and- The aggressive development of strategic payments alliances, such asVisa and Microsoft; and MasterCard, IBM and Netscape.The report also draws attention to the rapid growth in the number ofusers of commercial on-line services and the Internet. At November1995, there were approximately 8 million subscribers to commercialon-line services, and about 10 million users of the World Wide Web partof the Internet.The result of this has been an increasing awareness of the necessityfor the banking industry to act now or be left behind, as well as arealisation of the threats and opportunities facing banks over the nextfew years."The task at hand for banks now shifts from deciding whether to takeaction to deciding how, in what form, and at what speed," the reportstates.Two issues dealt with in detail by the study are how electronic bankingwill affect customer behaviour and how banks are to determine thedesign of the product offering. A segmentation analysis is used toevaluate which customers are likely to be early adopters of on-linedelivery, and to assess likely future customer behaviour.The conclusions suggest that the barriers to on-line delivery are lowerthan might be anticipated, and that some of the most attractivecustomer segments for banks seem likely to be early adopters.KEY DESIGN ISSUES BY SEGMENTNew enthusiastsDescription:  Upscale, above-average income, secure about financial              future              Desire to learn new things              Usually married              Higher level of education,Issues:       Looking for convenience and time savings              Will use technology when offeredImplications: Attractive segment              May be retained by electronic bankingSurfersDescription:  Mostly young and single              Lower income; temporary for some within segment              Above average ability to use technologyIssues:       Will use technology              Concerned with security and privacyImplications: Many transaction accounts; cost-saving opportunities              May stop often with technology              May increase income in futureOld linersDescription:  Usually older and less wealthy              Capital depleting              Do not use new technologyIssues:       Like current system, comfortable              Probably will continue to use branch and teller              Some migration to ATM and phoneImplications: Least likely to move on-line              Some may move to screenphones, etc.              Lower prioritySource: BCG/BAIBut how does one forecast how customers will respond to on-linebanking? The study points to research which indicates that almost 70percent of current financial transactions are conducted using methodsother than branches and ATMs - phones, mail and AVRUs (Automated VoiceResponse Units). Almost half the remaining 30 percent are interactionswith ATMs. It concludes that customers who currently bank by phone orATM will migrate more rapidly to on-line banking."In many ways, the move from a branch to an ATM was a bigger shift forsome customer segments than the move from telephone to PC will be," theauthors say. "The first move required new behaviour; the second shiftrequires a more modest change in behaviour and is accompanied by asignificant increase in functionality."The study also makes an interesting point as regards thecannibalisation debate. It claims that rather than rendering the branchnetwork obsolete, as on-line banking takes hold it will cannibaliseexisting electronic bank delivery systems - "those used by the affluent`early adopters' of technology".There is also a feeling that the millions of dollars invested inelectronic projects, including screen-phones, may have been betterspent elsewhere. "Near term, only the PC is really viable," claims TomWurster, vice-president of the Boston Consulting Group. "The slowdownin the deployment of broadband services says to us that the PC willdominate on-line banking for the near to medium term."The study cites research which supports this thinking. PC with modemswill be in 40 percent of US households by the year 2000, it claims, andone of the most attractive segments of the banking community (under 30years, over $50,000 income) already has a PC/modem penetration of 43percent - four to five times higher than that in households withincomes below $30,000 (see figure 1).The principal "roadblocks" for these key customer segments is "the lackof compelling on-line content, easy ways to gain access to thatcontent, and a secure on-line payments system", the authors say, addingrather ominously that non-bank financial services players are currentlyfocused on providing these latter, particularly for these attractivecustomer groups.Because the different customer segments differ radically in theiropenness to on-line delivery, and use of banking products, the designof the on-line offering necessitates a close analysis of customersegments and product use. BCG uses a lifestyle segmentation format,developed by US market research firm Odyssey L.P., to make generalobservations on how different offerings will need to be designed toappeal to different segments, dividing customers into three possibletarget segments (see figure 2):- New enthusiasts: upscale, typically between the ages of 30 and 60,largely white collar;- Surfers: a subsegment of younger households, typically more highlyeducated with upscale potential; and- Old liners: retired customers with moderate or fixed incomes,typically below $50,000.These three segments, the study says, constitute a significantpercentage of the overall market, and are useful starting points whenlooking at the key considerations in the design of the offering bysegment.Banks have traditionally had a lower share of wallet with the wealthiercustomers between the ages of 30 and 60 - similar to the newenthusiasts. These potentially profitable customers typically haverelationships with several financial institutions, tending to usespecialist providers for some of the larger investments, like mortgagesor mutual funds. What is more, these are likely to constitute a veryattractive on-line segment.Attitudinal research, according to the study, would suggest that thissegment is often looking for convenience and time saving, and willoften opt for technology when offered.An on-line offering for these customers will need to address both thedesire for convenience and their specific life cycle product needs, theBCG concludes. A focus on the role of investment products, financialplanning, mortgages and so on may be necessary, as well as theinteractive on-line environment. The study offers the example of"integrated information, such as an on-line net worth statement, linkedto both bank holdings and other holdings" as a core informationoffering. Above all, it insists on the importance of being early withan on-line offering to this segment, so as to gain usage and loyalty,at a time when competing non-bank institutions are targeting this samesegment.Another key group for which to design an on-line offering may be thesurfer-type subsegment of under-30 households. Unfortunately, thissegment is typically unprofitable for the banks. "They keep smallbalances, use only a few products and generate many transactions."However, many of these households will become attractive customers asthey grow older and more successful.The authors suggest a streamlined offering, with lower delivery costswhile improving access and convenience, in this way increasingprofitability and retention. The on-line offering should take intoaccount the attitudinal and behavioural characteristics of thissegment. These customers are generally comfortable using technology andmay value the convenience of on-line delivery of statements and e-mailinquiries. It is also a segment associated with loans and creditfacilities so an offering which includes on-line credit applicationswith quick response could have particular appeal, for example.Retired customers with fixed incomes, similar to the old liners,represent one of those segments which are low priority when designingon-line offerings, in the short or medium term. These latter are oftenthe most frequent users of the branch, and lowest users of ATMs.Attitudinal research suggests these may be one of the hardest to switchto on-line delivery.In designing their on-line offerings, it is essential that the banksconsider the actions of the non-bank players who are busy designingtheir own, the report insists. "Financial services has many attributesthat make it a logical and attractive candidate for on-line delivery,"it points out. "Recent events have confirmed this view." The followingare laid out as some of the principal considerations in relation to thedesign of on-line offerings:The most innovative non-bank players have a significantly lowerdelivery cost structure than banks, in part because they do not havethe investments in brick and mortar that banks do. The possibility ofon-line delivery will probably cause them to see opportunities tofurther expand their customer relationships at the expense of banks.Some of these players have strong brand positions, national presences,and high shares of the early adopter segments of the market (e.g.surfers, new enthusiasts).Some of these players may also take advantage of their current brandpositions by expanding the range of products and information offerings.These offerings can easily be outsourced.Only by evaluating the differing motivations of the non-bank playerscan the banks come to understand the likely competitive threat from thedifferent on-line offerings, the report warns.The authors suggest a return to analysis of customer needs and productcharacteristics. Many of the surfers and new enthusiasts, for example,will prefer to shop for products, as opposed to having products sold tothem, and will thus react positively to an offering that includescomparison shopping. "If banks are hesitant to promote the products ofothers, their offerings will have less appeal to these customers," theauthors claim.Banks are also reminded of their own competitive advantages -owningcurrent customer relations with a high level of trust, wide range ofdelivery channels for customer convenience, payment systems access andaccess to customer data. The report concludes that transforming thisdata into customer information is one of the greatest challenges forbanks today, and will be crucial for an effective on-line presence.The platform options available to banks are numerous and prioritieswill have to be established from the start, the report says. Banks needto decide whether to develop their service on commercial OLS (on-lineservices), the Internet or both. Another option would be for banks todevelop a proprietary banking platform.The choice of a commercial OLS provider, like Microsoft's MicrosoftNetwork, has advantages like access to new customers and standardinterfaces for customers to use when carrying out their on-linetransactions. The report cites the example of Fidelity Investments inthe US which has a "strategy of ubiquity", aiming to get on the maximumnumber of OLS platforms as possible, while others prefer to be moreselective.Before choosing a platform provider, the report says, it is essentialto consider the following: the on-line service's customer base; on-linedelivery development, including software skills; brand visibility andpositioning; and ownership of customer information. It will also benecessary to look at the OLS's customer base and how it overlaps withthe bank's existing and target customer segments.While the Internet has been the subject of much hype, and we haverecently seen the creation of an Internet-based bank, Security FirstNetwork Bank, the report notes that it is far from certain how thisplatform will develop. Despite its huge popularity, the report pointsout that it is accessed by anyone, but controlled by no one, andquestions whether security on the Internet will ever be sufficient totransact financial services.Proprietary platforms, on the other hand, offer three principaladvantages: lack of an intermediary between the bank and the customer;complete control over content, navigation as well as the "look" and the"feel" of the service; and the lack of other financial serviceproviders vying for customers on the same platform. However, manycustomers have previously demonstrated their lack of interest inprovider-specific platforms."Each institution must map its objectives against the alternatives andthe uncertainties before deciding where and how to participate."Above all, BCG concludes that the banks must be alert to thecompetitive threats closing in on all sides and respond effectively."The banking industry stands at the crossroads," says David Taylor,executive vice-president of the BAI and co-director of the study."Theon-line services, software giants, global entertainment companies,telcos and utilities have the pipelines and the navigational tools. Ifbanks don't act with foresight and firm purpose, the prognosis is for acontinuing erosion of their core retail business."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CAPTURING THE CUSTOMERSHong Kong is one of Asia's largest financial centres. With 1997 rapidlyapproaching, Andrew Moody reports from a market where productdevelopment takes precedence over slick marketing campaignsFEW WORLD markets are now as attractive for marketing banking servicesas Asia, where there have been dramatic increases in personal wealthfor more than a decade. Per capita incomes in many of the so-called`Tiger' economies now exceed those in Europe and the rest of thewestern world.The region's banks face a tough challenge to develop new products andoffer ever improved services to capture this new wealth against abackground of fierce competition.Despite the spectre of 1997, nowhere is this more true than in HongKong, one of Asia's largest financial centres with more than 400domestic and foreign banks, although only 180 of them are licensed.Over recent months, in particular, all of the leading banks have beenlaunching products, hoping that a particular extra specification willbe enough to attract elusive customers.Like western banks, they have been trying to segment the market to makesure they do not fail to properly target the territory's burgeoningmiddle class population, the result of a decade or more of GDP growthof between 5 percent and 8 percent.The partial collapse of the so-called Hong Kong interest rate cartel,which made it difficult for the banks to compete on loan and depositrates, has also led recently to very aggressive price-driven marketingstrategies.Despite the competition, Hong Kong banks, unlike their westerncounterparts, meet with very little consumer resistance. The territoryis one of those rare places where banking and bankers are popular. Theaverage Hong Kong citizen has 2.4 bank accounts in 1.9 banks.Newspapers, both Chinese and English, are scoured for anyadvertisements signalling changes in deposit rates.Talking about banking and finance over dinner would not necessarilysingle you out as a crashing bore but just as someone talking about oneof the most interesting subjects around.The challenge for the banks is therefore not to come up with slicksubliminal advertising campaigns to make banking seem exciting because,in the minds of the consumer, it already is. Much of the marketingliterature is, therefore, matter of fact and very much to the point.Instead, what the banks have to do is not so much to work on the imagebut rather on the real products, a much more difficult exercise.All the banks spend considerable resources on product development sothey might have that added feature which influences a consumer's finaldecision.Peter Wong, banking director of Citibank, one of the leading foreignbanks in the territory, which has just moved to luxurious new officesnear Hong Kong Telecom Tower in Quarry Bay, said the marketingchallenges for the bank are very different from those in the US."It is a unique market in many ways. People here are veryentrepreneurial and they have that mentality," he said. "If you go tothe US, nobody in the street is going to know what the dollar exchangerate is for the German mark but they would here."As a result, we have, to some extent, to launch aggressive productswhich are ahead of the competition."The leading product innovators in the market are, by common agreement,the Hong Kong Bank, the Hang Seng Bank (62 percent owned by the HongKong Bank but autonomous and independently listed), Standard Chartered,Citibank and Bank of East Asia.There has been much recent emphasis on packaged products in the market.Hong Kong Bank has launched Asset Vantage which gives those that haveaccess to it gold trading and the ability to hold deposits in differentcurrencies.And last July, Hang Seng Bank, the second-largest locally-incorporatedbank, launched its Bank-in-One account which consolidates a number offeatures including flexible overdraft and 24-hour automated phonebanking to the mass market customer. This was one of 17 new productslaunched by the bank last year.Despite the risks, foreign currency accounts are traditionally verypopular, even among mid-range customers, perhaps largely because ofHong Kong's trading nature.Other very popular products are tax loans which people take out becausethere is no PAYE or pay-as-you-go tax system in the colony.The key products, however, are deposit accounts and mortgages. Theseand not the cheque account - as in the west - are regarded as the coathanger product on which to build a long-term relationship.Alex Au, managing director of the Hang Seng Bank, said the importantthing is to establish a long-term relationship with a customer."This is what you have to do in banking everywhere, and probably thebest way to do it is through the deposit account or mortgage," he said."One can read too much into this as a cultural difference between usand the west since people here often use their deposit accounts thesame as a cheque account."Once you have got the customer, you can cross-sell other products,which enables you to build your competitive strategy and market share."The growing middle class has encouraged the banks to target their moreaffluent customers.It has even brought banks into the retail sector which weren'tpreviously there. One of these is ABN-AMRO which, although in theregion for 90 years, only decided to offer retail products three yearsago. These now bring in an incredible 30 percent of its Hong Kongprofits."We saw the middle and upper sectors of the market as a realopportunity and we have come in with a mortgage product which has aninterest rate 0.5 percent cheaper than most of our rivals," said SergioRial, ABN AMRO's general manager in Hong Kong."We are still very much building up our retail side but it is certainlya marketing strategy which has already paid off."Citibank too makes no bones about targeting the well off."The Hong Kong affluent are very much our target market and our minimumto open an account is $HK50,000 ($6,465)," Citibank's Wong said.Hong Kong Bank has gone further than most by developing new Selectbranches for its upper segment customers, leaving other customers toslum it in standard and automated branches.But Eric Tai, senior executive, retail, marketing and planning withHong Kong Bank, insisted it is not ignoring other customers."Although we segment the market, banking is banking is banking isbanking," he said. "We can't really offer a significantly differentservice to one customer compared to another."Branch design has come to be a key element of any marketing strategy ofHong Kong banks.The banks are reluctant to reveal their expenditure on branches, butwith few exceptions they are among the most splendid examples of bothinterior and exterior banking architecture anywhere in the world.Branches are not just about getting customers inside, but about makinguse of the time customers spend within them. Customers very often usetheir local branches as meeting places for colleagues and friends.So, after they finish their business they often stand around engagingin long conversations, perhaps about the day's currency movements orthe latest rate of interest in the bank around the corner.Creating the right ambience in the banking hall is therefore important.The Bank of East Asia deploys music, ranging from light tunes in themorning to heavier up-beat music in the evening.HONG KONG FACTSPopulation                   6.15mLife expectancy              Males 75.4, Females 81GDP                          $HK151.0 billionPer capita income            $HK24,361Growth rate                  4.5%Inflation                    9%Prime interest rate          9%Money supply (M2) increase   18%Unemployment rate            3.5%The branches do, however, represent greater opportunities for marketingthan in Europe. Many of the banks have installed computer displayswhich give customers up-to-date information on products and markets.As Au said: "I think in terms of branches we are very much ahead ofbanks in the west. We place great emphasis on giving our customersfirst class service within the branches."Pricing in terms of interest rates on deposits and loans has become amuch more fundamental part of the marketing strategy since therelaxation of the cartel began in October 1994.Instead of being fixed by the Hong Kong Association of Banks, interestrates on deposit accounts held longer than seven days are now freelyfloating.This has led to a lot of market buying with banks trying to gain marketshare in new product areas by taking a loss lead position.Some of the bigger banks are concerned about this added uncertainty inthe market, particularly in the run-up to 1997 which creates more thana few uncertainties of its own.The Dah Sing Bank, a new entrant to retail, has been accused ofdeliberate market buying.It launched a credit card 18 months ago with a bonus scheme which gaveit an effective interest rate 25 percent below the competition. DerekWong, Dah Sing's head of retail, defended the strategy."I think the competition is now open and fair," Wong told BMI. "It isnow a matter of how you operate your business strategy which willdetermine how successful you are."Those marketing banking products in Hong Kong are as preoccupied withage targeting as their counterparts in the west.Most of the banks are keen to attract students, not only because theymay prove to be lifelong customers but because they are likely to bemonogamous in their banking habits - a rare quality in Hong Kong.They do this by offering discount credit cards and air miles, lessgimmicky offers than the record token and free gift offers of somewestern banks."The competition for students is driven partly because of this," saidDavid K.P. Li, deputy chairman and chief executive of the Bank of EastAsia. "The student does not have much money so he is unlikely to bankwith anyone else, which makes him or her a better all-round customer.You do, however, hope to hang on to them for the rest of their lives."Older people are also becoming increasingly a target market for thebanks. The average life expectancy for males in Hong Kong is 75.4 andfemales 81, compared to 73 years for men in the US and 79 for women.Hong Kong is therefore moving more rapidly to an ageing population thanmany countries in the west.The banks are responding by providing products geared specifically toolder customers.W.K. Mok, deputy general manager and head of retail in Hang Seng Bank,said investment and protection products are particularly attractive tothis market."We have specifically developed a greater array of insurance productsand wealth accumulation investment products to cater for this veryimportant market," he said. Citibank's Wong said banks are having tothink more and more of the life cycle in their product offer tocustomers."I think you have to look at taking the customer over, for example, at25 years. When he or she is younger, the credit card might be thedriving product, then the mortgage, then the savings account, thenforeign exchange and then insurance products," he said.Although Asia is becoming an increasingly attractive market for banks,it remains very difficult for outsiders to penetrate.Banks such as Standard Chartered and Hong Kong Bank have their roots in19th century colonisation and to all intents and purposes are localbanks rather than British ones.Across Asia, the US and European banks which have a presence have along association with the region. They also have a regionalinfrastructure with a network of branches across the key capitals andfinancial centres.It would, therefore, be difficult for a carpet-bagging bank just totarget, for example, Hong Kong, because it would be at an immediatecompetitive disadvantage with other banks which could offer regionalservices."I think if you were going to set up in Asia it would be very difficultjust to set up in Hong Kong. You really need a presence across theregion. You could get lost," said ABN-AMRO's Rial.A key element of future marketing strategies will undoubtedly be China.The branches that banks have there tend to be there to facilitatebusiness between the mainland and Hong Kong and for the Chinesebusinessman. But, as the Chinese market liberalises and a retailbanking demand emerges, the Hong Kong banks will be in a betterposition than most to take advantage."While Hong Kong is likely to remain a key component of the HSBCGroup's business well into the foreseeable future, our mainlandoperations will grow increasingly important," said Hong Kong Bank'sTai."Foreign banks are unable to deal in the renminbi, the local currency,at present. But this will eventually change and when it does we will beready to take the initiative."Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MARKETING INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THE FUNDAMENTAL FLAWSThe way in which banks market their electronic banking services isoften fundamentally flawed, according to Richard G Lyons of InternetInc.WHILE MOST retail bankers see their electronic banking services as apriority, they are making some common mistakes in the way they marketthem to their customers. This is the claim made by Richard G Lyons Jr,executive vice-president and chief operating officer of Internet Inc.,which operates the Most ATM network in the US.Many retail bankers have not yet made clear the message they wish toconvey to those customers who might be interested in electronicbanking, he said at the BAI (Bank Administration Institute) RetailDelivery Systems conference last month.While almost 63 percent of retail bankers believe their electronicbanking services save money, only 17 percent feel their institution is"where it needs to be in its electronic banking programme". These aresome of the results of recent research that Lyons shared with thedelegates. Only 42 percent believe their institutes "have a clearstrategy for where we're going with EFT [Electronic Funds Transfers]".Internet's research involved extensive interviews with retail bankingmanagers, marketing managers and branch managers from 140 differentfinancial institutions. A large majority agreed that electronic bankingis a priority. Yet, many admitted they are not spending enough time ormoney on it, and are not investing enough in training for staff.Only 18 percent of interviewees agreed that "we spend enough time andmoney promoting electronic banking". While 87 percent agreed thatelectronic banking transactions at their institutions are increasingevery month, 73 percent admitted "Our branch personnel probably have alower understanding of EFT than I.""Consumers' antennae are up higher when they need what you're selling,"Lyons stated, insisting that banks would have a far greater degree ofsuccess marketing their electronic services if customers were madeaware that it allows them a hassle-free lifestyle. Yet, he said, 65percent of bankers agreed that "at account opening, we spend more timewith cheque choices than explaining electronic banking options".Indeed, the research found that a mere 27 percent of retail bankersagreed that their customers are "well aware of all our electronicbanking services".Over half of the bankers interviewed felt customers are not yet readyfor many EFT programmes, but Lyons suggested this might be a falsepresumption and pointed to a recent survey in which 64 percent of totalhouseholds agreed "using electronic banking services is more convenientthan going to a branch". He claimed that consumers are much morewilling to use alternative delivery channels than banks realise, andthat banks need to communicate the availability of such channels inorder to compete.There seemed, from the research, to be a realisation among financialinstitutions of the threat from non-bank institutions. While only 18percent agreed that banks are in control of the emerging consumerelectronic delivery channels, 70 percent agreed that"Microsoft andregional telephone companies could someday [soon] threaten to siphondeposits away from financial institutions". Indeed, 87 percent ofinterviewees felt that non-banks are in a position to compete with theelectronic banking delivery systems owned and operated by banks.Lyons suggested that many changes in attitude are needed to be made inorder that bankers make a success of their electronic bankingstrategies. What are needed are clear marketing objectives, customerfocus, effective brand management and good investment, he said.FIGURE 1AS THE POPULATION AGES, ELECTRONICS USERS BECOME THE MAJORITY              Total households         Electronic users (%)              1995     2005            1995     2005Under 25       5,156     5,314         45       6025-34         19,229    16,949         60       7535-49         31,660    34,121         51       7050-64         21,024    28,403         37       5165+           21,664    24,451         17       27Total         98,733   109,238         42       5620 million more "electronics" users over the next decadeSource: InternetCopyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT03-B37-29IA059-000325-B021-274http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi07.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003720 text/html 23462HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:35:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:45 GMTContent-length: 23273Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi07.html Sample Issue Copyright BANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNet January 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES RAYMOND JAMES PLANS BIG BOOST FOR BANK SERVICES (485 words) OCC READIES INSURANCE EXAM ACTIVITIES (457 words) FED ALLOWS ANNUITY SALES IN SECTION 20 SUBSIDIARIES (340 words) KEYCORP PURSUES SMALL BUSINESS 401(K) PLANS (187 words) TORONTO-DOMINION BREAKS NEW GROUND (233 words) FIDELITY ADDS UNIT TRUSTS TO BANK OFFERINGS (361 words) STEIN ROE PICKS NEW FUND NAME (220 words) REUTERS TO ADD NEW INVESTING SOFTWARE TO ONLINE BANK OFFERING (140 words) CALENDAR (247 words) BANKS SUPERMARKET MUTUAL FUND SALES EXPECTED TO INCREASE (185 words) FUNDS ANGLIM JOINS FLAGSHIP AS NATIONAL SALES MANAGER (107 words) CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996RAYMOND JAMES PLANS BIG BOOST FOR BANK SERVICESIn the financial equivalent of "man bites dog," Raymond JamesFinancial Inc. has underway a major thrust into traditional bankingservices via its wholly owned bank, Raymond James Bank. The St. Petersburg-based financial conglomerate will offer in February FDIC-insured productslike checking and savings accounts. And, in a few months the bank willmarket home equity lines of credit, and, possibly, residential mortgages.     If all goes well, the securities dealer's bank might become thenation's largest virtual bank. Theresa Schefstad, the president and CEO ofRaymond James bank, promises to reach her market "telephonically andelectronically. Our objective is to provide consolidated financial servicesso all their financial services can be received from our firm," she said.     The bank's initial target market will be the company's hefty customerbase of some 300,000 securities clients. Raymond James actually has400,000, but some of the accounts are linked and Schefstad preferred themore conservative estimate of 300,000 to describe her potential customerbase.     "We'll be able to offer our clients several product choices. We havethe FDIC option, our credit interest program (sweep account) option, andthe third is our Heritage mutual funds," Schefstad explained. The Heritagefunds are Raymond James' proprietary mutual funds.     The company will continue its tradition of not incenting brokers tosell proprietary products. "The compensation for our three options isconsistent for all three product options," Schefstad pointed out. In fact,this compensation practice has worked to the detriment of the Heritage fundfamily. Growth of its individual funds hasn't even come close to otherbrokerage houses proprietary funds despite the company's nationwide branchnetwork.     Schefstad claims that James is the only broker/dealer to wholly own afull-service bank. Unlike other nonbanking companies, which must resort tothe "nonbank bank" strategy to get into the banking business, Jamespurchased the bank branches with a total deposit base of $12 million fromthe Resolution Trust Co. In May, 1994 the company chartered the RaymondJames Bank FSB, which has a capability to operate in all 50 states. Thebank ended 1995 with approximately $162 million in assets and $136 millionin deposits.     Over the past 20 months, Schefstad, the bank staff has been wrestlingwith regulatory approvals, developing disclosure policies and integratingthe bank's systems into the Raymond James computer network.     "Because of who owns us for everything we have done we obtainedregulatory approval. For example, when we developed our consolidatedstatement we received approval (beforehand) of our disclosure policy andseparation of accounts," Schefstad said.     The bank will maintain a physical branch office near its headquartersin Florida. Schefstad envisions the remainder of the bank's efforts to takeplace electronically, particularly through the nationwide automated tellermachine networks. Of course, deposit-taking via the ATM isn't yet possiblebut Schefstad said the firm's brokerage clients are sophisticated enough tounderstand and use direct-deposit options available through the automatedclearing house system.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996OCC READIES INSURANCE EXAM ACTIVITIESThe Office of the Comptroller of the Currency is preparing for the daywhen national banks receive insurance powers. The Washington-basedregulator has created a task force to consider how a national bank'sinsurance activities should be supervised. The Comptroller has created thetask force in anticipation of Barnett Banks winning its landmark casescheduled for this month in the U.S. Supreme Court. A win for Barnett isgenerally interpreted as blanket permission for national banks to sellinsurance.     "They (the OCC) are laying the groundwork for determining quickly hownational bank insurance activities should be supervised," said one bankerfamiliar with the OCC's secret task-force meetings. He said similarmeetings were held several years ago to discuss how the OCC should regulatethe sale of mutual funds by banks -- well before the OCC published itsguidelines.     Under examination, sources said, are the issues of licensing for bankemployees and the development of either regulations or guidelines governinginsurance sales but not both. The difference is crucial. Violatingguidelines usually brings little more than a wrist-slapping to theoffending bank. Violating regulations brings down the whole panoply offines, dismissals, and bank takeovers.     For example, violating an OCC cease-and-desist order can bring finesup to $1 million daily against the banks as well as their officers anddirectors.     The Comptroller's Office decided to go ahead with the insuranceexamination task force after meeting with representatives of the AmericanBankers Association and the Bankers Roundtable. Attending the task forcesessions, sources said, were Konrad Alt, chief assistant to ComptrollerEugene A. Ludwig, and General Counsel Julie Williams. The task forcereportedly is expected to decide its next steps -- still unclear -- bytoday.     The OCC task force is apparently a reaction to rumblings on CapitolHill where, reportedly, insurance industry lobbyists are telling members ofCongress that the Supreme Court ruling will not address the issues ofsupervising and licensing bank insurance activities.     Banking industry officials charge the insurance lobbyists areindulging in "scare tactics" to influence Congress to answer the courtruling with legislation that will brunt the effect of a win for Barnett.The banking officials characterize the insurance lobbyists' concerns asunwarranted. They further say the OCC is trying to be proactive to reassureCongress that the OCC will continue to monitor, examine, and regulate allnational bank activities.     "Indeed, this oversight would be considered suffocating by regularinsurance agents," a banking industry lobbyist said.     Among the questions raised during the task force meetings, accordingto a banker who attended, was the issue of whom the agency should consultbefore putting the final touches on its insurance rules. Among thosesuggested were state insurance commissioners and the banking and insuranceindustry trade groups.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FED ALLOWS ANNUITY SALES IN SECTION 20 SUBSIDIARIESThe Federal Reserve Board will allow banks to consolidate theirannuity sales and brokerage activities under the terms of a no-actionletter the Fed published last month. The regulatory agency declined to namethe bank holding company receiving the permission.     The newly permitted activity allows a bank to use its employees of anonbank subsidiary of the holding company, i.e., a Section 20 subsidiary,to also sell annuities. The Fed's general counsel, Virgil Mattingly, signedthe letter which is an indication of the importance the letter had taken inthe eyes of the Fed staff and the Board of Governors.     The no-action letter, dated December 6, establishes a format thatcontemplates two forms of contracts. The first is a contract between athird-party vendor and the Section 20 subsidiary. The other involves acontractual lease of space between a vendor and the bank. The assumption ofthe no-action letter is that the banking subsidiary of the holding companycan either engage in annuity sales under state law or can sell annuitiesbecause it is a national bank.     The particular format approved by the Fed works only if the bankholding company uses a vendor offering brokerage services through theSection 20, and the employees selling the annuities work for both theSection 20 subsidiary and the third-party vendor.     Some critics of the Fed's action charge that the arrangement isconvoluted and not as simple as the authority granted freely by theComptroller of the Currency. This is true. And a 14-year-old banking law isthe reason. There is a specific reference in the Garn-St Germain Act of1982 barring annuity sales by holding companies. So, the Fed created theconvoluted annuity sales structure to accommodate the Garn-St Germainrestrictions.     The Comptroller has already allowed dual employee relations fornational bank annuity sales. The structure is simpler for two reasons.First, the Valic decision gives national banks the power to sell annuitiesand, second, the incidental powers authority of the Comptroller makes iteasier for the regulator to authorize annuity sales.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996KEYCORP PURSUES SMALL BUSINESS 401(K) PLANSAdd Cleveland's KeyCorp to the list of banks eyeing the hotlycontested small-business market for defined contribution plans. It appearsthe entire banking industry has carved out this niche as a way to makemoney and to further boost sales of bank proprietary mutual funds.     In KeyCorp's case, the program consists of five Victory proprietarymutual funds.     KeyCorp will eventually market the product, dubbed PRISM SmallBusiness, nationwide to businesses with fewer than 100 employees. It willstart offering the system to businesses in Albany, Buffalo, Cincinnati,Northern Indiana, and Syracuse. The heavy concentration of New York statemarkets reflects the former headquarters of Key Bank before it merged withSociety Bank to form KeyCorp. The banking company markets its PRISM productto large company 401(k) plans. KeyCorp developed PRISM in 1991 and claimsto serve more than 750 plans in 14 states with assets under managementtotaling $4 billion.     The market for small business 401(k) plans is expected to swell to$199 billion by the end of the decade. In 1994 the market stood at $70billion in plan assets, according to widely published research numbers.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996TORONTO-DOMINION BREAKS NEW GROUNDIn the U.S., the average bank mutual fund customer faces the quandaryof which funds to select in addition to the bank's proprietary fund. Not soin Canada where, until recently, banks were allowed to sell only their ownproprietary funds clearly marked with the bank name. Now, Toronto- DominionBank has received approval from several provincial securities commissionersto sell other brand-name mutual funds in its 900-branch network throughoutCanada. Toronto-Dominion is the first Canadian bank to receive this power.     Mark Wettlaufer, president of TD Asset Management (TDAM), alsoannounced that the bank was creating an asset-allocation account in which acustomer may accumulate not only the bank's Green Line No-Load mutual fundsbut also the other funds the bank has received the power to sell.     Investment advice will come from TDAM's portfolio managers; the bank'sdiscount brokerage company, Green Line Investor Services, will provide theback-office execution.     Last year, Toronto-Dominion announced the first of its expansion plansin the U.S. with the opening of several Green Line investment centersanchored by the company's office in New York. While the company wouldspecialize in servicing the Canadian investments of U.S. and Canadianinvestors, it also aims to break into the competitive discount brokeragemarket in the U.S.     Wettlaufer said Green Line operates a sales force of 5,000 throughoutits branch network and has C$10 billion (roughly US$7.3 billion) in assetsunder managementBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996FIDELITY ADDS UNIT TRUSTS TO BANK OFFERINGSFidelity Investments has decided it's time the investing public atbanks had a shot at unit investment trusts. The Boston-based financialbehemoth has added a series of Fidelity-sponsored unit investment trusts toits well-known line of Fidelity Advisor funds, the principal Fidelity fundssold through banks.     The funds come through Fidelity Capital Markets. The Fidelity unitcalls them Fidelity Defined Trusts. Fidelity Rolling Government Series(FRoGS), will feature one short-term Treasury portfolio product andFidelity Laddered Government Series (FLaGS), will feature a short-termTreasury portfolio product and a short/intermediate-term Treasuryportfolio.     Fidelity Investments Institutional Services Company will offer allthree UITs as part of its Fidelity Advisor family of mutual funds soldthrough investment professionals at brokerage firms, banks, and insurancecompanies. Fidelity also will continue to make third-party UIT productsavailable to its retail and institutional customers.     "UITs are a viable alternative for investors who want a fixed maturitydate and a maturity value in their fixed-income investments," said TimMcKenna, executive vice president of Fidelity Capital Markets fixed-incomedivision.Fixed, Unmanaged Treasury Portfolio     While Fidelity mutual funds are managed by Fidelity Management &Research Company, Defined Trusts are selected by Fidelity Capital Markets.Fidelity's new FRoGS are designed to provide monthly income andpreservation of principal through a fixed and unmanaged portfolio of U.S.Treasury securities.     Maturities on FRoGS will be distributed in 25% increments every threemonths over a one-year period beginning in March 1996.  Spreading thereturn of principal over a period of time allows investors to increaseflexibility and minimize risk.     Proceeds from maturing U.S. Treasury notes on FRoGS will be used torepurchase an additional one year U.S. Treasury note.  Fidelity will "roll"these distributions four times a year beginning in 1996 and ending in 1997.The Trust will distribute principal in 25% increments in 1998.     Treasury securities maturing every six months beginning in November1996 and ending in November 1998.  The average maturity is about two years.Series 2 consists of five short- and short-intermediate U.S Treasurysecurities maturing every 12 months beginning in May 1996 and ending in May2001.  The average maturity of the Series 2  FLaGS is approximately 3.5years.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996STEIN ROE PICKS NEW FUND NAMEStein Roe Mutual Funds has renamed the Stein Roe Prime Equities Fundthe Stein Roe Growth & Income Fund effective the beginning of next month.      "We believe the new name more accurately reflects the Fund'sinvestment philosophy by recognizing both its growth and incomecomponents," said Tim Armour, president of Stein Roe Mutual Funds. Thefund's investment objective also will be revised to better reflect theincome mission of the fund.     The revised objective will be to pursue both growth of capital andcurrent income. It is  designed for investors seeking a diversifiedportfolio of securities that offers the opportunity for long-term growth ofcapital while also pursuing a steady stream of income.     The fund's investment strategy will remain the same, which is toinvest in well-established companies whose common stocks are believed tohave both the potential to appreciate in value and to pay dividends toshareholders.     The fund will continue to emphasize investments in equity securitiesof companies having market capitalizations in excess of $1 billion.Securities of these well-established companies are believed to be generallyless volatile than smaller companies.     Founded in 1932, Stein Roe & Farnham is a Chicago-based investmentmanagement firm. It provides professional investment management forindividuals and institutions and serves as investment adviser to the SteinRoe family of 18 no-load mutual funds.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996REUTERS TO ADD NEW INVESTING SOFTWARE TO ONLINE BANK OFFERINGOn January 9, Reuters America Inc. acquired for cash EquisInternational of Salt Lake City, a developer of technical analysis softwarefor individual investors.     Reuters America will integrate the Equis International product linewith that of RealityOnline, Inc. of King of Prussia, PA, a Reuters companythat develops and operates an online personal investment service, ReutersMoney Network.     Reuters is using the personal finance software in an attempt to breakinto the bank securities industry as a technological vendor for retailaccounts.     Equis offers a product line that includes MetaStock, a technicalanalysis charting software; the DownLoader, a software application thatautomatically collects security price updates from several online services;MetaStock RT, software that charts real-time market information; PulsePortfolio Management System, a portfolio value tracking softwareapplication; and the Technician, an application that charts and analyzesinvestment marketing conditions.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996CALENDARWith the winter storm still a very fresh memory in the minds of manyon the East Coast, two investment product groups have wisely opted to holdtheir meetings in Palm Springs, CA. And it appears the popularity of thesite has caused at least one group to run out of rooms for the time being.The Bank Securities Association's Tom Cote said the group is negotiatingwith hotels in Palm Desert to cough up more rooms for the February 24-27annual convention of the BSA.     The meeting starts Saturday, February 24, with an address by PhilFeigin, the securities commissioner for Colorado. Other featured speakersare Robert Novak, a syndicated columnist and (invited) Rep. Sonny Bono, amember of the House Banking Committee, and the former mayor of PalmSprings. For the latest update on the meeting call the BSA at (415) 924-8010.     Starting six days before the BSA's meeting is the popular marketingconference of the National Association for Variable Annuities. It'll beheld in a "suburb" of Palm Springs in La Quinta, CA. The exhibit area openson Sunday, February 18, but the real meeting starts the next day. Theconference runs through February 24, with concurrent sessions running eachmorning. The keynote address comes from Robert Palmer, the Californiainsurance commissioner. So far, the lone banking representative speaking atthe meeting is Philip Corwin, the American Bankers Association's directorof operations and retail banking. For more information contact NAVA at(703) 620-0674.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996SUPERMARKET MUTUAL FUND SALES EXPECTED TO INCREASEThe supermarket banking trend appears to be maturing beyond plainvanilla banking, according to a survey conducted by supermarket bankingconsultants, National Commerce Bank Services in Memphis.     The consulting company, a subsidiary of National Commerce Bancorp.,also in Memphis, surveyed 800 shoppers in 20 states.     "We've said for years that in-store banking was the wave of thefuture. Well, the future has arrived," said Douglas W. Ferris, theconsulting company's president. What's more, he said, the number ofservices shoppers want from their supermarket bank branches has increased."In the early days of in-store banking, customers used the branches forwithdrawals and deposits," Ferris said. This has clearly changed.     For example, 40% of the survey's respondents said that sale of mutualfunds in the supermarket branches was important. Only a few banks operatingin-store branches offer investment products but this is likely to change asthe number of in-store branches continues to grow.     Ferris' group estimates the number of in-store bank branches will growby 150% in four years. These branches, the consulting company said, willplay an increasingly import role in bank delivery systems.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK MUTUAL FUND REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996ANGLIM JOINS FLAGSHIP AS NATIONAL SALES MANAGERPhil Anglim has become the national sales manager of Flagship Funds,effective immediately. Anglim had been a regional sales manager for thecompany before this most recent promotion. He will administer the company's15 regional sales vice presidents.     This is almost a new position for Flagship, since Richard P. Davis,the Flagship president, served as national sales manager since thecompany's inception in 1984.     The fund company, located in Dayton, OH, specializes in fixed-incomemunicipal securities. It has $4.5 billion in assets under management. Itpreviously had been the money management arm of Mead Corp. before Davis andthe current chairman, Bruce Bedford, led a management buyout.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-30IA059-000325-B021-309http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi71.html 205.156.212.5 19970115003908 text/html 49273HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:36:42 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:20 GMTContent-length: 49084Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi71.html Sample Issue Copyright BANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Seafirst Bank Expands Its ATM Network (55 words) EBT Ground Rules Elicit Some Boos From The Bleachers (419 words) Another Internet Company Goes Public (115 words) A New Year's Revolution In ATM Pricing (1332 words) Deluxe Corp. Sneezes, Deluxe Data Catches Cold (363 words) The Quest Begins For A National EBT Network (1414 words) Visa Aims For Debit Summit From Plus' Denver Base (886 words) When It Comes To ATM Deposits, Money Talks (1142 words) First Fidelity Gets A Charge Out Of Balance Inquiries (310 words) What's An ATM? 'Just A Vending Machine That Dispenses Cash' (415 words) EFTA Tries Again To Accelerate Into The Fast Lane (965 words) CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996Seafirst Bank Expands Its ATM NetworkSeafirst Bank, a Seattle-based subsidiary of Bank of America, has won acontract to install 140 ATMs in Safeway convenience stores in Washington,Idaho and Oregon.  The deal will increase the bank's ATM base 19% to 878units.  Installation will begin January 15 and is expected to be completed in90 days.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996EBT Ground Rules Elicit Some Boos From The BleachersThe electronic benefits council agreed to a number of rules in principle atits December meeting.  The rules are circulating among the council's 38members and will be released to the public by March.  Recommended rulesinclude:* Printing balances on receipts.  Terminal drivers must print a recipient'saccount balance on the transaction receipt for approved food stamp purchases,food stamp refunds and when a food stamp purchase is denied due toinsufficient funds.  Printing a balance is optional for cash benefits at thepoint-of-sale.  Terminal drivers aren't required to print balances undercommercial rules.* Record retention.  Operating rules should reflect commercial standards andrequire issuing or acquiring financial institutions to keep transactionrecords for at least two years.  Food stamp records must be kept three yearsby issuing institutions.* ATM transactions.  Recipients should be able to download at least $20 and amaximum of no less than $200 from ATMs.  Most EFT networks currently provideminimum and maximum withdrawal requirements.* Technical specifications.  Participating cards must comply with IndependentSales Organization and American National Standard Institute operatingstandards.  Primary account numbers must be displayed on the face of thecards, and a signature panel or signature image is required.* Settlement procedures.  Settlement procedures will mirror commercialstandards where settlement takes place on a daily basis.* Scrip machines (under review).  Scrip machines can be used for dispensingbenefits as long as they're treated as point-of-sale terminals and not ATMs.With scrip machines, recipients get vouchers that can be redeemed for cashfrom a store clerk.Tom McLaughlin, vice president with Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data, takes issuewith several rules, including the option of printing account balances onreceipts for cash benefits at the point-of-sale.  "If recipients don't havebalances on receipts, we could see more denials and help desk calls," he says."Making it optional could run up the cost of EBT."Kansas And Illinois Announce EBT DealsThe Midwest is the latest hotbed for electronic benefits transfer programs.Late last year, the Kansas Department of Social Services awarded a seven-year,$11.6 million EBT contract to Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems.  Theprogram will begin in Wichita in July, with a statewide rollout to becompleted by July 1997.In other EBT developments, the Illinois Department of Public Aid has selectedTexas-based Transactive Corp.  to negotiate a five-year EBT contract.  Theprogram will initially serve 65,000 households and expand to 500,000households statewide.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996Another Internet Company Goes PublicCyberCash Inc.  is going public.  The Reston, Va.-based developer ofencryption software for financial transactions over the Internet filed withthe Securities and Exchange Commission late last year for an initial publicoffering of two million shares of common stock.  Underwriters will have theoption to purchase an additional 300,000 shares.  The estimated price of thestock will be $15 to $17 per share.CyberCash plans to spend the estimated $34 million in proceeds on new productdevelopment and on marketing two new services, Secure Check and Coin Check.Secure Check will be the equivalent of an electronic certified check, whileCoin Check will encrypt small denomination payments over the Internet.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996A New Year's Revolution In ATM PricingThere's no question how much a can of soup is worth on the free market.  Theprice is clearly marked, and if it's too high the grocer will soon knowbecause his shelves will remain full.That's not been the case for the price of using an ATM in most areas, asnetworks rules have prevented ATM owners from charging the consumer directlyfor getting cash.  But the industry appears poised on the brink of afundamental shift in the pricing of ATMs as major networks relax theirsurcharging bans and allow market forces to determine the price of a servicemany consumers have come to view as a necessity.And early returns from markets that allow surcharging suggest consumers mayvalue the convenience of ATMs more than many in the industry believed.The momentum toward surcharging has grown in recent years as 14 states passedlaws that allowed surcharging, overriding the restrictions of both theVisa/Plus and MasterCard/Cirrus national ATM networks.  While surchargingspread rapidly in those states, many of them heavily touristed areas in theSouth and West, the Plus and Cirrus rules effectively prevented the practicefrom spreading to the major population centers of the Northeast, Midwest andWest Coast.The big breakthrough came last fall when Plus announced it would allowsurcharging at ATMs bearing its logo beginning April 1.  Last month, thelargest of the regional networks that still banned surcharging, Delaware-basedMAC, announced it, too, would allow the practice on April 1.Industry participants now expect Cirrus and other major regional networks tofall into line.  "I would imagine it would be a foregone conclusion," saysCharles Raphael, first vice president of electronic banking at First ChicagoNBD.  "In order to hold their members, and obviously the big deployers ofATMs, I don't think they would have a choice."  A Cirrus spokesperson says,"It is very likely the Cirrus board will take up this issue at its nextmeeting, which probably will be in March."With Plus and many of the larger regionals allowing surcharging, the holdoutsare left in a position many view as untenable.  If Cirrus were to maintain itsban, an ATM deployer in California, for instance, could place a machine withthe logos of Star System, which allows surcharging, and Plus, and serve thebig majority of consumers.Regionals Feel the HeatAnd if Cirrus does allow surcharging, the pressure will shift to regionalnetworks like Virginia-based Most that maintain the ban.  Because a Mostmember must put its ATMs into the network, it would not be able to surcharge,while a competitor that did not belong to the network could surcharge on amachine bearing the Plus and Cirrus logos and accept most ATM cards.Rather than put its members at a disadvantage, the Most board will reconsiderits policy at a meeting later this month, says David A.  O'Connor, presidentof the network.  "We see the pattern," he says.  "The forces of themarketplace seem to be driving the industry towards surcharges.  I thinkthat's a fairly strong movement that we probably won't resist."  Executives atMichigan-based Magic Line, the seventh-largest network, and Missouri-basedBankMate, the ninth-largest, say they, too, may have to reconsider theirsurcharging bans.New RulesSome networks whose owners oppose surcharging, such as Chicago-based CashStation, may hold the line for a while, says George Albright, president of theAtlanta-based Speer & Associates consulting firm.  "But, over time, as theownership changes as a result of mergers, and banks come in that aresurcharging in other regions, you're not going to just be able to say, 'Ourrules don't allow it.' They'll say, 'Let's change the rules,'" Albright says.Why are more banks anxious to surcharge now?  Industry participants offer manyexplanations, but among the most common is the growing pressure on banks togenerate increased non-interest income.  "People see a lot of untappedpotential in ATMs," says Raphael.  "The hardware and the switching system arethere, so the additional revenue you can produce off that network is almostpure profit."  Another banker who requested anonymity observes, "For ATMdeployers, this is a Christmas present of enormous potential."Off-Premise RivalryAt the same time, non-banking companies, such as Texas-based Electronic DataSystems, and Affiliated Computer Services, have been moving aggressively intooff-premise locations.  Banks, which enjoy low maintenance costs and no rentalfees when placing ATMs in their own lobbies, have moved more slowly becausethey were not certain they could generate enough revenue from off-premiselocations to justify the investment, observes David Baker, director ofmarketing at Fujitsu-ICL Systems Inc., an ATM manufacturer."But," Baker adds, "they don't want to see all the locations snapped up bynonbank deployers.  Bigger banks are saying, 'Give us the opportunity tosurcharge, lower the transaction volume needed for profitability, and we'regoing to go head-to-head with ACS and EDS.'" As an example of that approach,Baker points to NationsBank's outbidding EDS and ACS in August for thecontract to place ATMs in 661 Stop-N-Go convenience stores owned by NationalConvenience Stores in Texas, a state that allows surcharging.The successful implementation of surcharging by some major banks also hasinfluenced their peers, says Albright.  Among large banks, he says, thepioneer was Bank One of Texas, which began the practice in 1993, and led theway in raising the typical surcharge in the state from 25 cents to 50 cents."They showed they could do it and not get hurt in the marketplace," he says."All of a sudden the whole state of Texas was charging and the price went upto 50 cents."Many Will PayAlbright says developments in Texas and other states suggest consumers arewilling to pay more for ATM convenience than they were being charged.  Hepoints out that at the same time as surcharges were being imposed in Texas,issuing banks raised the foreign fees they charge their customers who use ATMsnot owned by the bank.  "The typical foreign fee went from 50 cents to $1.25,and some banks are charging $1.50," Albright says.  With Bank One and otherTexas institutions raising their surcharges to $1 in recent months, manyconsumers now are paying more than $2 to use an ATM, counting both foreignfees and surcharges.  "And exactly the same thing has happened in the state ofGeorgia just from March 1995 to the end of the year," says Albright.Is the price too high?  Apparently not for many consumers, based on networkreports of only temporary declines in transaction volumes.  Network officialsin Alabama reported an initial drop in volume of 8% and in Texas of 15%,Albright says, "but everyone tells me after six to nine months it comes back."And that occurs despite the spread of surcharging in most cases to includemany machines on bank premises as well as off.  Network executives say 75% ofATMs surcharge in Alabama, 60% in Texas and more than half in Utah.Ultimate TestNonetheless, some believe surcharging will spread more slowly in the majorNorthern cities.  Lynch says some NYCE members may not surcharge at all inhopes of pressuring competitors to refrain from the practice.  "There are manylarge organizations that have the point of view the revenue isn't worth therisk to the customer relationship," he says.Albright and Lynch both warn that consumer advocates and regulators are morelikely to raise objections in the Northeast than elsewhere.  And, Albrightadds, "the New York press will jump on it, whether the rest of the country isdoing it or not."With all those factors, he says, the Big Apple may be the ultimate test forsurcharging.  "If the same thing happens in New York that has happened inGeorgia and Texas," he says, "then surcharging will have become the norm."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996Deluxe Corp.  Sneezes, Deluxe Data Catches ColdWhen a company's board of directors holds a special meeting just beforeChristmas to implement a major restructuring, subsidiaries can expect bigchanges early in the New Year.And that's what's happened at Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems, whosepresident, James E.  McGowan, was relieved of his duties last week and placedon special assignment, reporting to J.  A.  "Gus" Blanchard, president and CEOof Deluxe Corp., the Minneapolis-based corporate parent.  John B.  Benton,chairman and CEO of the Benton International consulting firm which has beeninvolved in the Deluxe Corp.  restructuring, was named interim CEO, anassignment he says will last two to three months.The moves follow Deluxe Corp.'s announcement of the closing of severalcheck-printing plants and unveiling of a plan for growth that highlighted newproducts from Deluxe Data.  "I felt this major expansion required newleadership to move us to this higher plane," Blanchard said in a statement.Industry sources say Deluxe Data is at a crossroads, having lost majorprocessing contracts in recent years at the NYCE and Yankee 24 regional EFTnetworks, which took their processing in-house, and facing aggressivecompetition from Electronic Data Systems, which now processes for two of the10 largest regional networks, Cash Station and The Exchange.  They add thecompany's major investments in electronic benefits transfer have yet to payoff.Deluxe Data also has lagged in offering newer technology, such as homebanking, Internet access and prepaid phone cards.  While Deluxe Data isexpected to unveil a home banking and bill payment product soon, they trailcompetitors like EDS, Servantis and FIserv, says Richard Yanak, president ofthe New Jersey-based NYCE network.McGowan, who came to Deluxe Data 28 months ago, after many years at IBM, maylack the EFT experience needed to chart a new course for the company, saysDonald Mauer, senior vice president of Gensar, a Pennsylvania-based processor."What's required here is not just broad management skills," he says.  "Youneed someone who can define what this company's going to be."  Adds Yanak,Benton's interim role "may signal there isn't anyone inside the company that'slikely to get the job."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996The Quest Begins For A National EBT NetworkIn the early days of ATMs, customers could only use their cards in machinesowned by their own bank.  To give the ATMs more value, financial institutionsformed shared EFT networks so that customers could use their cards in machinesowned by other banks, including those in different parts of the country.  Thenetworks then teamed up with retailers to let customers use their cards tomake purchases at the point-of-sale.Now a second electronic payment evolution is underway.  But rather than createmore national ATM and POS networks, coalitions are forming for interstate EBT.State governments involved in electronic benefits transfer programs areteaming up with other industry participants to let welfare recipients receivebenefits at ATMs and POS terminals across state lines.  While some states havealready rolled out EBT programs, recipients from one state usually can'treceive benefits in other states because the programs don't have commonoperating rules.  The National Automated Clearing House Association'selectronic benefits council is trying to change that by developing commonrules.The electronic benefits council, a multi-industry trade group that includesstate governments, retailers, third-party processors and EFT networks, adopteda set of standards in principle late last year (see sidebar).  The rulesrepresent the first major action of the council created in September incollaboration with the U.S.  Department of Treasury and the Federal EBT TaskForce, a federal agency that oversees EBT implementation.  The council also isnegotiating with the board of directors of the Quest shared EFT network to usethe Quest logo as a national mark for EBT cards.Common Rules"Rather than have 50 states develop their own systems individually, we'retrying to lay the framework in advance so everyone knows what to expect," saysHelena Sims, senior director of the council.  While states with current EBTprojects can negotiate with EBT contractors in other states to let recipientsreceive benefits across state lines, the process is often burdensome andtime-consuming, she says.  And because most EBT contracts have a five-yearlimit, the agreements have to be constantly renegotiated with new contractors.Some industry participants, however, believe the council faces a tough task increating national operating rules that all EBT participants can agree on."The effort is noble, but it's as unattainable as worldwide peace," saysStephen Cole, president of the Chicago-based Cash Station EFT network.  "EveryATM network has different rules depending on state and local laws, and comingup with one set is very difficult.  They said they're going to have the rulesready by March, but I'd be surprised if they have them out by December."Skeptics say rules developed by shared EFT networks and state and federalgovernments already do the job.  The contradiction of existing rules is onearea of concern.  If an ATM overdispenses $10, for example, a network and bankare permitted under network rules to reconcile the transaction without theconsumer's knowledge.  With food stamps, however, it is considered an adverseaction under federal law to debit a recipient's account without notice."The council is addressing issues that are covered by network, state andfederal regulations, and we're concerned about duplication and conflict," saysThomas McLaughlin, vice president of Milwaukee-based Deluxe Data Systems.  "Ifthere are EBT policies that are contrary, who will arbitrate the disputes?"James McCarthy, executive vice president with the San Diego-based Star SystemEFT network and chairman of the electronic benefits council, says the issue ofaccount adjustments can be resolved.  "As a network, I operate a lot ofgateways with people who have different rules than me.  They're notconflicting, just different.  We're working with state and federal personnel,as well as networks and financial institutions, to come up with procedures."Advantage To RetailersRetailers stand to gain from the electronic benefits council's efforts."Retailers who participate in EBT programs should benefit from the efforts ofthe EBT council," says David Bragin, treasurer of Florida-based Winn Dixiesupermarkets.  "If the states adopt these national operating rules, any EBTcardholder or authorized retailer will be able to conduct EBT transactions nomatter which government entity issued the benefits or in which state theretailer operates."  Winn Dixie has approximately 1,175 stores in 14 states.While each state has the option to follow the operating rules, the eight-stateSouthern Alliance of States and seven-state Northeast Coalition areincorporating the rules into their contracts.  The two programs comprisenearly 50% of all welfare recipients in the U.S.  The rules must comply withfederal requirements that EBT programs not be more expensive to run thancurrent paper-based systems, says Dan Berry, program manager with New YorkState.  "The bottom line is these systems have to be cost-effective," he says.Although welfare benefits-such as food stamps and Aid to Families withDependent Children-are usually redeemed in the state where the recipientlives, the U.S.  government also plans to use EBT programs to distributebenefits to a population that is more likely to travel, such as SocialSecurity recipients.  "These programs will eventually deliver much more thanjust welfare benefits," Berry says.  Additional benefits may include militaryand railroad pensions and unemployment insurance.To let consumers know where they can receive their benefits, the council isnegotiating with the owners of the Kentucky-based Quest shared EFT network touse the Quest logo as a national mark for EBT cards.  The mark would bedisplayed on cards, ATM and POS terminals and at merchant locations.  TheQuest network dissolved in July, 1995, after its members migrated to theDelaware-based MAC regional EFT network.Buying A LogoUsing an existing logo is cheaper than developing a new logo, Sims says.  "Ifyou start from scratch, there's a lot of paperwork and forms you must fill outin developing a logo," she says.  The council hopes to complete thenegotiations by the end of January, she adds.  The logo would be purchasedwith funds collected from member dues.  Terms of the deal, including what thecouncil will pay to use the logo, were not revealed.In the event the deal does go through, the Quest EBT network would be similarto the Plus and Cirrus national ATM networks, McCarthy says.  If a recipientfrom New York uses his card at a Quest ATM in Florida, for example, thetransaction would be sent to the government-designated issuer in the SouthernAlliance of States who would route the transaction to the Northeast Coalitionfor authorization.  The transaction would then be switched by a regionalnetwork or other entity designated by the prime contractor in the SouthernAlliance of States.  Supermarket chains with a presence in both EBT programsmay opt to switch transactions themselves, McCarthy adds.  "We're trying toallow as much flexibility as possible," he says.And the state coalitions should bring sizeable volume to regional EFTnetworks.  That's particularly true with the Northeast Coalition.  "Bybringing welfare recipients into the EFT networks, we're bringing a hugevolume to the market that was never there before," says William Kilmartin,Massachusetts comptroller and vice chairman of the electronic benefitscouncil.  The Northeast coalition, for example, will bring approximately twomillion new cardholders into the New Jersey-based NYCE shared EFT network, hesays.  By providing each cardholder with four transactions per month, thecoalition could bring NYCE at least 96 million new transactions each year."If [NYCE] is paid per transaction, and we double their volume, it's extremelysignificant for them," he says.  The Northeast Coalition plans to announce thewinning bidder later this month.Some industry participants are concerned the council could impose a licensingfee on financial institutions and merchants who use the logo.  Elliot McEntee,NACHA president, says some form of fee may be imposed, but it won't be largeenough to inhibit participation.  "There may be a charge to cover the costs ofdistributing the logo, but it's not a money-making venture," he says.While the electronic benefits council faces a tough task developing rules thateveryone can agree on, most industry participants believe there should be anational set of operating rules as EBT takes on a national flavor.  "If wetake on a national approach, instead of each state building its own EBTsystem, it'll be much easier to bring on additional benefits," Kilmartin says."Once we figure out a common ground, it'll be cheaper and better foreveryone."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996Visa Aims For Debit Summit From Plus' Denver BaseHis first priority after taking the helm of the Plus System, says David A.Brooks, was to calm fears of wholesale changes at Visa's national ATM network.But the rest of his to-do list includes plenty of change, including a broaderrole for Visa in debit processing and more prominent use of the Visa name atATMs.Much will stay the same, however, says Brooks, 55, who was named actingpresident and CEO last month.  He replaces Denny D.  Dumler who resigned tohead up TransAlliance, a new joint venture between Electronic Data Systems andthe owners of the Washington-based Exchange regional ATM network.  The Plusboard is expected to ratify Brooks' appointment later this month.For one thing, he has assured Plus members, the team running the network willremain in place.  "They were concerned Visa not do anything that would givepeople concern for their futures and disrupt operations by having defections,"says Brooks.  Nor are there plans to move the network out of Denver, Brookssays.Remote ControlBrooks' own home base and responsibilities also change little.  He remains atVisa headquarters in San Francisco and retains the title of executive vicepresident of market development at Visa U.S.A., a job he took two years agoafter holding retail banking and administrative posts at First National Bankof Chicago, Crocker Bank and Citicorp.Some observers wonder how effectively Brooks can guide Plus from afar, as wellas about his limited EFT experience.  "He's a very capable man, but he's notan EFT guy," says one regional network executive.  "And Brooks remaining inSan Francisco doesn't sound like a strong management move for Plus."Brooks emphasizes the experience of the Plus team resident in Denver, led byRon Reed, senior vice president, as well as the benefit of his remaining inSan Francisco.  "My value is integrating Plus into the mainstream of Visa," hesays.  And, he adds, a major focus of Plus will remain a project that is wellunderway:  the deployment of a new debit processing platform of TandemHimalaya computers and Deluxe Data Systems software that Visa has installed inDenver at a cost of "multiple millions of dollars."The new platform will ultimately support all of Visa's debit products,including Plus, the Interlink point-of-sale network and the Visa checkoff-line debit card.  While Plus is not scheduled to move to the new platformuntil 1997, the first Visa check customer will go live by February, accordingto Reed.That will put the Visa/Plus data center into competition with third partiesthat handle the bulk of processing for Visa check, as well as for MasterCard'sMasterMoney off-line debit card.  And that's just the beginning of thecompetition they'll be getting from Visa, as Brooks says the new platform hasthe capacity to offer processing services to regional networks, which wouldpit Visa against major processors such as Deluxe Data and EDS, as well as someof the regional networks themselves.Brooks calls this a step towards greater EFT efficiency.  "As an industry," hesays, "we have to get rid of redundancies in systems and networks.  Ourstrategy will be to offer this functionality to our customers at the lowestpossible cost."Some network executives applaud the effort.  "The financial industry needs torespond with processing capability that's superior to what nonbanks canoffer," says Richard Lyons, chief operating officer of Virginia-based Most.Others point out competition is keen in EFT processing.  "How successfulthey'll be depends a great deal on what they offer and at what price," saysRichard P.  Yanak, president of New Jersey-based NYCE.  "That's become a verylow-margin business because competition has driven down the price."While Visa tried unsuccessfully to enter the processing arena in the early'90s, several observers say they're not surprised by Visa's new foray into EFTprocessing or MasterCard's decision last year to acquire the BankMate regionalnetwork and bring in-house processing for its Cirrus national ATM network"MasterCard and Visa have got a lock on the credit card side of electronicpayments, but not on debit," says a regional network executive.  "If they canget a lot of transactions running through their computers they'll have atoehold that would be difficult to pry loose."While the battle for transaction volume rages behind the scenes, Brooks saysthere may be more visible changes in the Plus logo at the ATM.  He says Visais "about 75% of the way through a major brand study" that indicates Plus isincreasingly known by its target audience of people who travel, but still hasnowhere near the recognition of Visa.  While he does not anticipate droppingthe Plus logo, he says he could envision a brand name such as "Plus by Visa"that would emphasize the connection.A final change Brooks foresees is the completion in November of Visa'sacquisition of Plus, a deal announced in 1993.  The price was not disclosed.While some insiders have wondered whether Visa, with its credit card emphasis,would make the final payment, Brooks says the sale will go through.  "We'vegot a total debit strategy, and I don't know why we would want to back awayfrom that," he says.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996When It Comes To ATM Deposits, Money TalksFor many consumers, withdrawing cash from an ATM is as commonplace as buying apack of gum from a convenience store.  By swiping a debit card and entering apersonal identification number, consumers can access funds and be on theirway.But while financial institutions have succeeded in getting people to use ATMsto make withdrawals, convincing them to make deposits is another story.According to a national survey in late 1994 by Atlanta-based SynergisticsResearch Corp., 92% of 613 ATM users made cash withdrawals at ATMs, while only32% of the consumers used ATMs to make deposits.Industry insiders point to several factors discouraging consumers from makingATM deposits, ranging from fears a check will collect dust in the bottom of aterminal to safety concerns about filling out a deposit envelope at a poorlylit machine.  Worries that a deposit won't be promptly credited-or credited atall-also contributes to consumer unease.  The ATM deposit slip does little tocalm those fears, they say."Many consumers have a fear of the unknown-depositing checks at ATMs issomething they haven't done," says Anne Morgan Moore, Synergistics ResearchCorp.  president.Financial institutions have used a number of strategies to overcome thosefears, ranging from financial incentives that reward ATM deposits to $3 feesfor each teller transaction.  Other institutions have deployedadvanced-function terminals that lift an image of a deposited check onto theATM screen to let consumers know their check isn't falling into a bottomlesspit.Financial IncentivesCleveland-based KeyCorp is using both financial incentives and penalties toencourage ATM deposits.  KeyCorp introduced a checking account late last yearthat pays consumers 25 cents for each ATM deposit.  The KeyMoney Accessaccount pays consumers up to $1 a month, requires no minimum balance andcarries no fees.  Consumers are charged $1.50 for in-branch deposits.  Theaccount is available in Ohio, Michigan and Indiana and will be rolled out toall KeyCorp branches by March.Larry Peterson, KeyCorp senior vice president, says the bank savesapproximately 50 cents on each ATM deposit, excluding the price of themachines.  Consumers that make four ATM deposits per month are paid a maximumof $1, netting the bank around $1 in profit.  "This is not a tremendous moneymaker," he says.  "We're paying customers to learn about the functionality ofATMs and get comfortable with the machines."The KeyMoney Access account isn't the first time KeyCorp has used incentivesto change consumer behavior.  The bank launched three 60-day marketingcampaigns in the fall of 1994 that rewarded a consumer with $5 if three out offive monthly ATM transactions were deposits.  The bank also enrolled consumersin a $10,000 sweepstakes for every ATM transaction and gave consumers $10 tosign up for various direct-deposit accounts.  The promotions took place inSyracuse, N.Y; Columbus, Ohio; and Seattle, Wash.Easy To UseAlthough Peterson was unable to reveal how many deposits were migrated fromtellers to ATMs, the bank issued eight times more ATM cards during the marketlaunch in Columbus than the comparable 60 days in 1994, he says.  KeyCorp alsoopened eight times more new direct-deposit accounts, he adds.But while KeyCorp was successful with its campaigns, other banks haven't beenso lucky.  First Chicago ran a two-month promotion in late 1994 whereconsumers were given $2 tokens they could redeem by making ATM deposits.While the bank saw a modest increase in ATM deposits during the promotion,those deposits gradually subsided during the following four months.  "Peopleeventually went back to the old way of doing things," says Tom Tremain, FirstChicago vice president.First Chicago has since introduced a plan in which consumers with accountsrequiring no minimum balance are charged $3 for each teller visit.  Customerswith a $250 minimum balance or more have one free teller visit per week, andcustomers with a $250 minimum balance and direct deposit have six free tellervisits per month.Positive ResultsAnd the results have been impressive.  First Chicago witnessed a 125% increasein ATM deposits during the first four months after the changes were made.  "Wesaw a huge increase in deposits, and a corresponding decrease in tellertransactions," Tremain says.  The bank saw a net loss of customers for a fewmonths, but now is signing up more new customers than it is losing, he says.But some banks, including Florida-based Barnett Banks, prefer education andincentives to penalties.  The bank is considering several strategies at itsTampa and Ft.  Lauderdale branches over the next few months, includingin-branch demonstrations on how to make ATM deposits and $1 coupons thatcustomers can redeem by making ATM deposits."I don't like First Chicago's and KeyCorp's negative approach-you don't take acustomer and slap them on the hand," says Len Ferman, Barnett Banks' directorof self-service banking.  Such pricing structures can give the impression abank is only concerned about its bottom line, he adds.  "No one knows what thelong-term ramifications are for charging customers for things they expect tobe free," he says.Other institutions have opted for high-technology hardware to encourage ATMdeposits.  InterBold and AT&T Global Information Solutions both offercheck-imaging ATMs that display checks on the ATM screen.  InterBold alsooffers an ATM that images a copy of the check onto the ATM receipt to giveconsumers an extra layer of comfort."The ATMs have eliminated the black-hole syndrome," says Robert Morris, vicepresident of electronic banking with Bank of America Arizona, which ispiloting six check-imaging machines in Phoenix.  The terminals have made amodest impact on increasing ATM deposits, he says.  The machines have onedrawback, however.  Because the ATMs can accept checks without envelopes,checks that are wrinkled are sometimes rejected.  "In some situations, theteller will have to cash the check," he says.Some bankers, however, say check-imaging ATMs are too costly.  The ATMs costup to $50,000, well above the $25,000 price tag on standard deposit-acceptingATMs.  "With the results we've seen [from price incentives], the imagingtechnology is way too expensive for the added value you get," Tremain says.Other bankers believe direct deposit is the way to go.  Joseph Pendleton,senior vice president with Reading, Pa.-based Meridian Bank, says processingdirect-deposit checks via the automated clearing house is less expensive thanprocessing deposits through ATMs and tellers.  It costs around two cents toprocess direct-deposit checks versus 85 cents for an ATM deposit and $1 for abranch deposit, Pendleton says."People are resistant to making deposits at ATMs, and you can spend a lot ofmoney trying to change their ways," Pendleton says.  "The returns aren't asgreat as spending money to convince people to use direct deposit."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996First Fidelity Gets A Charge Out Of Balance InquiriesWhile financial institutions are trying to get consumers to make deposits atATMs, one bank is focusing on moving balance inquiries to machines.Beginning Feb.  1, New Jersey-based First Fidelity Bancorp will chargecustomers whose deposits fall below minimum balance requirements 75 cents forbalance inquiries from tellers and 50 cents for balance inquiries on atoll-free number.  Customers receive two free inquiries per month from tellersand two from the voice response number.  Senior citizen accounts and accountswith high minimum balances will not be affected.The aim is to migrate branch inquiries to ATMs and get customers to maintainlarger balances, a First Fidelity spokesman says.  First Fidelity has 715 ATMsin New Jersey and surrounding states.  The fees are not related to the bank'smerger with First Union Corp.  earlier this year, he adds.While several banks offer checking accounts that encourage ATM usage bycharging low monthly fees-and for teller transactions-First Fidelity appearsto be a pioneer in imposing fees solely on balance inquiries.  And industryobservers expect other institutions to follow suit.  "There's certainly atrend in channeling consumers to lower cost services," says Anne Morgan Moore,president of Synergistics Research Corp., an Atlanta-based bankingconsultancy.  "Customers who want face-to-face contact should be willing topay more," she says.Some industry participants, however, are surprised the bank plans to chargecustomers for balance inquiries using its voice response system.  Such systemsare usually less expensive than ATMs, they say.  The First Fidelityspokesperson says a small number of customers were calling the bank up to fourtimes a day to check balances.  "The fees are focused on a very small numberof people who are making excessive calls," he says.  He predicts less than 10percent of the bank's 2.5 million customers will be affected by the change.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996What's An ATM?  'Just A Vending Machine That Dispenses Cash'Many expect the spread of surcharging to attract new nonbank ATM deployers.They may look a lot like Nationwide Money Services.Based in Calabasas, Calif., Nationwide has 1,100 orders to place ATMs and cashdispensers that do not accept deposits, including a contract for 400 Pantryconvenience stores in the Southeast.  Robert Peisner, the company's chiefoperating officer, says most of those machines will be deployed by June, whichwould make it one of the 20 largest ATM owners in the U.S.That's fast work for a company that was founded in 1993 by card-processingveterans Peisner and Jack O'Toole and only owned about 20 ATMs a year ago,when it got an infusion of capital from California-based CardserviceInternational, an independent sales organization that processes credit anddebit transactions.  CSI subsequently acquired a controlling interest inNationwide.Surcharging is central to the company's business plan, and its deployments areconcentrated in surcharging states.  Nationwide charges up to $1 for awithdrawal, Peisner says.But the real secret to its fast growth, says Peisner, is lowoverhead-processing and other services are outsourced-combined with using thecash-dispensing terminals to generate revenue in as many ways as possible."In essence these are just vending machines," he says.  "One of the productsthey dispense happens to be cash."  Nationwide machines also offer postagestamps, prepaid telephone cards and coupons.  The company charges $50 a monthto issue coupons for up to 12 vendors per machine.Promotion also is key, Peisner says.  As part of the seven-year contract withNationwide, merchants agree to place signs announcing the terminals and toinclude in their advertising that the store has an ATM that dispenses couponsas well as cash.  Peisner says consumers walk away with coupons that, if used,more than repay them for both the surcharge and the foreign fee charged by theconsumer's bank.And while the company's original five-year plan called for the deployment of1,500 machines, Peisner says that's been revised to between 5,000 and 7,000 bythe year 2000.Such high hopes on the part of new ATM deployers may be dashed by the realitythat the best ATM locations are taken and retailers are expecting a largershare of revenues, says Tommy Rouse, senior vice president of Dallas-basedAffiliated Computer Services, a leading third-party deployer.  "Over the nextyear, we expect 50% of the new players installing ATMs will file forbankruptcy," Rouse says.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK NETWORK NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996EFTA Tries Again To Accelerate Into The Fast LaneAs the EFT industry has matured, competition has grown sharper, profit marginshave grown smaller and the responsibilities of executives have grown heavier.That makes it harder to lure busy executives away from their desks toparticipate in trade associations.At the same time, the issues have grown more complex, creating a greater needfor trade groups that can help sort them out.  If the agenda is compellingenough, people will come, as evidenced by the record turnout at last month'sBank Administration Institute Retail Delivery Conference in Atlanta.By the admission of its own leadership, the Electronic Funds TransferAssociation hasn't done a good enough job in recent years of convincing EFTparticipants that they can't afford to miss an EFTA meeting.  But it's goingto give it another try.The association has announced its second management shakeup in just over ayear, this one featuring a multi-year agreement with the Benton Internationalconsulting firm, which will provide consultants to help plan meetings andwrite reports about them for the association's membership of bankers,processors, hardware and software vendors and government officials.Help WantedThe other major move is the promotion of H.  Kurt Helwig, the association'sdirector of government relations, to the post of executive director.  Hereplaces Wayne Boucher, who resigned in September, less than a year aftertaking the post as part of a new management team that included Robert P.Barone, the retired president of Diebold Inc.  Barone remains at EFTA aschairman and chief executive officer.Barone admits to disappointing results in his first year on the job.  "We'vehad some success in terms of new membership, but frankly weren't as successfulas I would have liked in terms of increasing the importance of the associationto the industry," he says.  "We couldn't get our hands around good,content-oriented material, and we weren't following up very well on ourspecial interest groups and councils and reporting their activities.  Wedecided we had to get some people involved who can help us do this."That's where the Benton firm comes in.  A Benton consultant will be assignedto each of the EFTA's committees to help chairmen develop strategy, planmeeting agendas and prepare reports.Free AdviceJohn B.  Benton, the CEO of Benton International and a long-time EFTA boardmember, says his staff will work for free until the association's revenuescover budgeted EFTA expenses for the year.  If revenues exceed that budget,his staff will bill at cost; in future years, he says, any dramatic growth inrevenues would be shared with the Benton firm.  Benton says he does not seethe deal as an income generator as much as an opportunity to revitalize theassociation while offering his staff a chance to network with industryleaders.  "If our people build some new relationships, we'll get out of itwhat I want to get," he says.Helwig says EFTA considered other consulting firms, but "Jack's been on ourboard and been very active and that tipped the balance toward BentonInternational."  Several EFT insiders applauded the choice.  "Benton'sextremely well-regarded and he's done a lot of high-level work in the EFTbusiness, so that should help," says Charles Raphael, first vice president ofFirst Chicago NBD.Benton's staff will be working with the EFTA's councils and special interestgroups.  There are two councils, which are empowered to take positions withoutgetting approval of the EFTA board, whose diverse composition makes itdifficult to reach a common stance.  One council focuses on electronicbenefits transfer; the other is a council of regional EFT network executivesformed last year after the Shared Network Executives Association merged withthe EFTA.Revitalized Board MeetingsThe three special interest groups are designed to be educational, and don'tadopt positions.  One focuses on electronic commerce and home banking, anotheron point-of-sale and a third on EBT.  The association plans to form a fourthdealing with regulatory and legislative issues this year, Helwig says.In addition to upgrading the meetings of these committees, Barone says theassociation will change the character of board meetings.  "They've beenbasically business meetings, taking up such things as finances," he says.  "Wereally need to focus on industry issues and that's what we'll do from thispoint forward."  And, in an effort to broaden participation, the size of theboard has been increased from 33 to 50.The association, which has a membership of nearly 1,300 individuals from 175companies, also plans a recruitment drive.  As part of that effort, a newindividual category of membership has been created, costing $1,000 a year.Corporate memberships range from $6,000 to $15,000 annually.Bankers WantedHelwig says there will be an emphasis on increasing participation fromfinancial institutions, which observers say has been a weakness of theorganization.  In particular, he says, it is hoped the work of Benton and hisstaff will help attract more senior bankers.  But Richard Speer, anAtlanta-based consultant, says that, as a result of bank mergers and thegrowth of the EFT business, many high-level managers just don't have the timefor industry meetings.  "It's very difficult right now to get senior bankersinvolved in any of these industry forums, it's not just the EFTA," he says.And it's not just bankers who are busy, says Donald Mauer, senior vicepresident of the Pennsylvania-based Gensar processing company, and someone whohas skipped recent EFTA meetings.  Speaking of Benton, Mauer says, "Jack hasto make it more striking and relevant.  I have to believe I'll learn more inthree days at a meeting than I could learn in three months, and that it willmove my business."Back to Headline List WT03-B37-31IA059-000325-B022-46http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi70.html 205.156.212.5 19970115004017 text/html 139887HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:37:47 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:19 GMTContent-length: 139697Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi70.html Sample Issue Copyright BANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Check Fraud: A Problem That Just Won't Go Away (995 words) IBOS Expands Its Ranks (966 words) When Servicing Customers, Every Minute Counts (345 words) Microsoft Shifts Gears (1062 words) Answering The High-Tech Call (2275 words) Solving Chicken-And-Egg Dilemmas In Electronic Bill Pay (2074 words) Wrap-up ... (634 words) Electronic Money: A Legislative Can Of Worms (2098 words) Find The Bank: (84 words) A Card By Any Other Name... (238 words) The Changing Physics Of Checking (1834 words) INTERACTIVE BEAT (1428 words) PRODUCT OF THE MONTH: Shaping A Competitive Image (547 words) An Unbalanced Budget Burden (1737 words) PRODUCT INTROS (858 words) Visa Pushes Non-Duality For Internet Purchases (422 words) Microsoft Makes Big-Bank Inroads With NT Servers (591 words) HP Dresses Up Teller Windows At Wachovia (192 words) What Do The Meca Banks Know That You Don't? (581 words) AOL, Intuit Pave Yet Another Electronic Path (505 words) New Directions EDS, The Exchange Create New Network (149 words) Mellon Offers Corporate Cards With A Twist (78 words) Going Where No Card Reader Has Gone Before (1116 words) CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Check Fraud: A Problem That Just Won't Go AwayCheck fraud is a multi-billion dollar problem destined only to intensify.Depending on who you talk to, bad checks are siphoning as much as $11 billiona year from the U.S.  economy.  That's more than the combined yearly totalsfor automated teller machine, credit card and wire transfer fraud, accordingto industry sources.Indeed, while the headlines of the business press for years have heralded thethreat of computer hackers accessing and pillaging the bank accounts ofcorporate America, a small army of criminals has been amassing wealth byforging and doctoring corporate America's old standby payment method:  thecheck.  Anyone with a few thousand dollars to invest in desktop publishingsoftware, some scanning equipment and a laser printer, and who has the desireto commit check fraud can print bogus checks that fool even the most astutebankers.  (Color copiers are another option, although the bogus checks theyproduce typically are not as sophisticated as the desktop variety.)"The amount of money involved in computer fraud is minimal compared to checkfraud," says Dan McGurl, president, Bottomline Technologies, Inc., aPortsmouth, NH, company that markets automated disbursement systems tocorporations and banks.  "The ease with which an individual inclined to dothis kind of thing can now rip off corporate checking accounts is astounding."In a backhanded way, that's good news for McGurl.  His firm is part of anoffensive that has emerged to counter check fraud using a concept known aspositive pay.  A company using positive pay provides its bank each day with anelectronic list of checks issued that day.  The bank then uses the list toverify the authenticity of checks presented against the company's account.Bottomline sells software, dubbed Positive PayLink, that lets companies createthese files and transmit the information to banks.  At a cost of about$10,000, just under 100 companies have purchased the system since itsintroduction in mid-1995, according to McGurl.Tough sellMcGurl sees great promise in Positive PayLink, and in the general trend towardpositive pay services.  "Every check-issuing organization is going to want toget into positive pay as long as the check system is the way it is today," heinsists.But it isn't that easy to sell corporations on positive pay.  Most bankers aredoing well if they can convince 10 to 20 percent of their corporate customersto use positive pay, says Bruce Brett, senior vice president, Signet Bank,Richmond, VA.  "I guess check fraud just isn't bad enough yet," gripes Brett,who chairs the American Bankers Association's check fraud task force.Or, suggests Richard Poje, partner, Treasury Strategies Inc., a Chicago-basedcash management consulting firm, check fraud losses just haven't hit enoughcorporate issuers of checks.  "The best time to be selling a positive payproduct is the morning after a fraud has occurred," Poje suggests.In the meantime, bankers are beginning to shop around for other check fraudweapons, like online verification services.  Dan Fisher, senior vicepresident, Victoria Bank and Trust, Victoria, TX, says a case can be made forcreating an electronic positive file of checks that operates akin to creditcard authorization systems.  "If you can set up a negative file for badchecks, why can't you set up a positive file of good checks?"  he asks.Some banks are doing that now through a company known as Primary PaymentSystems Inc., which was founded by Star System Inc., a bank-owned EFT networkbased in California.  The company maintains a database of information onchecking accounts at participating financial institutions.  Banks, or checkverification companies, use the information to decide whether checks should behonored.  As of last fall, the Primary Payment database contained informationon 22 million checking accounts at 20 financial institutions in California andsurrounding states.  Participation is poised to expand, however, as PrimaryPayment goes national.  "By the end of 1996, we'll definitely haveparticipation beyond the western states," says Nikki Waters, Star senior vicepresident.The daily process of uploading account updates and verifying check depositsagainst the Primary Payment database takes about five hours for a bank tocomplete, start to finish, according to Waters.Waters says Primary Payment participation makes good sense for banks.  "Forevery $1 spent participating in deposit check [the Primary Payment servicethat banks use to check on deposited checks], they can realize $9 to $10 insavings," she relates.  The savings figures, Waters says, are based upon dataprovided by some of the larger banks participating in Primary Payment.  Theseparticipants include Bank of America, Wells Fargo Bank and First InterstateBank.Fee opportunityBankers and others involved with Primary Payment say it, or similar services,can help retailers, too, and create new revenue opportunities for banks byproviding a venue for the sale of checking account information to firms thatsell check verification services to the merchant community.  ElectronicTransaction Corp., the Deluxe Corp.  unit that runs the Shared CheckAuthorization Network (SCAN), and Telecheck, Houston, have already beguntesting the idea.Representatives of the merchant community say they like the idea of bolsteringthe data available on checking accounts and potential bad checks at the pointof sale.  But they say banks also need to do more to thwart consumers who passbad checks at the point of sale.  "These are shared problems," says Judy Cook,president, Minnesota Retail Merchants Association.  "Trying to identify theseindividuals at the outset and not letting them open checking accounts is wherethe banks should be focusing their attention."Cook says the merchant community in Minnesota has been successful in forcingbanks to more closely scrutinize individuals opening checking accounts.  Butthe battle against check fraud is far from over, she concedes."No matter what you do, it seems the crooks always find another way to getyou," laments Cook.  "Cooperation is the real key."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996IBOS Expands Its RanksChase Manhattan Corp.  has tipped the scales of IBOS (Inter-Bank OnlineSystem), the technology-savvy international payments network, toward the U.S.Chase's recent purchase of a 24.05 percent stake in IBOS ratchets U.S.ownership to a majority, rounding out the 24.05 percent held by ElectronicData Systems, Plano, TX, and the 3.8 percent held by Goldman Sachs.  Thefounding institutions, Banco Santander of Spain and The Royal Bank ofScotland, both also own 24.05 percent of the company.IBOS is an electronic network that links accounts within all participatingbanks, allowing end-to-end international payments at both the retail andwholesale level.  The network was created about four years ago, inanticipation of increased cross-border transactions with the formation of theEuropean Community.  Indeed, increased global commerce has caused IBOS'volumes to "more than double in the last 12 months," according to Thomas Metz,director of global business development at IBOS and divisional vice presidentof EDS in Dallas, although he would not reveal IBOS' exact volumes.IBOS basically simplifies international banking for commercial and retailcustomers.  Commercial customers who use IBOS-participating banks benefit bynot having to go through agent banks in foreign countries in order to getcertain cash management, securities and corporate banking services.  Andindividuals benefit by being able to use foreign branches as if they werebranches in their own country.  For example, Chase customers vacationing inScotland could stop in at The Royal Bank of Scotland, identify themselves ascustomers of an IBOS-participating bank and conduct their banking as if theywere at their home branch in the U.S.Seal of approval"Because Chase is the largest correspondent bank in the world and one of theleading banks in international payments, they bring a tremendous amount ofcredibility to IBOS," notes Metz.  "It's kind of like the Good HousekeepingSeal of Approval.  Chase has indicated that it wants to create other virtualbanking alliances using its correspondent banks and add the IBOS paymentcapability to Chase's broad range of corporate cash management products."The global virtual bank of IBOS is racking up a bevy of new participants,including Denmark's Unibank; ING Bank and Instituto Bancario San Paolo duTorino-the largest banks in the Netherlands and Italy, respectively.  Othernon-equity members are Banco Comercio e Industria of Portugal, CreditCommercial de France and Belgium's Kredietbank and Credit General de Banque.Other banks are likely to sign on soon.  The EC Investment Services Directiverequires that all member countries' financial institutions and markets be opento all EC participants.  When that law goes into effect, there could be alandslide of banks joining IBOS, says Metz.And, now that the largest U.S.  bank is in on the deal, others will likelywant to keep up with the Joneses.  "We hope other banks in the U.S.  willfollow suit," says Chuck Mallis, global marketing and strategic positioningexecutive at Chase in New York City, who also sits on the Board of Directorsof the Society for Worldwide Financial Interbank Telecommunications(S.W.I.F.T.).  "We do not believe in exclusivity.  Open access networks arethe way to go."For 30 years, S.W.I.F.T.  has been smoothing out the cross-cultural kinks andlanguage barriers that would otherwise impede international transactionsamongst its member banks, which now total 3,000.  "There's been a lot ofconfusion over what S.W.I.F.T.  and IBOS are," notes Barry Morse, vicepresident of marketing at S.W.I.F.T.  in Lahoulpe, Belgium.  "The two servicesare very complementary," he explains.  "When two banks send payments to eachother there's a lot of communications required as intermediate steps.  That isthe S.W.I.F.T component-standardized communications using correspondentbanks."However, S.W.I.F.T.  is closing in on some of the services offered by IBOS.S.W.I.F.T.  has arranged to offer foreign institutions access to the U.S.Depository Trust Company's services, which include securities transfers;kicked off an end-to-end cross-border account payment service calledS.W.I.F.T.Pay, and launched a service called Accord, which performscross-border matching and bilateral netting.If banks want to conduct multilateral international netting, they can useS.W.I.F.T.  to access the foreign exchange clearing houses that have beensprouting up this summer.  "We do communications for Eccho [the London StockExchange's foreign exchange clearinghouse]," Morse says.  "We do not have arelationship with the U.S.'s [foreign exchange clearinghouses] F/XNet andMultinet.  But we're all trying to solve the same problems in the industry:the costs and risks associated with cross border payments and foreignexchange.  Eventually, we will all be doing much of the same things andpotentially working together."On a similar note, if S.W.I.F.T.  and IBOS were to pool their resources, "itwould open up opportunities in things like imaging and smart cardtechnologies," says Mallis.  "IBOS ultimately provides a virtual bank networkcapability through multiple associations."  IBOS is currently talking withofficials in Russia and other eastern European countries about helping themset up payment vehicles for their national clearing systems.  The group isalso discussing setting up a Web service, although that is not considered animmediate concern.  "There is also potential for industries and their banks todevelop information networks on IBOS because of its broad bandwidthcapabilities," says Mallis.Both IBOS and S.W.I.F.T.  have seen increasing activity.  "With these newbanks coming online, our volume is going to increase significantly," from thedoubling that just occurred over the past year, says Metz of IBOS.  "That isallowing us to lower our prices to make it more proportionate to S.W.I.F.T.pricing."S.W.I.F.T.  volumes, meanwhile, have risen only 17 percent over last year, butthat represents a larger base number.  Notes Morse of S.W.I.F.T., "The valueof payments that go through the network is about [U.S.] $2.5 trillion everyday, half the annual GNP of America."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996When Servicing Customers, Every Minute CountsCost-justifying a call center is getting easier by the minute, according toSprint Business.  By mimicking the pay system of an 800 number service, theDallas-based corporation has created a call center solution that offers acreative way to finance customer service requirements-it's a price-per-minutecall center.With this call center solution, there are no added costs or unexpected fees,says Kay Jain, Sprint's manager of customer programs.  The package is designedto ensure operating costs get offset by new revenue.  Total cost to thefinancial institutions are a direct result of the activity in its call center.Sprint's Call Center Connection includes all the equipment needed to outfit acall center, from the automated call distributor, to the phones, along withthe network services needed to connect it to customers and prospects.  Sprintteamed up with suppliers Rockwell Telecommunications, Downers Grove, IL, andNorthern Telecom, Chapel Hill, NC, to make the offering.Each customized per-minute deal includes turnkey installation, on-goingmaintenance and full warranty service, plus specialized training and systemupgrades.  Once installed on the bank's premises, bank management takes overfull control of the center to run its day-to-day operations.  If operationswarrant expansion, banks may add agents, equipment or services as needed.The price-per-minute cost for the call center service is determined by how thesystem is configured, the minimal annual usage commitment and the length ofthe contract.  The customer's anticipated call volumes provide the basis for aminimum annual usage commitment, which equals the minimum number of minutesthat agents will be handling calls in the course of a year.According to Jain, after the number of minutes-per-year is established and thecustomer decides on the equipment, the price can be determined for theduration of a contract.  "We recommend a two to five year contract but thereis no set limit."To help make it easier to track automated call distributor performance permonth, Sprint sends out two monthly billing statements, indicating longdistance usage and call center costs separately.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Microsoft Shifts GearsBill Gates quickly made amends for calling banks dinosaurs back in 1994,during his keynote address at Bank Administration Institution's RetailDelivery Systems conference.  Without skipping a beat, he then launched into asales pitch for Microsoft's latest offering to facilitate interactive banking.This time around, bankers were more impressed than threatened."I never said banks are dinosaurs," he clarified during his speech, referringto a quote that appeared in Newsweek.  "I actually said many banking systemsare dinosaurs."The original dinosaur comment surfaced before Microsoft signed on about adozen banks to offer to their customers Microsoft's personal financialmanagement software, Money.  To many observers, distributing the powerfulMicrosoft brand in such a way obscures and undermines the relationships bankshave with their customers.  Others also fear the set-up allows Microsoft tosomehow skim a small percent of fee revenue off transactions that occurthrough Money.Gates's latest interactive banking appeal, unveiled during his speech, is morein keeping with the type of relationships banks are accustomed to having withtheir vendors.  With high-tech fanfare, including a tongue-in-cheek video thatpoked fun at the Internet as a "Web of Wealth," Gates introduced a suite oftools and technologies for building profitable bank applications on Internetand e-mail platforms.  "The Internet will be the primary connection betweenbanks and their customers," predicted Gates.The December 5 speech actually was a preview to an announcement made two dayslater in Seattle of a wide-ranging Microsoft commitment to the Internet.  Atthat briefing, Microsoft introduced more than 20 products and tools to createapplications that encompass both Windows technology and the Internet.  "Ithink most people are going to be surprised at the depth and breadth of ourcommitment to integrate the Internet into our products," said Gates at thatbriefing.Just like old timesIn exploiting this new delivery channel, Microsoft will follow a businessmodel of partnering with others, a practice it has taken since its origins,when it relied on Intel to provide the microprocessors for its systems, Gatessaid.  "Over the next five years, we will partner with more companies than wehave in the last 20.  And Microsoft will continue to do exactly what it doestoday, which is write software."Like any off-the-shelf software package, the new Internet tools arelicensable.  Banks will be able to use them to create what Gates terms"virtual branches," which will be bank-branded and customizable.Chief among the new tools will be Internet Studio (code-named Blackbird), anauthoring tool for developing Internet interfaces that incorporate multimedia,such as sound and video.  Also available will be an Internet InformationServer, based on Windows NT.  These products will be available over the courseof 1996, and will join Microsoft's Internet browser, Explorer.  Thecombination will support authentication and also embed secure protocols forpayments over the Internet.Microsoft also has plans to jazz up e-mail.  New tools will make it possibleto transfer more than just text over e-mail connections.  For example, bankscould transmit formatted statements-complete with logos-via e-mail.  "Thiswill be a key element of what we provide," noted Gates.During the presentation, Linda Parker, vice president, US Bancorp, was invitedto demonstrate how the bank built a direct link between e-mail and a loanapproval center it created on its Internet site.  US Bank is an early adopterof Microsoft Money, as well as the new Internet tools.  The bank is well intothe process of using Microsoft's Internet Studio tools to build abank-branded, sales and service delivery channel over the Internet that linksto back-office data.With Microsoft's new Internet-centric approach, the role of Money changes.According to Gates, Money will become a "core database" or "file cabinet" thatbanks will be able to customize and extend by adding, say, a third-partyretirement planning software package to it.  In the near term, Money willreceive various upgrades, including additional back-end processing optionsbeyond the current one from Intuit Processing Services, and the ability toconnect users to banks' Internet sites via hot links.KudosFor the most part, banks put aside their typical skepticism of Microsoft'sintentions and applauded the company's efforts.  "He [Gates] has done a greatjob," says Tom Kitrick, vice president, First Union National Bank.  "He'sadded more value to the customer interface, and that's the most importantthing."Robert Hedges, executive vice president, Shawmut National Corp., brought upthe same two words:  customer interface.  "The future world is going torevolve around the quality of the customer interface," he says.  "We have tobe in the business of knowing how to create a good one."Shawmut will soon be folded into Fleet Financial Group, which is a part-ownerof Meca Software, Inc., a Fairfield, CT-based outfit that prides itself on itsbank-focused approach to distributing its Managing Your Money personalfinancial software.  Hedges says that although the bank is now a part-owner ofMeca, it would be open to working with Microsoft on other projects.  "But onlyon an open-systems basis, and only if we retain the customer interface."In adopting an approach more amenable to banks, Microsoft has, at the sametime, shifted its position relative to its own competition.  Prior toMicrosoft's announcement of its Internet intentions, Intuit Inc.  and itsQuicken program occupied the same competitive terrain as Microsoft and Money.Now that Microsoft has broadened its approach, it faces a new set ofcompetitors, namely Sun Microsystems.Sun's Java, a tool that adds dynamics-such as multimedia-to Web browsers,squares off against Microsoft's new Internet Studio.  Introduced in August,Java allows small applications (called applets) to be transported from serversover the Internet.  These applets latch on to client computers and liven up,say with animation, Internet interactions of that client computer.  Forexample, a client computer viewing the Web server of a bank that uses suchapplets might let users to perform dynamic what-if analyses on loan options,not just apply for a loan.How the competition will pan out in this next stage of the interactive worldremains to be seen.  "Everything's changing," notes Kitrick of First Union,who says he wants to see what happens with Java before he decides aboutInternet Studio.  "Nothing is staying the same."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Answering The High-Tech CallThere's no doubt call centers are emerging as a popular way to reduceoperating costs while improving service to customers.  To wit, this technologyentrant placed first out of 12 in BTN's annual survey of the Best Of TheNewest banking technologies (see BTN, December 1995).  Today, the question formany banks-especially medium- to small-sized ones-is deciding at what point,if ever, they should move from standard voice response systems to full fledgedstate-of-the-art call centers.Most banks already have some type of voice response system in place to allowfor automated responses to routine customer service inquiries.  Thesesystems-once known for handling only simple inquiries such as savings orchecking account balances-are now equipped with a variety of increasedcapabilities.  Integrated voice response applications can now processvirtually any information exchange including account balances, portfolioinformation, bill payment, interest rates and mortgage pre-qualifications.A fully customized, turnkey voice response solution can start at $30,000, andquickly increases with advanced programming applications.  But despite all theenhancements with voice response technology, it still has many limitationscompared to a full-blown call center solution.  Most notably missing is thehuman interaction with customers.Making the moveAdvanced call centers employ customer service workstations backed bycomputer-telephone integration.  Using computer-telephone integration to makeinformation that's locked away in computer databases available to telephonesystems is an act that's easier said than done.The basic hardware for incoming call management is a standard set-up comprisedof private branch exchanges, automated call distributors and voice responseunits.  The real feature that differentiates one bank's call center fromanother's is in its use of middleware.  The middleware provides the connectivedata integration link between a customer service representative's workstationand an incoming call."The key to implementing a state-of-the-art call center is integration," saysJulie Fitzpatrick, product marketing manager at Early, Cloud & Co., Newport,RI.  "Integrating customer information files allows a customer servicerepresentative to access a wealth of information that assists in a variety ofcapabilities and increases cross-selling opportunities."Middleware is actually the doorway to accessing information, managing call anddata information, routing the information, managing workflow and monitoringthe system.  In addition to basic call management and data managementcapabilities, more advanced services such as identifying numbers dialed bycallers, a process known as Designated Number Identification Service, as wellas identifying callers' telephone numbers, known as Automated NumberIdentification, are available.The more integration there is between computer and telephone systems, thelonger the list of services that a bank can offer through the phone.  Beyondretrieving account balances, customers can authorize funds transfers, openchecking and savings accounts, apply for loans, pay off credit card balancesand the list goes on-directly over the phone.Sky's the limitExperts say the absolute minimum investment for a fully integrated call centeris $10,000 per seat, with $20,000 per seat not an unreasonable price forhigher configurations.  Basically, there is no definite price cap on theinvestment because of all the different options and equipment available.  Inessence, stepping up from standard voice response to call-centercomputer-telephone integration requires a significant investment, but it canalso be one with limitless possibilities.A number of packaged call center automation software applications areavailable.  One such package, scheduled for general release next quarter, isEarly Cloud's Call Flow Client.  The new desktop software environment letsinstitutions automate telephone-based customer service operations withcomputer-telephone integration, message-based data access and enterprise-widebusiness workflow within a distributed client/server environment.Call Flow Client helps retail banks tackle the project of buildingcomprehensive, completely integrated call centers, all the way from back-endsystems to customer service desktops, and eliminates the need to build everycall center application from scratch.  With its graphical interfaceenvironment, developers can graphically define workflow processing andindividually design their call center environments.  The software packageoffers a number of options ranging from historical transaction information;new account openings for savings, checking, loans, CDs and IRAs; billpayments, to an ATM locator feature with scanned map retrieval.Although the costs associated with a full-blown call center versus a standardvoice response system vary, experts say cost is only one of many issuesrelevant to the decision to plunge into call-center technology.  "Ultimately,the decision is one that should be based on your marketing strategy and whatmessage your bank is trying to convey," says Lisa Stockburger, vice presidentat Vanguard Communications Corp., Morris Plains, NJ.  "You have to determine,'Do I want to be like the big boys or do I want to maintain my face-to-faceimage associated with smaller banks?'"Meeting challengesFor Bank United of Texas, $12 billion in assets, the decision to create anadvanced call center was strategic-the result of a long string ofacquisitions.  In 1990, Houston-based Bank United acquired six financialinstitutions that had retail, mortgage and wholesale banking divisions.Consolidating the different banks into one entity resulted in multipleoperating systems and a very confused customer base.  In addition, the bankwas further challenged by inadequate marketing of its telephone-basedservices.At the time, Bank United had only two small customer service centers locatedin Houston and Dallas.  The centers operated during normal business hours andoffered very limited services.  And since they were scarcely promoted, manycustomers were unaware of their existence at all.The need for an improved customer service system was apparent.  According toPat Moretti, assistant vice president, the bank redefined is strategy and itscustomer service mission statement to its current definition:  to enhancevalue by providing an efficient, cost effective sales and service alternativefor existing and prospective Bank United customers on a national level.Through its acquisitions, the bank had inherited a Syntellect voice responsesystem, which it is now considering upgrading, and it purchased an Aspectswitch from Aspect Telecommunications, San Jose, CA, for about $225,000 forthe new call center.  In addition, it is working on cost-justifying futurepurchases of a TCS Forecaster Scheduler from TCS Management Group, Inc.,Nashville, TN, which will run about $38,000, as well as an Alltel CustomerService Platform Workstation from Alltel Information Services, Inc.  LittleRock, AR, which will cost around $500,000.Bank United's technology allows calls to be routed among five units within thecall center, including:  loan-by-phone; customer service; deposit sales;support functions, and a systems administrator.  The bank is also introducinga financial markets unit as an alternative service for annuities andsecurities customers.  The bank maximizes the capability of its voice responseunit whenever applicable but always has a customer service representativeready to respond.Before implementing its full-blown call center, the bank's customer servicecenters averaged about 126,000 calls received per month, of which 32,000 wereanswered by live representatives.  With the telephone banking center, thenumber of calls answered has increased to an average of 210,000 calls permonth with about 47,000 answered by representatives.The call center also has had success with new-account openings, which were notpossible through the original customer service centers.  The current callcenter averages about 400 new-account openings per month.  That rate is on parwith the number of accounts opened monthly at the largest of the 67 branchesBank United operates throughout Texas, according to Moretti."We went from nothing to something," says Moretti, describing the call center,which grew from eight to 41 employees.  At the same time, "we broadened ourcustomer base by catering to all types of customers."For some banks, investing in a call center is tantamount to using technologyas a weapon to remain independent.  "Call centers are a major investment forsmaller banks, but one that is necessary if you wish to remain independent,"says Pat Mackesey, vice president of telephone banking at Dauphin DepositBank.  "And, it can be easily cost-justified if done correctly."Mackesey was instrumental in the creation of Dauphin Deposit's telephonebanking center, introduced in November.  The Hanover, PA-based bank, with $5.5billion in assets, owns and operates Farmers Bank, ValleysBank and Bank ofPennsylvania, and now handles customer service for all those banks through asingle call center.  Dauphin Deposit's telephone banking center, whichcurrently employs a staff of 17, is projected to employ 50 people by April.The bank also plans to offer underwriting services through the call center.According to Mackesey, performance is the turning point in making a callcenter a profit center.  He points out that the center creates a myriad ofopportunities for pro-active cross selling.  "There is a major positivecontribution in covering bank expense in a call center," he says.  "You areable to take advantage of a customer service situation and turn it into asales opportunity."Local flavor"We took a basic customer service center and turned it into a multi-facetedservice and sales center with an expanded level of service," he says.  "It hasbecome an alternate delivery channel opportunity to service customers moreefficiently with more cost-effective means of banking."With the installation of an Argo Platform system developed by Dallas-basedArgo Data Resource Corp., Dauphin Deposit succeeded in centralizing the callcenter function, while still retaining the local flavor of each of the threebanks that comprise the institution.  The telephone number listed for all ofthe banks is one centralized number.  When calls are received by the front-endnetwork, they are recognized and routed to the customer service representativewho will then answer with the appropriate branch name.Mackesey said that the new call center is viewed as a "superbranch" and isexpected to enhance traditional branch production, not replace it.  Beforeimplementing the new call center, Dauphin Deposit had only one customerservice unit, which was not able to open any type of account.  The new callcenter, which he says is already experiencing "encouraging" responses prior toany advertising efforts has already proven to be effective in cross-sellingnew accounts for the bank.The right numberSimilar telephone banking success was found at Oakland, MD-based First UnitedNational Bank & Trust, $500 million in assets.  Its implementation of a newcall center increased efficiencies while offering cross-selling and outboundtelemarketing opportunities.  The bank's call center, which runs the CustomerService and Correspondence system (CSCS) from Milwaukee-based Fiserv, handlesall transactions, customer needs and inquiries, and allows the bank toautomatically track calls, trends and sales.  Outbound telemarketing calls arealso documented on the system to record the number of sales produced.Fiserv's CSCS system, with a starting cost of about $10,000 (and up, dependingupon the number of users and feature applications), provides a complete casehistory of calls by automatically time- and date-stamping every commententered by customer service representatives.  It tracks the effectiveness ofindividuals and departments in responding to customer requests.  The systemalso provides online instructions and prompts to help solve problems, aidcross-selling efforts and ensure consistent responses are communicated onspecific inquiries.First United's call center, now staffed by four people, is expected to tripleby the end of this year.  Introduced last August, the number of calls actuallyserviced increased immediately.  Prior to the new call center, calls weredistributed among various departments, which inevitably led to lost or missedcalls.  With the new call center, all calls are centralized and handled in astandardized manner, increasing the number of calls serviced.Robin Murray, customer service manager, adds that the telephone banking centeris viewed as a high growth area for the bank because it lets the bank expandits customer base without having to expand its brick and mortar."The telephone banking center allows our in-branch sales force to do moreprospecting and less service-oriented transactions," says Murray.  "Our longterm strategy places a strong focus on our telephone center because of theflexibility and convenience it provides combined with the personal touch thatsatisfies customers."Customizing your call center will essentially determine its cost.  Accordingto Jeanne Michelson, marketing representative at Telcom Technologies, PomonaCA, the size of a call center is one important criteria in pricing it.  Butother variables weigh just as heavily.  These factors include the expectedvalue of your incoming calls, the general level of competition your businessfaces and the experience level of your call center supervisors and managers.Start-up and small call centers often opt for a private branch exchange, whichis a basic telephone switching system, because it can be inexpensive and isusually already in place within the company.  Many of the more popular privatebranch exchange systems can be purchased for less than $600 per station or$1,200 to $2,800, along with an automated call distributor hardware/softwarepackage.A stand-alone automated call distributor, according to Telcom, typically costs$2,200 to $3,000 per position, depending on the particular application andconfiguration requirements.  Therefore, for a cost effective automated calldistributor, expect to see the following price ranges:  $35,000 to $45,000 fora 15-agent system; $120,000 to $150,000 for a 50-agent system; $170,000 to$225,000 for a 75-agent system.Cost justifying a standalone automated call distributor comes down to avariety of factors.  By determining caller demand, identifying salesopportunities, calculating revenue losses (i.e., missed calls) and totaloperational cost savings-personnel and telephone service usage-a bank can costjustify its system on paper.  By adding revenue savings, personnel savings andphone usage savings, a bank can determine eventual paybank in years bydividing the total system cost by the total savings.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Solving Chicken-And-Egg Dilemmas In Electronic Bill PayTrying to get more consumers and merchants interested in electronic billpayments is like trying to answer the question, "Which came first, the chickenor the egg?"The chicken:  many consumers are balking when asked to sign up for electronicbill payment services because, to a large extent, associated fees still aregreater than or equal to the cost of mailing checks through the tried and trueU.S.  Postal Service.The egg:  banks won't be able to drop fees any further until more merchantsare able to receive such bill payments electronically.  The irony of mostbanks' electronic bill payment programs is that the bulk of payments made tomerchants are actually in the form of paper checks.  The only thing electronicabout them is that they were initiated electronically by consumers usingscreenphones, PCs or telephones.The vast majority of merchants lack the computer capabilities to handleelectronic payments.  Visa International estimates that nearly 60 percent of"electronic" bill payments actually are converted to paper before they arepassed to merchants.  Bill Burchfield, CEO of Intuit Services Corp., whichhandles bill payments for users of Intuit's Quicken and Microsoft's Money homebanking products, similarly estimates that 70 percent of the payments it makesto merchants are in paper form.Yet another egg (or would that be a chicken?):  Merchants as a whole areunenthusiastic about electronic bill payment services.  Those not able toaccept electronic payments get a raw deal, because they end up receiving frombanks cumbersome lists of names and account numbers, accompanied by a singlecheck that represents many payors.  Generally known as a check-and-list, thepayment represents an exception item for the biller.Merchants also are dragging their feet because they don't see enough consumersusing bill payment services.  Larger volumes, among other factors, would makeit worth their while to go electronic.  "Every merchant is interested inmoving to electronic payments, but most need to make [systems] changes to dothat," says Mark Johnson, executive vice president of Columbus, OH-basedCheckfree Corp., a leading electronic bill payment processor.  "We need to getas much [consumer] volume as possible, so that the merchants see it'sworthwhile" to invest in the necessary systems upgrades.Here's the good news:  Leading payment processors are aggressively pursuingvarious strategies that should make electronic bill payments more palatable toboth billers and consumers.  Visa, for example, is tackling the back-end withits introduction last month of an end-to-end electronic payment and remittancesystem.  The Visa system will let billers easily accept more types ofelectronic payments, without having to make large investments in new systems.The bi-directional system even will make it possible for billers to deliverbills electronically to consumers who want them.Checkfree is also making major moves to increase the electronic element ofbill payments.  Checkfree's efforts focus on volume-specifically, boosting thevolume of consumers and small businesses using electronic bill paymentservices.  With increased customer volumes, large billers should deem it allthe more worthwhile to invest in automated payment receptors.Even smaller outfits are getting into the act.  An outsourcing service thatspecializes in delivering bills electronically to biller endpoints is gettinga higher profile than ever these days.  Princeton TeleCom Corp., Princeton,NJ, just signed on to provide $68-billion, Cleveland-based KeyCorp with billsettlement and disbursement services for KeyCorp's newly introduced homebanking services.Visa adds missing linkVisa collaborated with Dallas-based Sterling Software, a leading vendor ofelectronic commerce and electronic data interchage software, in its attempt toget more merchants into the electronic arena.  Sterling's financial EDIproduct, Vector:Connexion, is a key element of Visa's ability to create afully electronic, paperless pathway from consumers, through their banks and onto billing companies via billers' banks.Sterling's Vector product has been available independent of Visa for a goodeight years, and is now installed at 41 banks.  To accommodate the increasingflow of electronic consumer-to-biller payments, Sterling simply built a newmodule to its Vector:Connexion product, which adds Visa's EDI format, TC09, tothe list of electronic payments it can make, such as ANSI X.12, 820, BAIlockbox, flat file or customized formats.  The Vector:Connexion for Visamodule communicates payment information from billers' banks to billers viadirect connections, value-added networks, or the Internet."Now the huge Visa network, which so many banks are connected to, can feedtransactions to merchant banks," says M.A.  Hancook, manager, marketingcommunications at Sterling.  "Merchant banks know that their paper-basedlockbox operations are going to go electronic someday.  What they're doing isprotecting their lockbox businesses, plus saving a lot of money becausethey're not processing paper."Visa also is striving to fill in yet another missing electronic link of theelectronic bill payment process.  Through Visa Interactive, a company formedby Visa last year to offer PC- and screenphone-based banking, Visa willprovide electronic bill presentment.  In other words, no more envelopes.Consumers will be able to receive their bills electronically via Visa's homebanking software.  Merchants will be able to transmit bills in a customizedformat, complete with logos and marketing information, and also send returnsand corrections electronically to consumers.Visa already is working with a number of banks, including Banc One, BarnettBanks and Chase Manhattan, to take advantage of the commercial relationshipsthese banks have with billers, and get the electronic remittance product,dubbed ePay, out in the market.  Financial institutions will do the honor ofdistributing the application to their biller customers, giving them theopportunity to add value-and sales revenue-to biller relationships.NationsBank, for example, is using ePay to add to the cash management serviceit already offers its biller customers.  "The biggest benefit is in the way wecan meet our customers' needs," says Ken Wood, vice president of emergingtechnologies, NationsBank.  "Our biller customers are seeing an onslaught ofelectronic payments coming [from front-end electronic connections tocustomers], and they are fearing more paper payments coming through the backend.  We expect this service to eliminate the chore of having to go throughthe long lists of netted payments."The $170 billion NationsBank signed up for the entire Visa package, includingVector:Connexion.  Banks are not required to have Vector:Connexion to runVisa's ePay; however, the set-up makes for more seamless interactions.  Wooddid not disclose how much the bank paid for the package, but said the price ofePay is "competitive" with the automated clearinghouse and other back-endsystems.  "We have to be under the ball, ready to catch it for our clients,"Wood says.  "By joining Visa, we're covering more of the outfield.  There areother parts of the outfield, like ACH or [MasterCard's] Remittance ProcessingService, with whom we'll retain our relationships."Bills, bills, billsCheckfree is hoping to sweet talk more merchants into electronic commerce byfocusing on increasing volumes.  In one effort, Checkfree, like Visa, isstriving to electronically present bills to consumers.  In this respect, thebill payment processor is potentially one step ahead of Visa, since it alreadyis involved in piloting electronic bill delivery to 500 consumers across thecountry.  Participating billers include various telephone and utilitycompanies.  All of the participating billers are already equipped to receiveelectronic payments from Checkfree.  Eventually, Checkfree will diversify itstrial to include credit card, insurance, newspaper and cellular phonecompanies.  The goal is a controlled test of some 2,800 households, a fractionof the customer bases of the participating companies.  When the service goeslive in the third quarter, it could extend to the companies' millions ofcustomers.Checkfree sees electronic bill presentment as an important first ingredientfor more electronic bill payments.  "A lot of consumers aren't interested inpaying bills electronically until they can receive them electronically," saysBill Kitchen, director of product development at Checkfree.  And formerchants, electronic bill presentment cuts costs, and is more accurate andtimely.Once the service goes full tilt, Kitchen expects the rest of Checkfree'selectronic merchants will want to get in on the action.  While the service isde gratis during the trial, Checkfree might impose a per item charge tomerchants when it goes live.Checkfree is just as busily mounting other efforts to build up the volume ofusers of electronic bill pay services.  Recently, it teamed up with AutomaticData Processing, Inc., Roseland, NJ, to launch a joint marketing program thatwill target to small businesses PC banking and bill payment, payrollprocessing, direct deposit and other services.  With only one percent of the12 billion checks cut every year by U.S.  corporations processedelectronically, the potential to spur new waves of electronic bill payments ishuge.  "Small business owners use personal financial management packages athome, and they want them for their businesses," notes Pete Kight, presidentand CEO of Checkfree.  "It's almost criminal that we haven't delivered suchsolutions to small businesses."All in oneThe emergence of companies like Princeton TeleCom is yet another hopefulsignal that electronic bill payment volumes are well on their way.  Theprivately held company was founded in 1983 by a group of Princeton Universityprofessors.  Originally organized to introduce a PC banking product, the firmchanged its direction in 1987 to focus on bill payments only.The company specializes in addressing the needs of billers that receiveelectronic bill payments.  A number of banks, the latest being KeyCorp, hirePrinceton TeleCom as an outsourcing service for settling and disbursingelectronic bill payments to billers."Princeton TeleCom is the only outsource that specifically concentrates onelectronic delivery to the biller endpoints," says Paul Ayres, Key Corp's vicepresident for consumer electronic payments.  "We were searching for a partnerwho fully understood the need for timely and accurate postings," to billerremittance centers.Princton TeleCom accomplishes this task through its flagship els ElectronicLockbox Service.  With full electronic links to more than 450 billers,Princeton TeleCom captures the overwhelming majority of payment items banksnow mail out to biller endpoints in the form of nettlesome "check-and-list"disbursements.At a set time each day, a file of all the day's transactions is sent intoPrinceton TeleCom's main system.  "We go through that file and edit it basedon each biller's specifications about which account numbers are acceptable.Once files have been cleaned, we sort them into files for each payee.  At thatpoint, each file is reformatted according to each payee's file specs," saysMartha Davis, marketing manager of Princeton TeleCom.  This process "givesbanks the ability to do customer service, to show their customers that theyare on the ball."If a payee is not equipped to receive electronic payments, Princeton's RemoteDisbursement Facility prints out individual checks for each consumer payment,rather than sending out net payments accompanied with a list of payers.  Netpayments "are very labor intensive.  If one of the payments on a bulk list iswrong, they'll hold the whole list.  It's one payment per check with us.  Thisway the quality of the check meets or exceeds the standards of the remittancestub," says Davis.The company encourages merchants to go electronic once payments reach acritical mass, she notes.  Otherwise, the vendor can meet some non-electronicmerchants halfway if they have MICR scanners in their remittance centers.  Inthat case, Princeton TeleCom can send payments to a scanning workstation atthe remittance center.  From there, payments are uploaded to accountsreceivable systems, processed and posted.  This is also the option forelectronic merchants not comfortable with the idea of an outsider sendingitems directly into their accounts receivable systems, the method PrincetonTeleCom uses for merchants so equipped.The whole electronic process takes place in a maximum of 48 hours:  two hoursfor editing and sorting, and then it's just a matter of catching the billers'15-minute "payment acceptance window."Princeton's 2,000 bill payment originators include KeyCorp, Bank of America,Wells Fargo, Boatmen's Bancshares, Fleet Financial Group, CoreStates, PremierBancorp Inc., Washington Mutual, Barnett Banks Inc.  and Union Bank.Princeton charges billers 10 cents per transaction, while originators, such asbanks, pay 15 cents or less per transaction, based on volume.The more that ideas to increase electronic bill payments get hatched, the morethat chicken-and-egg problems associated with the task will get smashed.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Wrap-up ...ACQUISITIONS + AGREEMENTS CFI ProServices, Inc.  of Portland, OR, is acquiringDayton, OH-based Culverin Corp., a provider of branch automation andremittance processing software products and services.  The acquisition, valuedat $4.8 million plus royalty considerations, will boost CFI's ability to offerintegrated branch automation solutions to financial institutions.  In 1994,CFI had revenues of $32.6 million, compared to Culverin's $4.5 million.Treasury Services Corp., Santa Monica, CA, acquired Minneapolis-based WorthInformation, Inc., broadening its capability to offer fully-reconciled datafor both profitability analysis and customer relationship management.  Worth'sfinancial and marketing systems will be integrated with the decision-supportand profitability-management systems of its new parent.Nova Information Systems, Inc., Atlanta, First Union Corp., Charlotte, NC, andFirst Fidelity Bancorp, Newark, NJ, have announced plans to combine theirmerchant bank-card activities.  The new partnership creates the eighth-largestmerchant processor, which will handle about $12 billion in bank-card sales.Affiliated Computer Services, headquartered in Dallas, and Columbia, SC-basedAffinity Technology Group have entered into a value-added remarketeragreement.  The deal calls for the remarketing of Affinity's automated loanmachines (ALMs) to current and future customers of ACS's MoneyMaker ATMnetwork, which incorporates more than 3,450 ATMs.A joint venture between IBM Corp., White Plains, NY, and Risk ManagementTechnologies, Berkeley, CA, will lead to the development of a massivelyparallel processing asset-liability and data warehouse solution.  The twofirms will provide RMT's Radar system on IBM's RISC System/6000 Scalable PowerParallel system.  Sumitomo Bank in Tokyo, the world's fourth largest bank, isinstalling the system.Lexington, MA-based Logica is linking arms with Santa Clara, CA-based EdifyCorp.  to crank out interactive banking services.  Logica is the U.S.subsidiary of an international software, systems integration and consultingfirm and Edify vends software geared toward helping firms set up their owninteractive Web sites.Little Rock, AR-based Alltel Information Services has teamed up with BankersSystems Inc., headquartered in St.  Cloud, MN, to develop a new breed of loangeneration software.  The Rembrandt Lending System, to be released in 1996, isa suite of lending applications developed specifically for Windows 95 andWindows NT.  Alltel will provide support services.CONTRACT SIGNINGSDiners Club International, a subsidiary of Citicorp, has signed on AmericanManagement Systems, Fairfax, VA, to set up a global system and standards forits international collections activities.  Serving more than seven millioncustomers in 175 countries, Diners Club International will implement AMS'sComputer Assisted Collection System (CACS) into a suite of standards fordistribution to 50 of its processing centers.Standard Federal Bank, with $13 billion in assets, has selected Olivetti NorthAmerica's Mosaic OA applications and tool set for automating the retailoperations of its 164 branches.  Both Standard Federal and Olivetti are basedin Liberty Lake, WA.Fleet Financial Group has awarded Wayne, PA-based SEI Corp.  a five-yearcontract, selecting SEI's trust and securities accounting software for itsmore than $70-billion trust business.EARNINGS NEWSDallas-based Affiliated Computer Services, Inc.  announced record-breakingfiscal 1996 first quarter revenues of $89.3 million, up 26 percent from thecomparable period last year.  Net income also climbed to a record high of $5.7million, up from $3.8 million.  During this period, ACS signed a strategicalliance with Integrated Delivery Technologies, established a bank-cardsubsidiary entitled ACS Merchant Services, acquired Dallas-based Intellifileand added 450 ATMs to the company's MoneyMaker network.US Order, Inc.  reported more than a 250-percent jump in third quarterrevenue.  The Herndon, VA-based company earned $1.1 million for the threemonths ending Sept.  30, 1995, compared to 1994's third quarter revenue totalof $341,872.  US Order's net loss for the quarter decreased by more than 50percent to $847,528 after 1994's third quarter net loss of $1.7 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Electronic Money:  A Legislative Can Of WormsA vast, unregulated terrain looms ahead as new payment methods-from smartcards to stored-value cards to electronic cash-hit the marketplace.Unfortunately, the current laws that monitor these fledgling products are notnew themselves.  Minute amendments aside, the most recent round of electronicfunds transfer rules were written at least ten years ago.  Today, new paymenttechnologies are stirring up a whole new set of regulatory dilemmas to bedealt with, not to mention potential fraud pitfalls.Industry experts and regulators are examining whether existing rules fit thenew environment, whether amendments must be written or altogether newregulations drafted, and even more fundamentally, which entities have thejurisdiction to regulate each of the new payment vehicles and write the lawsin the first place.Fast action neededGovernment higher-ups concede that swift action is necessary.  Recently,Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Alan Blinder told the House Subcommittee onDomestic and International Monetary Policy, "Clarifying the legal andregulatory structure that will govern electronic money products is one areathat may need prompt attention from both policymakers and the industry.  Inthis case, failure of the government to act may, ironically, impede ratherthan facilitate private-sector developments."In the mind of at least one banker, one aspect of the coming regulatoryplaying field is clear.  "Regulation should take place at the national level,"says Robert Egan, vice president in Chemical Bank's legal department and a keyplayer in the Financial Services Technology Consortium, a national squadron ofbanks, technology firms, consultants and universities working on varioustechnology projects.  "If you have to deal with local state laws on cards, itbecomes impossible to market a product that can go across state lines."  Thatdynamic is especially important for Internet transactions, where buyer,seller, bank, issuer and online server could all be in different states orcountries.Egan raises another issue.  Cards jointly issued by groups of companies andthat carry multiple functions "result in an overlap of regulators."  Shouldstored-value calling cards, for example, be regulated by the Federal Reserveor the Federal Communications Commission?  "There needs to be some effort tocoordinate [who governs what]."Few wheels in motionSo far, the only concrete action taken in this rocky regulatory arena is aSenate proposal in October to exempt smart cards from Regulation E of theElectronic Funds Transfer Act.  Led by Senators Robert Bennet (R., Utah) andRichard Shelby (R., Alabama), the exemption would free card issuers fromhaving to replace funds on lost or stolen cards and from having to printreceipts for transactions, as stipulated by Reg E."With the new technologies, paper receipt generation is not always feasible,"says Mike Shade, vice president of smart cards at VeriFone, Redwood City, CA.The company is a key player in the SmartCash venture, a group of 11 banks andvarious card technology providers creating the first stored-value cardbusiness that will extend nationwide.  "Electronic receipts may be possible,but certainly not in the form Reg E asks for.  One of the niches smart cardsare supposed to fill is the vending machine, and purchases of that nature.  Itwould be difficult to generate receipts [for purchases of such small amounts]in a manner that complies with Reg E."One alternative to producing paper receipts for small-dollar, stored-valuetransactions is to generate receipts only when loading value onto a card.Ending the paper trail at that point would avoid the burdensome expense ofconstantly generating paper for small-value purchases.What about lost or stolen funds on smart cards?  "If I were to go to my bankand withdraw $100 in $20 bills and then lose one of the bills, I can't go backto the bank for a refund," notes Paul Seader, an attorney affiliated with thelaw firm of Hughes, Hubbard & Reed, and who advises the electronic-cash vendorDigiCash in New York City.  "But what's the status of an electronic cashwithdrawal in this regard, either via a smart card or the Internet?  Theseissues need to be addressed in the contractual arrangements that underlie theissuance of smart cards or electronic cash."You say tomato, I say tomahtoeMuch of the regulatory discourse revolves around whether the new technologieswill be seen as resembling their physical world look-alikes, or as entirelydifferent from their predecessors.  Do Internet credit-card payments, forexample, fit into the current mold of rules for card transactions over thephone and in retail outlets?  "I think regulators are beginning to changetheir approach, to form new categories instead of forcing new technologiesinto old categories," says Magdalena Yesil, director of marketing at Reston,VA-based CyberCash, which is already shooting out encrypted credit-cardpayments on the Internet.  "The Internet itself is going to be a whole newcategory."One innovation that appears to diverge sharply from its real-world counterpartis ecash, Amsterdam-based DigiCash's Internet currency, which made its U.S.debut on the Internet in October (see December BTN).Dan Schutzer, vice president and director of advanced technology at Citibankand director of the Financial Services Technology Consortium, throws out someinteresting questions:  "Will banks exchange ecash for currency, or will it bethe equivalent of currency?  If not, the value of ecash could fluctuaterelative to other companies' electronic money, to the dollar itself and toother currencies."  And then Wall Streeters would start placing bets on ecashexchange rates!An oft-cited concern about ecash is whether a consumer has recourse if a harddrive crashes, the ecash disappears, and it just so happens the owner did notmake a backup copy on disk.  Would Digicash or the issuing bank be held liableto replace the ecash, or is the consumer out of luck?  In this case, if ecashis equated with regular cash, the consumer is out of luck.  But if anamendment declares ecash to be electronic funds, reimbursement would be inorder.Digicash currently doesn't have a policy providing for reimbursement, althoughit's working on one.  On its Web site (http://www.digicash.com), Digicashprovides this nebulous assurance:  "In case your computer were ever to breakdown, if you had written down the secret random seed number you choseinitially when opening your account, future versions would let you use it torecreate the coins and thereby obtain a free re-issue of the signed coins thatwere lost."  St.  Louis-based Mark Twain Bank, the first U.S.  insitution toissue ecash, notes on its Web site that losing ecash is like losing cash outof a real-world wallet.  The bank advises consumers to only stash as muchmoney in the hard drive as one would in the wallet.Square peg in a round hole?Unspent funds on smart cards are the subject of numerous regulatory questions.The funds could be subject to Federal Reserve requirements that 10 percent ofthe floating amount be maintained in a non-interest bearing account againstthe unspent funds, says Bob Ballen, partner at the law firm of Schwartz &Ballen in Washington D.C.For banks involved in smart-card initiatives, such a ruling "would certainlyhave an impact on the earning power of those dollars," says W.  Doug King,executive vice president of consumer credit services at Wachovia Corp., whichis participating in both the Visa stored-value pilot and the SmartCash pilot."But we have been faced with Reserve requirements on deposits forever."In addition, floating funds on smart cards could affect the Fed's ability tomonitor monetary supply by distorting the perception of the amount incirculation.  This could spur a call for disclosure regulation in the future."Having to disclose [floating funds on smart cards] would hinder our desire togo into smart cards," King says.  In his view, however, disclosure isunnecessary.  The Visa system, for example "is fully auditable," he says."All transactions are routed through a single settlement unit."Unspent funds on stored-value cards could also fit into current laws governingescheatment, or abandoned property, although these vary from state to state.William Keenan, senior vice president of marketing and business development atNatWest Bank in Delaware and chair of the legal and public policy subcommitteeof the Smart Card Forum, suggests that cards be confiscated if their value isnot used up after two years.  "But who would regulate that?"  Keenan asks."The Fed would argue that it should be the one.  Stolen cards, on the otherhand, can be deactivated through card readers."The Mondex mystiqueOnce the industry settles all the regulatory issues related to unspent fundson stored-value cards, it still will have to grapple with Mondex.  Thisstored-value card, the brainchild of London-based National Westminster Bank,is currently being piloted in Swindon, U.K.  If all goes well, the cards willhit the U.S., Canada and Hong Kong next year.Mondex cards work just like cash.  Card owners-be they two friends or acustomer and merchant-can transfer funds to one another without going througha middleman.  Because Mondex does not have a central settlement mechanism,many argue that it would be difficult to track how much money is changinghands.But Mondex's chief executive officer, Tim Jones, asserts, "Point-of-saleterminals can remember everything they do, making Mondex more auditable thancash.  It's not a fully accountable system [like some stored-value programs],but still more so than [cash].  We are in discussions with U.S.  regulators.They are doing a good job so far."However, unspent Mondex funds may pose other problems.  "Somewhere, Mondexdollars, either in a reserve amount or actual dollars representing it, is ondeposit and a bank is making lots of money on the float.  From the FederalReserve's standpoint, how do you keep an eye on the currency flow?"  asksHenry Polmer, a partner at Bell, Boyd & Lloyd in Washington D.C., and legalcounsel to Electronic Funds Transfer Association.Auditability is a key component of levying taxes, as well as curbing criminalactivity.  "Taxation is not at all difficult with stored-value transactions atthe point of sale," says Bernard David, director of marketing and planning forthe Smart Card Enterprise at DE-based Electronic Payment Services, aparticipant in the Smart Cash enterprise.  "But with the anonymity oftransactions on the Internet, will taxable transactions be able to be traced,as well as enforced by taxing authorities?"A price for privacyAt the same time that banks face auditability issues with electronic money,they also must deal with requirements of protecting customer information underthe Bank Secrecy Act.  The Bank Secrecy Act requires financial institutions toreport cash transactions of more than $10,000, as well as "suspicioustransactions," to federal law enforcement agencies.  "The cost of auditabilityis a loss of privacy," notes William Binzel, vice president of governmentrelations at MasterCard in Washington D.C.  "Conversely, the cost ofprotecting privacy is not being able to catch people who are doing launderingor other illegal activities."When larger chunks of money start changing hands on the Internet, rules andsystems may have to be set up to act as financial police.  For example,digital signatures and other technologies could authenticate the parties to atransaction.  Currently, Internet transactions veer toward the $10 to $100range, which makes money laundering over the Internet as yet inconvenient.That doesn't mean money-laundering Internet schemes and other crimes won'tcrop up.  Stanley Morris, director of the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network(FinCEN) of the Treasury, described the maladies that could plague theInternet, in a recent hearing of the House Subcommittee on Domestic andInternational Monetary Policy:"Suppose my Internet user is a narcotics trafficker.  Consider the invoicesthe trafficker might pay, the supplies he might order and the transactions hemight accomplish if, for instance, he could download an unlimited amount ofcash from a smart card to a computer, and then transmit those funds to othersmart cards in locations around the world-all anonymously, all without anaudit trail, and all without the need to resort to a traditional financialinsitution."A scary proposition, indeed.  But unlike the woeful circumstances thatultimately resulted in the formation of the Securities and Exchange Commissionand other regulatory agencies, industry experts say a Depression-like crisiswill not be a necessary impetus to establish electronic-money laws.  Says Eganof Chemical Bank, "You hope the regulators will be sufficiently on top ofthings so that when something [bad] happens they can have the tools to dealwith it."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Find The Bank:Wachovia Bank recently unveiled the handsome design of the stored-value Visacards it will issue during the 1996 Atlanta Olympic games.  Most prominent isthe athelete at the top of the card, in dramatic motion.  Next, one noticesthe Atlanta skyline.  Emblazoned at the bottom of the card is the Visa Cashlogo and the chip emblem.  Want to know which bank issued this bank card?You'll have to turn the card over to find, finally, Wachovia's name at thebottom.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996A Card By Any Other Name...It's all in the cards, or is it the name?  Major players in the bank-cardarena are realizing that the skillful naming of new card products has a handin their success.  The barrage of new bank-card options-from stored-valuecards, to debit cards, to multi-function smart cards-is increasing theimportance of effective naming.Hence, Visa U.S.A.  has officially adopted the name "Visa Cash" for itsstored-value cards issued in the U.S., which are currently serving as cashsubstitutes for purchases under $10.  The Visa Cash name and logo wereintroduced last November in Atlanta, prior to its usage at this year's SummerOlympic Games.  The prepaid bank cards operate with embedded computer chipsthat store money as electronic data.Visa's competitors have also opted for simplicity in naming their stored-valuecards.  MasterCard International has chosen "MastercardCash," while SmartCash,the stored value card venture spearheaded by Electronic Payment Services Inc.,will offer SmartCash cards.While the naming of these "cash" cards is straightforward, consumers stillhave to be sure not to confuse them with MasterMoney or VisaCheck cards.Known by bankers as debit cards-since transaction amounts are automaticallywithdrawn from accounts rather than prepaid-both companies nixed using "debit"to describe such cards, due to its negative connotation with consumers.MasterCard surveyed more than 5,000 customers before deciding on theMasterMoney moniker for debit cards, further proof that the name can say itall.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996The Changing Physics Of CheckingQuiz those individuals with a stake in the business on their attitudes towardchecking and you're apt to receive a nearly universal response:  Checking is abusiness undergoing colossal change."It's the new physics of banking," observes Dan Fisher, senior vice presidentand cashier, Victoria Bank and Trust, Victoria, TX.  Industry consolidation isthe leading cause of change for the checking business today.  Fisher mustunderstand this fact first hand:  Victoria Bank, a $2 billion-asset bank,situated in southeast Texas, about midway between Houston and Corpus Christi,will soon become part of the Norwest Corp.  family of banks.  Norwest, amulti-bank holding company headquartered in Minneapolis, tendered a bid forVictoria Bank in November; the acquisition is expected to be finalized earlythis year.What is to become of Fisher's check processing shop once the acquisition byNorwest is completed epitomizes the $64,000 question confronting bankers ofevery ilk involved in the current consolidation frenzy.  No matter howefficient a bank's check operation, experts note, it's difficult for anacquiring bank to justify redundant check processing facilities because theydetract too much from the economies bank consolidations offer.  It's only amatter of time before merged banks begin consolidating check shops.  "With allof the merger activity we saw in 1995, we can expect to see consolidation ofgreater check volumes into single check shops in 1996," predicts Stanley (Ned)Miltko, senior vice president, Littlewood, Shain and Co., Exton, PA.Miltko speculates that, at merging institutions, consolidation will throttlethe processes that support widescale implementation of new technologies, likeelectronic check presentment (ECP) and image check processing.  "Technologyinitiatives are going to have to wait to some degree for the consolidationprocess to shake out," he says.ECP, the equalizerClearly, there is a case to be made for ECP.  In the vernacular of many bankoperations executives, ECP is the great equalizer.  "ECP puts everyone on anequal footing," explains Fisher.  "Distances don't matter anymore when you'reclearing checks electronically."  Nor does size; a small bank can presentchecks with the same ease as its big bank competitor, provided each bank inthe exchange process is ECP-compatible.  "It levels the playing field," saysFisher.But there are many issues that must be resolved before ECP can begin tofulfill its promise of widescale improvements in the efficiency of the checkclearing process.  For example, notes Miltko, in moving away from paperpresentment to a check clearing system that relies more on the exchange ofelectronic files, banks will need to develop techniques for the integration ofback office systems, like accounting and statement rendering, with this newcheck clearing model.  "It's not as simple as installing ECP receive software;it's a whole reengineering of the back office that's required," says Miltko."That's really a tall order."Today, ECP is almost always the electronic transmission of check paymentinformation in advance of the physical exchange of checks.  The idea is to geta jump start on the processing of paper in hopes of identifying early in theprocessing cycle items to be returned.  Clearly, if the paper check never hadto move-if it were truncated at the point of purchase or the bank of firstdeposit-the hassles of reconciling paper and electronic presentments woulddisappear.Truncation woesBut check truncation brings with it an assortment of other problems.  Many ofthe legal assurances that make the check a preferred method of payment inAmerica today simply don't translate into the world of the electronic check.Banks need timely access to truncated checks, or at least to the images ofthose items, to mitigate risks such as return item risk.And then there is the matter of storage-where do banks stow all the checks, orimages of checks, that are truncated and converted to electronic items?  Theseimportant questions must be answered before electronic check processes candisplace a significant share of paper check exchanges.The Federal Reserve organized a panel of bankers and Fed officials late lastyear in an effort to try and address these and related issues.  But before theFed's Advisory Group on ECP can begin to make headway, members will need toagree upon a "common vision" for ECP, notes Paul Connolly, first vicepresident, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and director of retail paymentproducts for the Federal Reserve Bank System.  "I think all of us wouldbenefit from developing a common vision for ECP:  ideally, a vision ofpaperless collection of checks, and certainly of reduced reliance on paper; avision in which checks could be written by businesses and consumers, and thencollected electronically instead of by processing and delivering the paperchecks themselves," Connolly said in a speech to bankers last fall.Not everyone is optimistic about ECP and truncation, however, even with theFed leading the charge.  One of the real sticking points, says Richard Ercole,Huntington Treasury Management Co., Columbus, OH, is how you supporttruncation at the point of sale.  The model most industry executives point torelies upon the automated clearing house (ACH) to clear the electronic itemscreated from truncated checks.  And the National Automated Clearing HouseAssociation (NACHA) has gone so far as to create a multi-industry panel, theElectronic Check Council, to promote this approach to truncation.But Ercole, who participates on the NACHA panel, says there are many legal andregulatory issues that get in the way of truncation.  For example, once acheck is converted to an ACH debit, in today's world at least, it becomessubject to Regulation E, the Fed's consumer electronic funds transferregulation.  Reg E, among other things, provides consumers with a 60-dayopportunity to rescind contested EFT transactions.There also have been questions raised about whether or not consumers should berequired to authorize the truncation of checks tendered at the point of sale.An initial test plan for POS truncation, involving only return checks, alreadyhas been placed on the back burner because of questions such as these, Ercolenotes.  Any widespread implementation of check truncation at the point of saleis probably a long way off, he suggests.Trading in efficiency?"Quite frankly, I'm not sure we can truncate checks at the point of receiptwithout making the payment system less efficient," says Ercole.  "I thinkeither legislation or regulations are going to have to be changed, at least asfar as forward presentment is concerned."Another contentious issue raised by truncation is storage.  Truncation oflockbox items illustrates the situation aptly.  As image technology makesinroads in lockbox operations, experts say the case for truncating checkscollected through lockboxes becomes even more compelling.  "What do you needthe check copy for if you can have the image of the check?"  asks RichardPoje, a partner at Treasury Strategies Inc., a Chicago cash managementconsulting firm.  But, then, who is to retain the images of those checks forthose situations when a payor or payee needs a copy of an item?"The absence of an accessible, economic archive is a major impediment totruncation on a broad-scale basis," says Poje.  To overcome this impediment,Poje suggests bankers turn to the Fed.  "I think the Fed is the naturalprovider" of check image archive services.  "They are the honest broker in thebusiness; the one party everybody trusts."But how will the Fed get the images?  Today, only about one-third of theestimated 63 billion checks written that are tendered for payment each yearclear though the Fed.  "The concept of a repository needs to be developedaround the whole clearing structure," says Jay Simmons, vice president,Citibank.  "The Fed should be doing it for the items that clear through them."But to forward to the Fed for storage those check images that are not clearedthrough the Fed, would diminish many of the economies promised by truncation,Simmons suggests.The more appropriate role for the Fed in the evolution of electronic checkprocesses, Simmons says, is in rule writing.  As a regulator, the Fed canimplement rules that provide the assurances banks need to overcome theshortcomings of ECP and truncation.  "I think that's their role in life," hesays.Putting imaging in its placeAnd, what about imaging?  After years of promise, imaging has yet to makemajor inroads into the labor-intensive proof-of-deposit function.  But imagingis gaining favor for specialized applications, such as lockbox and return itemprocessing.  "To me, an imaging system focused on returns makes a great dealof sense," says Simmons.  "It takes a lot of the risk out of the process."During the course of a typical month, Simmons notes, a major cash managementbank might return between 4,000 and 5,000 checks that have been presentedagainst controlled disbursement accounts.  Sending those checks back throughthe paper return cycle can take upwards of five days; transmitting images ofthe items is a far quicker alternative.One potential obstacle, Simmons concedes, is the current lack of imagingstandards.  Differences in the way the two major brands of check imagingequipment-Unisys Corp.  and IBM Corp.-convert paper checks to electronicimages makes broad-scale image interchange an iffy proposition.At least two groups-the New York Clearing House (NYCH) and the FinancialServices Technology Consortium (FSTC)-are working on projects to perfect theuse of images to support the check return process and check image interchange,Simmons notes.  (Citibank is a member of both groups.)  If the FSTC and NYCHprojects prove successful, imaging could help the private sector chip away atthe Fed's return item processing business.Today, the vast majority of check returns are routed through the Fed.  It'slargely a matter of convenience, explains Huntington's Ercole.  The Fed'sprices are such that it is often cheaper to send the Fed a mixed cashletterthan it is for a bank to sort the items itself.  Imaging, Ercole suggests,makes it worthwhile for a third party, like a clearing house, to fine sort andcapture the images of checks for its members (or clients), thereby enabling itto compete head-to-head with the Fed.Online access to check images, he believes, could expedite the return processby at least a day.  Ercole's parent bank, Huntington, is a founding member ofthe National Clearing House Association (NCHA), which competes with the Fedfor nationwide check clearing business.  It's all in keeping with what bankerslike Victoria Bank's Fisher like to refer to as the "changing physics" ofbanking, where the evolution of check products and services draws upon theunlimited power of electronics rather than the physical limitations of paper."We have a system that is designed to deal with exceptions," explains Fisher."So why not create an image-based infrastructure for return items?"The conversion of other paper-based check processes to electronics, suggestFisher and others, will just follow naturally.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996INTERACTIVE BEATWill New Service Send Customers Out The Door?  Whether the newest feature tobe added to the interactive banking package from Online Resources &Communications, Inc., McLean, VA, will be a boom or bust to banks is entirelydebatable.Online's Interbank Transfer Service gives consumers an easy way to shop aroundfor the most competitive banking rates and electronically transfer money intobanks that offer the most attractive options.  At the same time, however,consumers also have the ability to take money out of their banks more quicklyand easily than ever.  Whether a bank is on the winning or losing end of thatequation will determine just how much value they find in Online's newoffering."It seems absurd that banks would want to offer this service," says DavidStewart, consultant at Global Concepts, Inc., Atlanta.  "Obviously, it ispotentially damaging for banks that are looking to maintain and strengthen arelationship with the customer."  In essence, banks are encouraging a "shoparound" attitude, Stewart says.  The only benefit may be if banks believe itadvantageous to offer as many options as possible, even at the risk of losingbusiness, he adds.To use the interbank transfer feature, a consumer need only sign up (at noadded cost) for the service through an Online Resources client financialinstitution that is marketing the feature.  Consumers can then access funds invirtually any U.S.  institution from their home- or office-based PCs orscreenphones.  Three banks that are currently using the service includeNationsbank, Comstar Federal Credit Union, Gaithersburg, MD, and Richmond,CA-based Mechanics Bank."I'm not sure there's any way to ensure that funds won't leave your bank,"says Alex Hart, vice president of customer access at NationsBank.  "But, thebest way to keep funds in your bank is to offer customers the services theywant."  As a service provider, Hart concludes that a bank needs to be focusedon offering the type of functionality and services desired by customers.  "Youshould not be so proprietary to deny customers the conveniences they wantpurely for defensive reasons," he says.Online Resources contends that its new service feature is as beneficial forbanks as it is for consumers.  Says Lori Stewart, Online Resource's seniorvice president of marketing, the service is a "big benefit" for banks becauseit is the first interactive way to transfer new funds into the bank.12 Merchants Get Smart With First UnionFirst Union Corp.  is the first to announce merchant commitments toparticipate in a smart-card trial during this year's Summer Olympics inAtlanta.  The First Union Visa Cash card will be accepted by most of themerchants as early as first quarter of the year.  Two other banks scheduled toissue Visa Cash cards-NationsBank and Wachovia-had not announced any merchantagreements as of November.The 12 merchants signed up with First Union for the test launch includeBaskin-Robbins, BellSouth, Blimpie, Chick-fil-A, Communications Central, CrownCentral Petroleum, Domino's Pizza, the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid TransitAuthority, Pollo Tropical, Star Enterprise, Taco Bell and United ArtistTheaters.  According to First Union officials, several other merchants havealready signed letters of intent for participation.The prepaid stored-value cards are available in $10, $20, $50 and eventually$100 values, and may be obtained by anyone regardless of their bankaffiliation or credit history.  There is no fee to buy or use the cards, whichcan be purchased with cash, credit or debit cards.  Omaha, NE-based AppliedCommunications, Inc.  is providing the BASE24 software needed to load cashvalue onto the First Union cards, which can be used wherever the Visa Cashlogo appears.Visa is officially leading the smart card race in North America, withLondon-based Mondex running close behind.  Mondex just announced a 12-monthpilot in the city of Guelph, Ontario scheduled for the latter half of thisyear.  Mondex began piloting the system last July in Swindon, England andreports usage by more than 8,000 consumers.  Plans are also underway foradditional pilots in the U.S., Asia and Europe.Other competitors include Electronic Payment System's SmartCash (11participants in this), which is expected to hit the U.S.  market sometimelater this year along with Mastercard International's MastercardCash, alreadyin circulation in Australia.  Even American Express is making sure it is notleft behind in the dust.  Teaming up with MCI, American Express Special Teamsis planning to market "integrated service" cards for stored-value applicationsto college campuses in the U.S.  and abroad for a 1996 release.All-in-one cards comingBy mid 1996, First Union will introduce reloadable stored-value cards.Customers will be able to add cash value to the cards by using a First UnionATM machine to access their checking or savings accounts.  The eventual goalis an all-in-one card that will function as stored-value, debit and/or creditcard.Next year, First Union plans to expand Visa Cash cards to other cities,including the greater Washington, D.C.  area, Richmond, VA, and major Floridametropolitan areas.  Major cities in North Carolina, South Carolina andTennessee are planned for 1998.MasterCard Bounces Checkfree For ServantisMasterCard International announced an alliance with Norcross, GA-basedServantis Systems, Inc.  as part of several enhancements being made to itsMasterBanking program.  The Servantis alliance will eventually override theexisting agreement between Checkfree Corp., the Columbus, OH-based billpayment processor, and MasterCard that began three years ago with the launchof the MasterBanking program.  The enhanced MasterBanking program will beavailable during the first quarter of this year.  MasterCard contends thatunder a mutually modified agreement, the 50,000 MasterBanking customers whosetransactions are currently passed on to Checkfree will be converted over tothe Servantis system.  Full conversion is expected by mid 1996.Dual role"There is no problem with Checkfree, it's just a different choice of atechnology partner," says A.  Christian Frederick, MasterCard senior vicepresident of remote banking and strategic planning.  "We wanted the dualfunctionality offered by Servantis rather than just the bill payment optionoffered by Checkfree."The dual functionality Frederick refers to is Servantis' ability to offer bothhome banking and bill payment capabilities.  The Servantis software allowscustomers looking for simple, quick access to their finances to checkbalances, transfer funds, pay bills and send and receive email messages to andfrom their financial institution through Windows- and Macintosh-basedcomputers.  Servantis will market these products and services as Bank StreetPlatinum.US Order Delivers Smarter Phones At Lower CostAvailable at a cost of about $200 (down from $250), U.S.  Order's smart phonesnot only got cheaper, they got smarter.  The Herndon, VA-based companyannounced three new interactive features for its PhonePlus line of smarttelephones.With the introduction of three features-EZPage text paging, EZPost emailservice and FastFind visual directory assistance-PhonePlus smart phones nowhave the capability to type and send full text messages directly to pagers,send email messages via the Internet and receive nationwide directoryassistance information visually on the phone's display screen.  These threeapplications add to its established functionality, which includes an interfacewith Visa's electronic banking and bill payment service.  The screenphonesalso provide a personal phone directory, visual caller ID and visual messageretrieval features.Banc One, headquartered in Columbus, OH, and Memphis-based First TennesseeBank have both begun deployment of the Phone Plus Smart Phone while 18 otherfinancial institutions are planning to deploy the phones for technicalevaluation and trials.  Current PhonePlus customers will be able to downloadthe new applications directly from the US Order host computer.  New customerscan purchase the new smart phones through GTE and Sprint.IRE Helps Secure Quicken OnlineBaltimore-based Information Engineering Resources is providing Intuit ServiceCorp.  with secure remote access products to protect electronic commercetransactions.  The encryption equipment, now available through Intuit'sQuicken software, is packaged in a small, portable case designed forconvenient use in home banking.Banks have been up and running with Quicken since Oct.  26, 1995.  The onlineQuicken service enables consumers to bank, pay bills and perform otherfinancial tasks by dialing up their bank and downloading data directly intothe software, which then organizes consumers' records.Founded in the early 1980's, Information Engineering Resources is a publiccompany that designs, manufactures and markets secure, encryption-basedcommunications systems.  The company reported revenues in excess of $4 millionlast year, up 60 percent from the previous year, according to companyspokesperson Jill Leukhardt.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996PRODUCT OF THE MONTH:  Shaping A Competitive ImageShortly after First Commerce Bank of Georgia, $120 million in assets,installed the PrimeImage Check Imaging System, bank officials had proof theymade the right decision.  With PrimeImage, the bank was able to detect afraudulent-check situation that would have resulted in a loss of $160,000."Since the system allows instant retrieval of the previous day's deposits, wewere able to substantiate a suspected kite, therefore saving us from asubstantial loss," says Randy Whitehead, group vice president.  "Withmicrofilm, there is no way we would have been able access our records as fastto move on the situation."The PrimeImage Check Imaging System from Carrollton, GA-based Greenway Corp.is a Windows-NT based check and document imaging software system.  One uniqueaspect of PrimeImage is that it utilizes a Redundant Array of Independent Disk(RAID) system for online, magnetic storage of images.  The online RAID systemreduces statement preparation time by 90 percent over optical storage systems.With PrimeImage, the front and back of each check and deposit slip is capturedby electronic cameras mounted on an image-enabled check reader/sorter andtransferred to a RAID system for high capacity, online magnetic storage withfault tolerant safety.  The software system has the capability to assemble theimages and print up to 33 double-sided check-statement pages per minute incheck-number order.  Thus, it streamlines operations by simplifying thecheck-sorting process and reducing the number of employees involved.First Commerce Bank served as the beta site for PrimeImage.  Fully implementedin June 1995, the system processes all checks for more than 10,000 FirstCommerce accounts.  Whitehead points out that the bank has also prevented fouror five other potential losses since installing the complete system in August.He concludes, "It really has been an excellent overall move for the bank interms of time, accuracy, staff productivity and customer service."Banks using the PrimeImage software report that customers find the newtechnology improves the way they balance their checkbooks.  First Commerce'sWhitehead says "customers love it" and reports a 99.5 percent satisfactionrate with the new laser printed statements.First National Bank of Griffin, $150 million in assets, installed thePrimeImage system in November.  Prior to the system's implementation, theGeorgia-based bank conducted focus groups comprised of a variety ofprofessional and lay people to determine consumer opinion on the newtechnology.  The overwhelming majority agreed the system was a quicker andeasier alternative to the "old" checking system.Elderly customers, in particular, were especially appreciative of the easy tounderstand statements, says Bill Homes, senior vice president at FirstNational Bank of Griffin.  With PrimeImage, checks are reduced to print-outsthat can be stored in a three-ring notebook provided by the bank.  "Ourcustomers are very comfortable and extremely pleased with our new system," hesays.Other banks using the PrimeImage software include Moultre, GA-based ABCBancorp ($314 million in assets), which installed the system in December, andNorthwest Georgia Bank in Ringgould, GA ($180 million in assets), which willbe up and running with the system in February.-Joanna KolorPrimeImageGreenway Corp.  1340 North Park Street Carrollton, GA 30117 Price:  $258,000to $475,000 Release Date:  August 1995 Number of Bank Users:  4Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996An Unbalanced Budget BurdenIt's not easy being a medium-sized institution these days.  That's at leastone of the findings of an annual survey of bank and thriftinformation-technology expenditures from Mentis Corp., Durham, NC.The amount of money banks and thrifts of all sizes spent to purchase newinformation systems, hardware and software reached $4.3 billion in 1995, upfrom $3.7 billion in 1994, a 17-percent increase.  In addition to the $4.3billion of capital invested in new technology, the industry spent more than$20 billion on personnel, facilities, external services and other expensecategories associated with running existing systems and equipment.Interestingly, the extent to which banks increased their capital investment intechnology differed greatly depending on the deposit size of the bank, thesurvey found.  With consolidations roiling and churning the industrypractically weekly, such size-based spending suggests banks are usingtechnology as a tool to either defend, expand or control their turf.Medium-sized institutions were the most aggressive investors in new technologyin 1995.  For many of them, potent technology-based strategies were the key tomaintaining their independence against ever-bigger banks encroaching on theirterritory.  Mentis found that the segment with between $1 billion and $4billion in deposits experienced an increase in capital IT spending of 41percent, from $413 million to $582 million.  That hefty increase occurred evenas the number of branches these institutions own and operate went down (from11,278 in 1994 to 10,765 in 1995).  By the same token, the segment ofinstitutions with between $500 million and $1 billion in deposits boosted ITcapital spending by 29 percent, from $184 million to $238 million, even thoughthey too, had fewer branches to maintain (5,765 in 1994 versus 5,107 in 1995).When examined by branch, average technology spending for institutions withbetween $1 billion and $4 billion in deposits increased by 48 percent perbranch between 1994 and 1995 (from $36,620 to $54,064 per branch).  For thesegment with between $500 million and $1 billion, such spending per branchincreased a 46 percent (from $31,917 to $46,603).  These stats lead to thesummary that medium-sized institutions may well be feeling the heat to competemore effectively-either to keep up with large banks, or at least avoid beingtaken over by them.  Clearly, banks and thrifts of this size are usingtechnology to pursue aggressive business strategies toward those ends.Aggressive goalsOne case in point, among many, is Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, NC.  The $5billion institution is surrounded on all sides by some formidable big-bankcompetition, including NationsBank, First Union and Wachovia.  Over the pastyear, Centura has geared the bulk of its bank technology spending toward avery specific, aggressive goal:  toward becoming the "money manager" of itscustomers, says Tom Rogers, executive vice president.  Investing in technologywas virtually the only way to ensure the success of that strategy.A month or two from now, Centura will wrap up a branch automation project thatshould facilitate the bank's goal of better understanding customers' financialsituations, their needs and their profitability profiles.  Centura'sinstallation of Windows-based SellStation software from Ampersand Corp.  (nowowned by EDS Corp.)  at the teller and platform lines hooks into a customerinformation system, from Customer Insight Co., Denver.  Customer Insight'sAnalytix Software delivers customer information, including profitability,directly to salespeople at the platform, helping them to gear product pitchesto the appropriate customers.All of these systems and features at the platform are helping to buildbusiness in the bank's new brokerage unit, which offers insurance andinvestment accounts.  Rogers was not specific about revenues or new accountsgenerated in this area, but relates that "from a business plan standpoint, thenew units are making very good progress."For Centura, technology was the "tool chest" that helped make it possible.Quite simply, Rogers says, "we need those [technology] tools to compete, andto achieve our objective of being money managers."Big banks reign inCompared to medium-sized banks and thrifts, the biggest institutions spent farless on acquiring new technology in 1995.  Banks and thrifts with more than $4billion in deposits increased capital IT investments by only 17 percent, from$2.3 billion to $2.6 billion.  The increase is even more modest in light ofthe fact that the number of branches these institutions own and operate alsoincreased, from 33,942 to 35,222.Many large banks and thrifts, having merged recently, are being sidetrackedfrom new-investment initiatives as they grapple with the huge jobs ofeliminating multiple information systems and paring overlapped branchnetworks.  Of course, there's light at the end of the tunnel for these banksand thrifts.  As these large institutions succeed in eliminating redundancies,they should be able to redirect future IT expenditures toward capitalinvestments in new strategic initiatives.Chase Manhattan and Chemical Bank, to be officially combined as the largestbank in the land come March, are in that limbo stage right now.  But with theexpectation of eliminating 12,000 positions, consolidating back-office systemswithin three years, and saving $1.5 billion in expenses, the combined bankshould be in a position to invest in new technology before long.  The newChase is predicting a revenue fall within the first year of merged operation,a year of break-even growth after that, and finally, revenue gains by 1998.The objectives and experiences of small banks and thrifts turned out to bealtogether different from those of larger institutions in 1995, when it cameto investments in technology.  According to the Mentis survey, banks andthrifts with less than $500 million showed a much lower growth rate in theiracquisition of new technology.  Those with between $250 million and $500million in deposits spent 15 percent less investing in new technology (from$229 million to $195 million) while those under $250 million increased theirtechnology expenditures by only 10 percent (from $598 million to $657million).These lagging trends in technology budgets make sense in light of the decreasein the number of branches owned and operated by this segment of the bank andthrift population.  Institutions with between $250 million and $500 million indeposits now operate 728 fewer branches (6,767 in 1994 versus 6,039 in 1995),while those with less than $250 million are dealing with 2,834 fewer branches(28,425 in 1994 versus 25,591 in 1995).Despite the overall decrease in technology investment for small banks andthrifts, the Mentis study shows small institutions are nonetheless beginningto invest in technology at a level that's on par with their larger brethren.Mentis examined how capital technology expenditures compare to institutions'non-interest expenditures-all those expenditures that support a bank'soperations and facilities, such as personnel and technology.For banks and thrifts with deposits of more than $1 billion in deposits, 1995capital technology expenditures amounted to 2.5 percent of total non-interestexpenditures.  For those institutions between $250 million and $1 billion,capital technology spending was 1.9 percent of non-interest expenditures, andfor those with less than $250 million in deposits, it was 2.0 percent.According to Dr.  James Moore, president and CEO of Mentis, the slightlyhigher technology investments of larger banks as a percent of non-interestexpenditures is not a surprise.  "Economies of scale and consolidation in thelarge bank segment allow a greater proportion of total dollars to go towardacquiring new technology," he says, as opposed to managing the currentinfrastructure.The good news is that small banks and thrifts seem to be taking the challengeof a lack of scale economies in stride, especially as advanced technologybecomes more affordable to them.  If small institutions can't spend asaggressively as large ones, they at least seem to be spending wisely.  Taketiny State National Bank of Big Spring, TX.  With $130 million in assets, thebank has not let its small size get in the way of innovative ideas and astutetechnology investments.Busy, busy, busyIts list of technology credits include just completing installation of a checkimaging system, developing a debit-card program through MasterCard'sMasterMoney offering, launching an electronic data interchange (EDI)translation service and offering voice-response access to account balances.Prior to these projects-most of which occurred in 1995-the bank was busyinstalling a fully loaded local area network that runs Windows-basedapplications for lending, account openings and other platform functions.  Onthe agenda for 1996 is home banking.Decisive movesRobert Buckner, first vice president, can't yet quantify the payback the bankhas received, since most of the projects are just starting to have an effecton customers now.  But State National is moving decisively to ensure itsinvestments pay off.In just one example of moving swiftly to offer a service most large banks areonly now just dreaming of, State National will be delivering check images toits fleet of networked PCs to aid customer service efforts.  Bankers will beable to print out the front and back of checks in response to customerrequests.  And in a move that some institutions might think radical, StateNational will charge a fee to customers who want paper checks returned, butwill offer imaged checking-account statements for free.State National is not only thinking big, but is thinking creatively about howto get good returns on technology investments.  Recently, it instituted whatcould be a first:  a wake-up service brought to you by a bank.  Through itsvoice response system, supplied by Regency Voice Systems, Inc., Dallas, StateNational has rigged a wake-up service that sends out ring-a-lings to about 100people every morning.  The message offers the time, the temperature and afriendly "Good morning from State National Bank!"The bank does not feel a need to charge a fee for such calls.  "We figure thatif the first thing you hear every morning is the name of our bank, then prettysoon that's the only name that comes to mind when banking comes up," notesBrunckner.Flexible, free-form thinking like that, in addition to the ever-declining costof PC-based banking applications, will help small banks bring much-neededefficiency gains to technology expenditures.And once a much-needed calm to the industry's current consolidation frenzysettles in, perhaps operating budgets will begin following a more steady,consistent pattern across banks of all sizesBack to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996PRODUCT INTROSFor An Encore, Culverin Promotes Self-ServiceImagine customers who act as tellers for themselves.  Dayton, OH-basedCulverin Corp.  is doing just that, as it positions the self-service packagefor its Encore!  for Windows application system as a labor-saving tool.Recently, Culverin was acquired by CFI ProServices, Portland, OR.The self-service package runs on a touchscreen-equipped PC.  With a cardreader and laser printer, customers can get account and product information,print instant statements and run simple, non-cash transactions.  PINs maintaincustomer security.Although the self-service package can run independently of the Encore!system, Culverin doesn't plan to market it as such, says Robert Feaganes,marketing director.  The software package will probably cost $5,000 to $7,000per workstation, he says.  Add the hardware required to run it, and the systemcomes in priced at less than $10,000.  Culverin Corp., (513) 435-2335.Signatures Go DigitalFrom time immemorial, signatures have been used to positively identify bankcustomers.  With the ID-007, Atlanta-based Cadix International, Inc., bringssignature verification into the electronic age.  A pressure sensitive writingtablet and Windows-based driver software make up the ID-007 system.The ID-007 documents not only the shape of a signature, but also the pressureand speed with which a person signs.  When first registering with the system,a customer signs three to five times to give a large enough sample.  TheID-007 software normalizes the signature and creates a 1.5 KB template.Future signatures are compared to the template.  The system continues toupdate the template with each genuine signature, as the template, like aperson's signature, changes gradually over time.The system operates on either a local computer or over a network.  It costs$250 to $1000 per unit, depending on desired features.  Cadix International,Inc., (404) 804-9951.Identix ID Points A Finger At ImpostorsIdentix, Inc., of Sunnyvale, CA, began shipping its TouchSafe II FingerprintIdentification Terminal, which provides a physical method of verifyingpersonal identities of customers and computer users.The TouchSafe II consists of two elements.  The first is a fingerprint scanner"about the size of four average mice," says Anna Stockel, Identix's directorof fingerprint identification products.  The scanner connects to a standardPC-mounted card.The company using the system creates a database by scanning the fingerprintsof people it will wish to later identify.  The Identix system creates andstores digital templates for these fingerprints.  To positively identify aperson, the system creates a second template from a new scan and compares itwith the old template.Stockel emphasizes that unless the system is specially ordered, fingerprintimages cannot be generated from templates.  This lack, she says, helps calmcustomers or users who fear their fingerprints, after they are scanned, willbe compared to law agency records.Stockel declined to give price information on the Touchsafe II system.Identix, Inc., (408) 739-2000.Budgeting Service For Check CustomersFor businesses and families on a budget, every check written is important.Banks using Budget Master software, a product of Wausau Financial Systems,Inc., can deliver to their budget-conscious customers statements thatcategorize cashed checks into various budget areas.Banks with Budget Master software issue special budget checking accounts.Checks for these accounts are imprinted with 21 to 35 special symbols, createdby OnTRACK Management Systems, Inc., Downey, CA.  When writing a check, acustomer marks one or more symbols for budget categories into which thepayment falls.  At the bank, these check categories are keyed in along withthe other check information required to process a check.Wausau, based in Mosinee, WI, also plans to release an image capture versionof the software, says Joe Gregory, product development manager.  The softwareprice varies depending on a bank's assets, from a minimum of $20,000 to$125,000 for a $2 billion bank.  Wausau Financial Systems, Inc., (715)693-5560UCC Software Prevents Costly Filing MistakesA program from Librasoft, Inc., significantly reduces the risk of clericalerrors that might endanger a banks' legal protection under the UniversalCommercial Code (UCC).  UCC Control, a Windows-based program, automates thecompletion of the more than 177 varieties of UCC forms.Santa Fe, NM-based Librasoft developed UCC Control to automate data entry andtrack compliance with UCC filing regulations.  UCC Control recognizesincongruities in data and notifies users of impending filing lapses.Form update disks for the program are provided quarterly under an arrangementwith UCC Filing Guide.  A single-user package costs $2,495.  Novell networkversions are available.  Librasoft, Inc., (800) 922-4988.Toolkit Eases Transition To Mortgage EDILenders using FiTECH Lending's Mortgage Lending system will be able to createElectronic Data Interchange (EDI) interfaces on demand using the Greensboro,NC, company's EDI Tool Kit.The kit, priced under $10,000, gives lenders the ability to communicate withmultiple vendors that support the EDI standard.  Lenders using EDI improve thetimeliness of business transactions, eliminate redundancy, reduce paperwork,improve business workflow, reduce processing errors, streamline operationalcosts and provide access to additional services.  FiTECH Lending, (800)753-6633.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Visa Pushes Non-Duality For Internet PurchasesThe World Wide Web of the Internet is a whole new world, right?  Visa U.S.A.sure seems to think so.  Recently, the bank card association staked out astrikingly bold claim in the still-developing world of Web commerce.Visa announced it will collaborate with Sony Corp.  of America to build aslick entertainment- and information-rich Web site-one that will takeadvantage of Sony's multiple strengths in filmmaking, music, television,radio, consumer electronics and video games, among others.  The site, dubbedSony Station, will be available for access in spring 1996.  Web surfers willbe able to access loads of new content that Sony is developing for thismedium, such as interactive tours with bands, live dating games andinformation sessions with audio experts.Visa's role in this venture is to act as the exclusive processor of securepayments and micropayments for those who purchase entertainment or otherproducts from the Web site.  Visa's bold move excludes other brands of debit,credit and chip cards for use on the Web site.  In other words, consumers willnot be able to use MasterCard or other card brands to make Sony Stationpurchases.  In essence, Visa is attempting to create a new model for Internetpayments where duality-the accepted practice of having issuers and merchantsoffer and accept multiple brands of bank cards-is a no go."Visa's going in the wrong direction," says David Weisman, analyst atForrester Research, Cambridge, MA.  "It's an attempt to say Visa has the onlysecure payment system for the Internet, which it doesn't.  Now is not the timeto be staking territory."Visa's attempt to create a non-dual world on the Internet harks back to itsannouncement last September that it had established a secure transactionprotocol for Internet payments.  The announcement caught the industry bysurprise because Microsoft, not MasterCard, shared the podium with Visa.Prior to the unexpected revelation, Visa and MasterCard had said publicly thatthey were collaborating on a single standard for secure Internet transactions.During the press conference announcing Sony Station, Carl Pascarella, Visa'spresident and CEO, said that the differences between the Visa- andMasterCard-led secure Internet protocols were "minimal."  He added, "We'reworking on fast convergence of the standard."However, resolution of the standard will not change the way transactions occuron Sony Station.  "Resolving the standard will accelerate acceptance ofcommerce on the Internet," said Pascarella.  "But it won't change Visa'sposition on Sony Station.  Visa will be the only accepted card."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Microsoft Makes Big-Bank Inroads With NT ServersA number of financial big leaguers recently pledged their allegiance toMicrosoft's Windows NT as their server operating-system of choice for some oftheir more mission-critical applications.  The list of high-profileinstitutions to sign up with Microsoft toward the end of 1995 includesCiticorp, Merrill Lynch & Co.  Inc., Charles Schwab & Co., KeyCorp, CrestarBank and Sanford C.  Bernstein & Co.  Inc.Most of these firms are employing Microsoft Back Office, a set ofnext-generation business applications for NT servers.  According to Microsoft,shipments of the Windows NT Server increased 70 percent between the first andsecond quarters of 1995.  Even so, Windows NT, which hit the market in 1993,still has a long way to go to catch up to the financial-services market shareof server operating-systems currently owned by Novell's NetWare networkoperating system, according to a 1995 survey by The Tower Group, Wellesley,MA.  Windows NT represented only 18 percent of new server operating-systempurchases by banks in 1995, compared to the whopping 52 percent represented byNovell NetWare.However, that 52 percent represents a harsh loss of share for Novell, becauseit is down significantly from 1994's 72 percent, according to Tower.  NT's18-percent share, meanwhile, represents dramatic momentum, up from only twopercent in 1994.  Through all this, IBM Corp.'s OS/2 LAN Server maintained aneven 20-percent market share in 1994 and 1995, according to Tower.Many of the applications being put on Windows NT these days are consideredmission-critical.  New York-based Citibank, with more than $250 billion inassets, will be rolling out more than 10,000 machines grounded in NT over thenext three years.  The bank will develop its future line of ATMs, in-branchkiosks and staff workstations on Windows NT.The $14 billion Crestar Bank, Richmond, VA, also is putting NT to work inbranch automation.  Crestar had been using Bankpro branch automation softwarefrom Dallas-based Argo Data on OS/2 operating systems at all of its branches.When Argo announced that it would make Bankpro available on Windows NT,Crestar agreed to be one of the beta test sites for the NT version."Many of the other local area networks operating within the organization arepredominantly Microsoft and Novell-based solutions," explains David Holman,senior vice president and manager of branch operations at Crestar.  "If we areable to run the mission-critical branch automation on Microsoft, we will havemade a significant step forward in achieving increased compatibility betweenoperating systems across corporate LANs."Cleveland-based KeyCorp, with $68 billion in assets, began piloting Windows NTfor branch automation at four branches in Columbus, OH, last September.  Bythe end of October, the Columbus branches had a total of about 18 workstationsequipped with NT running Olivetti Corp.'s Mosaic OA branch managementsoftware.By the end of 1996, full functionality will be realized in 200 KeyCorpbranches.  Ultimately, the NT system will run database marketing programs,interactive video banking kiosks, telephone banking services, enhanced ATMfunctionality and smart card services.  Says Janet Malecki, vice president ofKey Services Corp., the move is part of the institution's "First Choice 2000Strategic Initiative," a set of goals for the turn of the century.Merrill Lynch, meanwhile, will implement Windows NT on all its 700 branchservers and 25,000 desktops.  Sanford Bernstein & Co.  already has migrated 25servers and 400 workstations to Microsoft Back Office and plans to migrate itsremaining mainframe-based applications, such as portfolio accounting andanalytical modeling, to the Windows NT Server.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996HP Dresses Up Teller Windows At WachoviaMicrosoft's Windows NT is not the only high-powered operating system makingits way into bank branches.  At Wachovia Bank, Winston-Salem, NC, HewlettPackard computers will automate teller windows at some 500 branches in Northand South Carolina and Georgia.  Wachovia plunked down $30 million on theintelligent HP workstations and the AT&T GIS servers that will feed them.  Onthe platform side of branch operations, Wachovia uses IBM workstations runningOS/2.  Previously, the bank used an IBM 4700 configuration in its branches andin other areas.William Scales, Wachovia's manager of computing and network services justifiesthe huge investment as part of a long-term strategy.  "We've put in a baseplatform that will give us a lot of flexibility in the future," he says.  Theterminals could soup up customer service and rev up cross selling at theteller location, for example.The HP implementation is also an extension of an ongoing relationship with thePalo Alto, CA-based computer vendor.  HP workstations and servers automateWachovia's bond trading, investment operations, auto finance andasset-liability management departments.  HP Openview, a network managementsoftware, coordinates systems across the bank.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996What Do The Meca Banks Know That You Don't?Fleet Financial Group, First Bank Systems, Inc.  and Royal Bank of Canada mayknow something the rest of the banking industry doesn't.  At a time whenIntuit's Quicken and Microsoft's Money are the bulls in the PC home bankingmarket, these three banks have bought ownership stakes in Meca Software, whoseManaging Your Money application holds, at best, about 10 percent of themarket."The banks that invested in Meca want to be able to offer a full-featurepersonal financial management package that's bank-branded, so the relationshipis with the bank rather than with the software package itself," says DavidWeisman, analyst at the Forrester Group, Cambridge, MA.  "With Quicken orMoney, the customer relationship is with the package, not the bank."Besides displaying only bank logos, the Meca software allows banks todetermine which financial services to offer.  Banks also can choose fromvarious back-end payment systems processors.  "The cornerstone of the bank'srelationship with its customers has been the payment system.  And if youbelieve that there's an opportunity to merge the payment system with Internetcommerce, then you would want to make sure that you were in control of thatpayment system," says Paul Harrison, president and CEO of Meca."Canadianizing" home bankingMeca's flexibility has special appeal for Toronto-based Royal Bank, becausewith Meca, it can easily "Canadianize" PC home banking.  Canada's currency andfinancial regulations are not fully accommodated by US-oriented packages likeQuicken and Money, points out Dan Maceluch, a spokesman for the bank.  Forexample, Canadian retirement plans are called Registered Retirement SavingsPlans, rather than 401(K)s, as denoted on US-made software, and are controlledby a different set of laws.  Similarly, tax filings are conducted differentlyand need to be molded within the software accordingly."We would also like to offer the software to the different subsidiaries ofRoyal Bank, like Royal Trust, Royal Mutual Funds, RBCDS Dominion Securitiesand Action Direct, our discount brokerage," notes Maceluch.  "You have tocreate all of those interfaces.  It's not a matter of handing out boxes ofsoftware to customers."  Royal plans on distributing the package for free, andcharging an as-yet undetermined monthly fee.The three new Meca banks join San Francisco-based Bank of America, with morethan $215 billion in assets, and Charlotte-based NationsBank, with $169billion in assets, which collaborated to buy the Fairfield, CT-based Meca lastspring.  Each of the five banks now owns 20 percent of Meca.  The ownershipring is potentially open to a few more bidders-although Harrison asserts hedoesn't want too many owners.Others cluing inUltimately, Meca will offer and tailor the product for non-owner banks.  Otherplans include rolling a wider range of services onto the application, such asbrokerage, loan origination, insurance, and even travel tickets and catalogs.The three banks' versions of the application will begin appearing on themarket the first half of this year.These banks are "not the only ones" cluing in to the importance of brandingfinancial software, says William Randle, director of marketing and strategicplanning at Huntingon Bancshares, Columbus, OH.  "Our view of the future is anelectronic gateway that says 'Huntington.' Microsoft and Intuit have differentviews," he asserts.  Randle has faith that "most banks will take action toprotect their customer relationships, so the brand in front of the customer istheir own.  The advantage banks have is they currently own the customerrelationships."Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996AOL, Intuit Pave Yet Another Electronic PathNow that Intuit, Inc.  and America Online, Inc.  have joined forces to provideonline electronic banking services, consumers have one more entry into theevolving world of home banking.  The strategic alliance between the twoindustry leaders opens the door to electronic banking for the millions ofAmerica Online members.  At the same time, it creates yet another productdetour for consumers en route to banks.AOL subscribers will have point-and-click access to financial servicesincluding checking, savings, money market and credit card accounts-as long asthese accounts are located at banks participating in the new AOL service.These banks will charge fees independent of the AOL subscriber fee.Providing AOL access will be easiest for banks already offering electronicbanking services via Intuit's Quicken.  For these banks, no additionalequipment or programming will be necessary-a single connection to IntuitServices Corp.  will give these banks the ability to communicateelectronically with the eight million Quicken users and the four million AOLmembers alike.However, experts caution the potential hazards of banks engaging in such anoffering.  "It's a double-edged sword," points out David Weisman, an analystat Forrester Research, Cambridge, MA.  "It's a tempting place to be becauseIntuit and AOL have such great target customer bases."  But, as more bankssign on to offer their products through AOL, "you run the risk of becomingjust another computer icon within someone else's financial powerhouse."Will banks go for it?  "We won't be jumping on this," says Doug Haynes, seniorvice president at $5.1 billion Centura Bank, Rocky Mount, NC, which offersboth Quicken and Microsoft Money to its customers.  "Obviously AOL is one ofthe more popular online service providers.  So it's certainly something we'llbe looking into down the road."  Haynes adds that the bank is too busy rightnow focusing efforts on its recent rollouts of Quicken and Money.One more optionFirst National Bank of Chicago, another adopter of both Quicken and Money, isinvestigating the AOL/Intuit service.  "Right now, we can say to ourcustomers, 'If you don't like Quicken, you can use Microsoft Money' or viceversa," says Tom Kelly, spokesperson.  "If we were to sign on with AOL, wewould then be able to provide one more option to our customers."According to Linda Parker, senior vice president at US Bancorp, Portland, OR,the AOL/Intuit product description is "very attractive."  The real advantagefor banks, she says, is the potential to tap into a customer segmentunreachable through personal finance software.The collaborative electronic banking service is expected to be launched duringthe first half of this year for Windows users and by the end of the year forMacintosh users.  Nevertheless, no financial institutions had committedthemselves as of press time.Prior to the alliance, the Vienna, VA-based online service provider had onlyone other online banking service agreement, with Bank of America, which hadestablished a site on AOL's Personal Finance channel last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996New Directions EDS, The Exchange Create New NetworkEDS and The Exchange regional network are splitting ownership of a newenterprise, TransAlliance, that will offer electronic funds transfer servicesto institutions in the western U.S.  and western Canada.  The alliancecombines The Exchange's more than 300 members with EDS' two EFT networkoperations for a total initial customer base of about 700 financialinstitutions spanning 13 states and four provinces, with 9,000 ATMs, andannual revenues of about $50 million.The bill of fare will include ATM, point-of-sale and interbank transactionprocessing, and eventually home banking and electronic bill pay transactions.Multimedia-based ATM transactions are a possibility as well.Transactions will be processed on a new platform, called EON, just introducedby EDS to satisfy requirements for greater uptime and availability.  DennyDumler, president and CEO of Visa International's Plus national ATM network,was named president and CEO of the new enterprise.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Mellon Offers Corporate Cards With A TwistCompany handouts to employees are taking on a new twist with a corporate ATMcard being offered by $38-billion asset Mellon Bank.  The card lets employeesaccess compensation and incentive funds from special accounts whenever theyfeel like it.  And, it reduces costs for employers, as it replaces paperchecks or certificates, and leaves the processing of ATM and debittransactions to Mellon.  The Pittsburgh-based bank will custom design thecards according to firms' specifications.Back to Headline List CopyrightBANK TECHNOLOGY NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996Going Where No Card Reader Has Gone BeforeGamblers beware.  Off-track betting could end up in consumers' living roomsthrough a pilot combining at-home point-of-sale terminals and interactivetelevision simulcasts of horse races.  This project is one of many that MorrisPlains, NJ-based ISED (International Secure Encryption Devices) is pursuing,as it attempts to establish applications for a new low-cost point-of-saleterminal that secures debit and credit card transactions initiated in the homeor small office.ISED's horse-betting venture with Tulsa, OK-based On Demand Services, apartner of Churchill Downs, organizer of the Kentucky Derby, typifies the sortof in-home POS service that ISED is hoping to make mainstream.  Gamblers willbe able to place bets on interactive-TV race simulcasts by swiping cardsthrough ISED's Secure Encryption Devices and making online or offline debits.Other ultimate uses for the devices will be to facilitate the $40 billionworth of home-shopping purchases currently made by consumers via telephoneeach year.  Using the secure terminals to transmit home-shopping orders offersfar more privacy and security than reciting one's credit card number over thephone to a customer sales representative.$75 a pop"The little box replicates an ATM in every sense of the word except that itdoesn't dispense cash," says Joseph Favole, vice president of ISED.  At $75 apop, ISED is hoping to become the first company to make secure card paymentsvia telephones and PCs a reality for consumers at home.  The terminals useregular phone jacks to plug into telephones and modems.  Another version ofthe gizmo fits into the keyboard port on a PC.  From these easy access points,ISED taps into the might of the ATM and credit card networks, allowing secureonline and offline debit and credit transactions to occur from home.Before reaching the mass consumer market, however, ISED is first targeting thesmall merchant market.  ISED estimates six to seven million small merchantsstill accept only cash or checks because they deem the POS terminals availabletoday as expensive barriers to electronic transactions.  Not only are the lessexpensive Secure Encryption Devices an inducement for such merchants, but bygetting rid of paper, the typical 2.18 percent interchange rate and $.10per-transaction fee drop to an interchange rate of 1.3 percent and no fee.  Atleast 800 Secure Encryption Devices are already in action at merchant sites,and there's a huge back order on the little machines, according to HilaryThomas, president of ISED.  Thomas hails from a prior post as president ofMinitel USA, a subsidiary of France Telecom, which distributed screenphonesthroughout France a few years ago.Rutland, VT-based Chittenden Bank, $1.2 billion in assets, is the first bankto test the Secure Encryption Devices.  Daniel Alcorn, senior vice presidentof Chittenden's retail credit division, expects the terminal "will enable usto get more merchants, independent sales organizations and agent banks ascustomers.  It's a low-cost solution to paper processing, and a low-costentrance into electronic processing, including debit."Alcorn predicts a surge in merchant processing revenues, thanks to thelow-cost competitive edge the Secure Encryption Devices provide.  "If webrought in merchants each with an average transaction rate of $10,000 a month,and we signed on a thousand merchants, that's $10 million a month.  The marginon that business is usually .0025.  You make $25,000 a month in net pretaxmargin, which is $300,000 a year before taxes.  We think we'll be able toattract at least that many new customers in one year," Alcorn says.Merchant to supplierOnce the Secure Encryption Devices make headway in the small-merchant marketas low-cost POS terminals, ISED plans to market them as devices merchants canuse to facilitate purchases from their suppliers.  "These first two phases arehappening now," notes Favole.  Finally, the devices will enter into consumerhomes, supplied by merchants through customer loyalty programs, and ultimatelysold to consumers by software companies.ISED is adopting a different terminal deployment strategy from that ofVeriFone, which recently announced a plan to enable consumers to make paymentsfrom home using PC-based software called Pay Window.  Under VeriFone's scheme,a device will marry point-of-sale terminals, called Payports, to consumers' PCterminals.  The solution will let consumers use credit and debit cards,electronic cash and electronic checks to make Internet purchases.  The planincludes payment software for merchants and acquirers, and Gateway software totap into existing payment and clearing infrastructures.To pull this off, the Redwood City, CA-based vendor is tapping the resourcesof its recent acquisition, Enterprise Integration Technologies of Menlo Park,CA, which specializes in software and consulting to get companies rolling withelectronic commerce, and Cybercash, Reston, VA, a key player in paymentsystems on the Internet.  VeriFone's Internet payment architecture isscheduled to hit the market in six to nine months.Flawed strategy?In the view of VeriFone, ISED's strategy of reaching out to small merchantsmay well be flawed.  "Eighty percent of merchants who can afford debittransactions are well equipped at this point," says Mohammad Khan, director ofmarketing at VeriFone's Internet Commerce Division.  "There are only a fewmerchants left who don't have electronic card readers, and that merchantsegment is not interested in debit cards at this point."ISED, nonetheless, is forging right ahead.  "Right now, we're encrypting thePIN" for ATM and debit card activity, says Favole.  "We can also encrypt themagnetic stripe information, but we're not doing it yet.  Regulations don'trequire encryption for credit card transactions yet.  But in the event thatVisa and Mastercard start offering banks lower rates for encryptedtransactions, we are ready."A further security measure waiting in ISED's wings is the creation ofone-of-a-kind public and private keys for every missive.  Processors of theSecure Encryption Devices will be called upon to create and maintain masterkeys for security purposes.  Processors of the banks and merchants that deploydevices to the consumer will have the ability to recognize transactions from"foreign" Secure Encryption Devices, much like bank ATM processors todayrecognize and route foreign ATM transactions between banks.  For example, amerchant or bank's Secure Encryption Device processor will request a workingkey from the processor of the consumer's deployer.  A single-use-only workingkey, encrypted under the master key, will be sent back directly to theconsumer's Secure Encryption Device within seconds.Backed by Electronic Data Systems, ISED congealed some three years ago withthe goal of bringing the Secure Encryption Device to market.  EDS' involvementin the privately held ISED is strictly financial, and the monetary stake hasnot resulted in the Dallas-based company becoming the sole processor for theISED terminals.Back to Headline List WT03-B37-32IA059-000325-B022-142http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi32.html 205.156.212.5 19970115004221 text/html 265073HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:39:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:10 GMTContent-length: 264883Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fi32.html Sample Issue Copyright THE BANKER via NewsNet February 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NOTES: FIRST INTERSTATE GIVES IN TO WELLS FARGO (359 words) NOTES: NEW LOOK FOR FIRST UNION (511 words) NOTES: GANGLAND GAMBLE (563 words) NEWS NOTES: FLAK-FIGHTER STEPS DOWN (135 words) NOTES: NCB TAKES ITS PARTNERS (297 words) NOTES: A TRULY BRITISH IDENTITY (109 words) NOTES: PRIVATE CASH HEADS EAST (395 words) NOTES: EMERGING MARKETS (952 words) FOREIGN BANKS IN LONDON: THE SECRET COST OF TAX (1560 words) VIEWPOINT: SHAPE UP FOR EUROPE (1469 words) INVESTMENT BANKING: A PURSE IN A WALLET (780 words) INVESTMENT BANKING: CATS THAT GOT THE CREAM (3302 words) INVESTMENT BANKING: DIG DEEP FOR DEBT (2153 words) INVESTMENT BANKING: GO FOR THE GILT (1752 words) INVESTMENT BANKING: MOVE OVER (334 words) ITALY: LOSERS NOT CHOOSERS (1237 words) FRANCE: PROFIT - OR LOSS (630 words) AUSTRIA: POST-UNION BLUES (2070 words) CZECH REPUBLIC: THE SECOND TIME AROUND (2212 words) GLOBAL BANKING: HOME AND AWAY (1203 words) JAPAN: HASHIMOTO TO THE RESCUE (1476 words) TAIWAN: GIVE US A SMILE (2120 words) TAIWAN: STORM DAMAGE (1267 words) TAIWAN: SIX FOR THE HIGH JUMP (257 words) ASIA NOTES: CHINA'S MARKET LAUNCH (383 words) ASIA NOTES: INDONESIA WIDENS BAND (249 words) ASIA NOTES: WELCOME TO BURMA (314 words) MACAU: BEIJING BOUNTY (1614 words) LATIN NOTES: ZEDILLO'S BIG BAILOUT (536 words) LATIN NOTES: BANESPA GOOD HEALTH RECIPE (271 words) LATIN NOTES: NOW, WHERE WERE WE? (167 words) MEXICO: NO EASY RECIPE (2115 words) GHANA: RERUN THE GOLD RUSH (1484 words) BARCLAYS TESTS BARCLAYZONE (211 words) REUTERS LAUNCHES KOBRA (269 words) PRICE OF LOTUS NOTES CUT (224 words) NEW DERIVATIVES MESSAGING STANDARDS (56 words) TELERATE LIVE CHANGES (227 words) BOLERO CHOOSES SWIFT (212 words) TFS PARTS FROM SYNTEGRA (197 words) TECHNOLOGY: CONVERT OR CRASH (1491 words) TECHNOLOGY: EUROPE'S IT BOOM (575 words) TECHNOLOGY: FRAUD BUSTERS (1594 words) THE BOTTOM LINE (887 words) CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: FIRST INTERSTATE GIVES IN TO WELLS FARGOFirst Interstate Bancorp finally gave in last month to the unwelcomeapproaches of its Californian neighbour Wells Fargo. The resultingmerger, valued at dollars 11.6 billion, is the biggest in US bankhistory and a rare example of a successful hostile bid.After several months of fighting, when the end came for FirstInterstate it came quickly. On Monday 22 January the bank announcedthat it had started talking to Wells. By Wednesday, the deal wasagreed.The agreement left First Interstate's rival suitor, First Bank System(FBS) of Minneapolis, on the shelf.FBS had come in as a white knight to rescue First Interstate. Ascompensation, the Minneapolis bank receives a dollars 200 milliontermination fee.Two developments appeared to have prompted First Interstate's volteface.The potential benefits of the FBS merger had been undermined by aSecurities and Exchange Commission ruling that, because the deal wasstructured as a 'pooling of interests' the group would not be able toundertake any substantial stock repurchases for two years afterwards.Meanwhile, the strength of the Wells stock price had boosted the valueof its bid and the gap over the alternative. The terms of the offer -two-thirds of a Wells share for each First Interstate - have notchanged since Wells upped its first bid (The Banker, 12/95, p4), butits worth has.At the time of the announcement, in contrast, the FBS offer was worthsome dollars 10.1 billion.The get-together is expected to lead to some substantial cuts instaffing and branch networks as Wells gets to grips with theconsiderable overlaps between the two groups and creates a new major tochallenge the strengths of BankAmerica in California.Wells, based in San Francisco, has 983 banking locations in the state,increasingly focused on supermarket outlets rather than traditionalbranches. First Interstate, Los Angeles-based, has a total of 1,140offices in 13 western states; 406 are in California. The network willbe reduced. So will staff levels; Wells has indicated that around 7,500jobs would go as part of an dollars 800 million cost cutting programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: NEW LOOK FOR FIRST UNIONFirst Union Corporation of North Carolina has acquired a new dimensionas a result of its merger with New Jersey's First Fidelity. As well ascreating the sixth largest US bank holding company, with assets of somedollars 126 billion and covering 12 eastern states plus Washington DC,the deal has brought a substantial addition to First Union'sinternational armoury.First Fidelity has had a significant presence in London since 1973. Thebranch, where Richard Morley remains as general manager, has now beenre-labelled with the First Union logo.Until recently, the North Carolina bank's international involvement hadbeen minimal. Andrew Oleksiw, US-based managing director, internationaldivision, explains that the group has focused over the last 10 years ongrowing internally and being 'a high performance bank in the US'.Until the latest merger, First Union's growth to its present positionhad been in a rather lower key than that of its immediate neighbour inCharlotte, NationsBank.Daniel Mathis, US-based managing director of First Union's capitalmarkets group, says that over a period of 10 years the group has madesome 60 acquisitions, many of them small and designed to fill in thecoverage. They often produced significant cost savings.With the First Fidelity deal, he says, there is no overlap andtherefore no great economies. But with the extended branch network inthe US, he sees opportunities to sell existing products to newcustomers.Oleksiw explains that in the home market the group had focused on fourmain areas. First, international corporate banking, particularly for USsubsidiaries of foreign companies in its region. Second, trade finance,where he argues that with its technology the group can offer lowerprocessing costs on letters of credit, for example, than the moneycentre banks.Third, correspondent banking. And fourth, something of a specialitybecause of its acquired presence in Washington, banking for embassies,which often have procurement and economic development agencies there.Now the group is looking at a new horizon, supporting US corporationsabroad. Oleksiw says Latin America, which is in the same time zone andeasily accessible, does not require a physical presence; not having onecan boost correspondent banking business.In the far East, the group established a joint venture company inHongkong with the Hong Kong Chinese Bank to support US companies withtrade in Asia.The company, First Union HKCB Asia, 'is expected to process overdollars 1 billion annually in trade transactions by the end of thedecade'. First Union has also opened a representative office in SouthAfrica.Says Oleksiw: 'That left us with Europe. We were looking here beforethe acquisition. The preference would have been to buy a small bank andtweak it to fit; we weren't able to find the right opportunities. It isfortuitous that we bought First Fidelity which had an operation with aLondon focus.' First Union has identified more than 2,500 companiesbased in its home market area with UK subsidiaries. Morley could havehis work cut out.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: GANGLAND GAMBLEBig names on a little list? So it would appear from the furore that haserupted in Japan with the revelation that a relative few big borrowersaccount for over 40% of total loans from the country's seven bankrupthousing loan corporations (Jusen). The sixty four thousand dollar (orrather Yen 628 billion) question is, who are these people? It has beenwidely believed that the Jusen collapsed because they got in way overtheir heads during the orgy of real-estate lending that occured duringJapan's bubble economy. Once asset values collapsed their loans wentbad and that was that.A more sinister interpretation is emerging, however, that seems certainto show up prime minister Ryutaro Hashimoto's Liberal Democratic Partyin an unfavourable light - assuming that the full details ever comeout.The picture that is coming slowly into focus is one of a corruptalliance among Japanese bankers, bureaucrats and organised crime(Yakuza) syndicates to exploit the profits of the bubble economy.The government has released lists of the leading 50 borrowers at eachJusen, though no names as yet. There is strong public interest inknowing who they are because of the growing realisation that in thecase of many big borrowers from the Jusen they are simply refusing torepay debts rather than being unable to do so. And yet taxpayers arebeing asked to cough up Yen 628 billion (dollars 598 million) towardthe clean-up of the Jusen mess.It has been assumed, too, that the Jusen's Yakuza debtors, nasty enoughas they are to have shot dead one bank manager who tried to collectdebts and to have stabbed another, were on the fringe of the Jusenproblem.However, the figures show that debts held by major borrowers at theJusen amounted in total to Yen 4.4 trillion or 41% of the total loansoutstanding.In the case of four of the Jusen, the top 50 borrowers include(anonymous) individuals.'Public servants are bound by law not to disclose secrets,' declaredprime minister Hashimoto, although the finance ministry said it wouldconsider releasing names to a closed session of Japan's national Diet(parliament) upon request.What makes the affair even more intriguing is that no fewer than 473 ofthe total 532 senior executives of the Jusen were supposedlyrespectable Japanese bankers.Banks founded and funded the Jusen, along with hundreds of Japaneseagricultural co-operatives, but they also played a large part inmanaging them. A dozen of their executives were also former seniorofficials of the Ministry of Finance.The Jusen affair has an almost uncanny resonance with the great'compensation' deal scandal that embroiled most of Japan's leadingsecurities houses in 1991.At that time, news leaked out that the big brokerages had paid some oftheir biggest clients huge sums to compensate them for losses theysuffered when the great Tokyo bull market of the late 1980s collapsed.The legions of small investors who had to take their knocks in themarket were not delighted to learn of this, though it was assumed thatthe favoured few were so big that the brokers wanted to stay on theright side of them at any cost.The question now is - were they also gangsters whom the brokers wereterrified of confronting?Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: FLAK-FIGHTER STEPS DOWNBrian Quinn, who is stepping down at the end of this month as Bank ofEngland executive director responsible for banking supervision, haslived in interesting times.During his tenure, two dramatic bank crashes have brought the Bank'srole under the spotlight and created a good deal of flak aimed at thesupervisors, including suggestions that the supervisory role should beremoved from the central bank.The 1991 closure of the fraud-ridden Bank of Credit & CommerceInternational (BCCI), where the Bank played a leading role, led to theBingham report and in turn to significant developments in the Bank'soperations. Last year's collapse of Barings brought further criticismand more reports to be followed up.That task falls to Michael Foot, deputy in the supervisory department,who will take Quinn's place.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: NCB TAKES ITS PARTNERSPartnerships may still be in fashion at Goldman Sachs but elsewhere,from accountancy firms to banks, incorporation is preferred. In SaudiArabia, the largest bank in the Arab world, National Commercial Bank(NCB), has been a partnership since it was established in 1951. Buttimes may be changing.In the late 1980s and early 1990s NCB went through a difficult periodwhere it was forced for various reasons, including involvements withBank of Credit & Commerce International (BCCI), to withdraw from manyof its international operations. In recent years, however, the bank hasundergone a reorganisation and last month chairman Mohammed bin Mahfouzannounced another year of record profits with NCB's net income in 1995up 20% over the SR579 million(dollars 154 million) achieved in 1994 andan improvement in the net return on partners' equity from 8.3% to 9.9%.The improved performance is not all that has changed. Early last yearthe bank's founder Salim bin Mahfouz died, which focused attention onthe ownership of the bank which was known to be spread among theMahfouz and Kaki families.While the partnership form has been maintained it is understood thatthe entire ownership of the bank is now in the hands of former chiefexecutive Khalid bin Mahfouz, who is no longer involved in the bank'smanagement.With Khalid bin Mahfouz now owning 100%, the bank's ownership structurehas been streamlined. But NCB remains unincorporated and not listed onthe local stock exchange like other banks.Bankers suggest that if NCB wants to expand abroad again and utilisethe growing domestic capital markets then it would need to beincorporated.The question now is whether Khalid bin Mahfouz's sole partnership willgo the way of Goldman Sachs or seek incorporation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: A TRULY BRITISH IDENTITYUBAF Bank, the majority Arab-owned institution founded in London in1972, is to change its name in early March to British Arab CommercialBank (BACB).The purpose of the change, according to chief executive Peter Taplin,is to reinforce the bank's identity as a British-based institutionlicensed and supervised by the Bank of England.The bank has six Arab shareholders, including Libyan Arab Foreign Bank(36.5%), Central Bank of Egypt (7.9%) and Rafidain Bank (4.9%) as wellas a major British shareholder, Midland Bank (24.8%).The new name will reflect the bank's prime role of conducting businesswith banks and other customers in the Arab world.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: PRIVATE CASH HEADS EASTTotal capital flows to leading emerging markets in 1995 were aroundrecord levels of about dollars 216 billion despite the Mexican pesocrisis. Total private capital flows to these markets in 1996 areprojected to be robust, demonstrating the substantial continuinginvestor interest in emerging economies, says the Washington-basedInstitute of International Finance (IIF).In its 1996 capital flows forecasts the IIF says that private financialflows to the leading 30 emerging economies may total around dollars 175billion, much the same as the totals in 1994 and 1995 and comparable tothe 1993 record flow of dollars 192 billion.Official flows, which increased substantially in 1995 after the Mexicancrisis and reached dollars 41 billion, are expected to decline toaround dollars 11 billion in 1996.Developments in markets in leading industrial countries are expected tohave a profound impact on flows to emerging economies.'The continuation of relatively low world interest rates during 1996,and improving economic fundamentals in many developing countries,suggest that there will be strong investor interest in emerging marketsthis year,' says Charles Dallara, IIF managing director. 'We anticipatea substantial rebound in bond financing and increased directinvestment, offset by a reduction in short-term lending by banks fromthe high levels seen last year.'Latin America and Asia-Pacific have been the prime areas of capitalflows to emerging markets. The IIF predicts that private flows to LatinAmerica will reach about dollars 52 billion in 1996 after dropping todollars 37 billion in 1995, while private flows to Asia-Pacific willamount to dollars 87 billion in 1996 compared to dollars 94 billion in1995. The IIF also forecasts that real GDP growth will average 2.7 % inLatin America in 1996 after 0.4% growth in 1995 while Asia-Pacific willagain be the powerhouse with expected growth this year of 8.4% afterreaching 9.0% in 1995.Financial flows to main borrowing countries(dollars bn)                          1993      1994    1995(e)   1996(f)Private flows:Major borrowers          192.5     174.7     174.9     175.3of which:Latin America             75.0      60.5      36.9      51.7Asia/Pacific              76.8      87.5      93.8      86.9C/E Europe                13.3      13.4      21.2      12.8Official flows:Major borrowers           22.3      23.2      41.2      10.9of which:Latin America              1.7       0.0      27.4      -3.7Asia/Pacific              11.9      13.8       6.9       8.5C/E Europe                 9.7       3.9       3.6       3.3(e)= estimate, (f)= forecastSource:  IIF, WashingtonBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOTES: EMERGING MARKETSIt was a year to forget for emerging markets investors and fundmanagers. Many are choosing to bury memories by focusing on a brighter1996. The markets suffered from foreign investors' confidence crisisfollowing the Mexican devaluation in late 1994 and early 1995. US fundmanagers, in particular, found little incentive to venture beyond thecomforts of home into riskier markets, thanks to the strong performanceof the US equity market, which rose 34.7% in dollars, according to theMorgan Stanley Capital International US Index.In 1995, the IFC Investable Composite Index fell 10.3% in dollar terms,after a 13.8% fall in the index in 1994, in contrast with the MSCIWorld Index, which rose 18.7% in dollar terms. Among regional IFCindices, Latin America dropped 18.7% and Asia 6.9%.Europe/Mideast/Africa provided a ray of light, with its 19.5% increase,although the region ex-South Africa registered a fall of 6.9%.The best performers among the IFC Investable Indices in 1995 wereheaded by Jordan, which rose 23.1% in dollar terms, followed by SouthAfrica with a 14.8% increase and Zimbabwe with 12.3%. The runners-upwere Peru, up 10.6% and Indonesia, which climbed 9.9%.Jordan was seen as a play on the Middle East peace process by foreigninvestors. It also received a boost from a 1995 investment law, whichlifted restrictions on the entry of foreign capital.South Africa enjoyed an inflow of around dollars 1.4 billion of foreignmoney into equities in 1995, says Vikas Nath, emerging marketstrategist of UBS, after entrance into several indices, including theIFC Investable Indices, and return to the international investmentscene.Macro-economic fundamentals improved and falling inflation, among otherfactors, spurred a huge bond rally in the last four months of the year.South Africa's good performance also boosted Zimbabwe, explains Nath.Zimbabwe's rise also reflects a slight recovery from the impact of adrought in late 1994 and 1995, says Nigel Rendell, emerging marketsstrategist at James Capel.Worst performers were Sri Lanka, with a fall of 39.5% in 1995; Hungarywith 35.1%; and India with 34.9%. Pakistan, with a fall of 33.7%, wasclose behind.Foreigners were scared off from Sri Lanka by the civil war andterrorism; Pakistan was also hit by political turmoil. India came offthe boil after the 1994 euphoria. 'A lot of people are tipping India asa key market for 1996 after such a disastrous 1995,' says Rendell.Hungary was tarnished in the eyes of foreign investors by big budgetand current account deficits at the start of 1995, but a stabilisationplan announced in March 1995 has been quite successful in reducingthem.Michael Howell, head strategist at ING Barings, projects about dollars50 billion of cross-border equity flows to emerging markets in 1996(including Hongkong, China and Singapore), from dollars 15 billion in1995.He expects foreign buying in 1996 will be felt strongly by two regions:Asia-Pacific, specifically Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand andIndonesia; and the 'embryo' emerging markets, notably Eastern Europeand Russia.He forecasts these regions, which comprise around 25% of the emergingstock market capitalisation, will receive around dollars 20 billion. Headds that more cash will also go into sub-Saharan Africa: 'This indeedcould be the region to surprise investors in 1996'.Jane Hakham, investment director of Beta Funds, picks Argentina andPoland as her favourites for 1996. She believes Argentina did notdeserve the pasting it received in the wake of the Mexican crisis andis 'definitely due for a recovery'. With 1996 price/earnings ratios ofabout 10 times or less for some stocks, the market is 'really verycheap', she says. She also finds Poland, on a P/E of about 7 for 1996,good value.Of new markets, Hakham likes Egypt, which has 1995 P/Es of about 8-8.5.The market is a 'turnaround story', which will benefit indirectly fromthe Middle East peace process. China, Pakistan and Turkey could also beturnaround stories for 1996, she thinks.Nath of UBS, for the first half of 1996, recommends overweightingTurkey, South Korea, Chile, Israel and Thailand; and 'neutral plus'positions for Brazil and South Africa.Rendell also favours Poland for 1996 and Brazil, if it can engineercrucial reforms of the tax system and public sector pensions.IFC investable indicesPrice (in US dollar terms)                                   % change    % change                       29 Dec '95   30 Nov      Dec '94Latin AmericaArgentina (30)           800.94       8.2          9.1Brazil (71)              305.30      -2.1        -20.6Chile (36)               748.49       7.1         -4.6Colombia (16)            598.06       8.0        -26.3Mexico (67)              453.19       1.7        -25.5Peru (19)                197.23       4.3         10.6Venezuela (12)           334.36      17.2        -32.4East AsiaChina (20)                54.10      -5.3        -28.7Korea (159)              125.93      -5.0         -7.9Philippines (25)         259.55       6.8        -12.9Taiwan (93)              112.77       8.2        -31.5South AsiaIndia (101)               80.36       3.8        -34.9Indonesia (42)           109.68       4.0          9.9Malaysia (114)           271.16       4.7          0.9Pakistan (36)            242.64      11.2        -33.7Sri Lanka (19)           104.07       0.9        -39.5Thailand (68)            375.83       6.1         -2.0Europe/Mideast/AfricaCzech Rep (5)             60.01        1.9       -25.2Greece (40)              241.55        3.8         7.0Hungary (5)               98.42      -10.8       -35.1Jordan (8)               184.68        6.0        23.1Poland (16)              426.35       -1.2        -9.2Portugal (26)            115.76        3.8        -4.4S. Africa (64)           258.05        4.6        14.8Turkey (44)              104.49       -6.8       -13.4Zimbabwe (5)             274.67        0.9        12.3RegionsComposite (1136)         275.79       3.3        -10.3Latin America (251)      471.70       1.8        -18.7Asia (677)               232.18       4.4         -6.9EMEA (208)               141.63       3.5         19.5Comp ex-SAF (1072)       270.00       2.9        -12.2EMEA ex-SAF (144)        110.35      -1.2         -6.9Figures in parentheses show the number of stocks.Note: Regional indices do not include Czech Rep.Source:  International Finance CorporationBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FOREIGN BANKS IN LONDON: THE SECRET COST OF TAXForeign banks with branches in the UK face complex tax legislation anda wide variety of taxes. A branch bank operating in the UK has its ownUK corporation tax liability as well as responsibilities for thecollection of tax from its employees and the people with whom it doesbusiness. The Inland Revenue has taken an increasing interest in banks'proper application of the rules for deduction of tax at source inrecent years, and this has been expensive for banks which were notaware of their obligations.Few banks in London have not had to face detailed questioning by theInland Revenue before their accounts are agreed. This is due to thecomplexity of banking business and the fact that banking business isoften carried out by a branch; branch accounts seldom carry a statutoryaudit opinion.A bank operating in the UK through a branch must pay corporation tax onthe profits attributable to the business carried out in the UK. TheInland Revenue is concerned that the UK branch accounts accuratelyreflect those profits. Recently it has looked in great depth at theextent to which loans booked in the UK branch are genuinely Londonbusiness.It was initially concerned that loans were being booked in London totake advantage of the UK's generous tax credit rules. However, in 1987these were changed and its concern in recent years has been that loanson which large losses have been made do not belong in London. Loanlosses have wiped out many branch bank profits over the last few yearsso it is clearly beneficial for the Inland Revenue to be able to arguethat these losses do not belong in the UK branch accounts.In deciding where a loan belongs the Inland Revenue uses Organisationfor Economic Co-operation & Development criteria, which look at wherethe following took place:* the offer of the new business;* establishing the borrower's credit rating and the risk involved inthe loan;* negotiation of the terms;* the decision to make the loan;* conclusion of the contract and disbursement of the funds; and* administration of the loan.Of these the first four are the most important. Where a bank makeslarge provisions it is likely to face questions from the Inland Revenueabout which country the above functions took place in. The InlandRevenue does not carry out audits, in the way that the tax authoritiesof some countries do, but it may ask to see loan files or loandocumentation in order to establish that loans belong in the UK.It will not usually accept that the transfer of loans from one branchto another is effective for tax purposes. If a loan was initiallybooked in the London branch its view is that the profits associatedwith it cannot be transferred to another branch even if all the riskand administration of the loan is transferred as well.Another area of Inland Revenue interest is ensuring that a UK branchreceives adequate reward for work done for other parts of the bank.This includes the raising of funds on the London markets for otherparts of the bank when the London branch is expected to make a marginon the transaction.The other side of the coin is the amounts paid to other parts of thebank for work done for the UK branch. Here the Inland Revenue wants tobe sure that profits are not shifted out of the UK by the use ofcharges for work performed outside the UK. A bank must be able tojustify its intra-group charges by reference to the amounts which wouldbe charged by third parties.Two particular deductions claimed by most branch banks operating inLondon have been scrutinised by the Inland Revenue in recent years. Thefirst is the deduction for head office charges relating to the UKbranch.Under the terms of many tax treaties entered into by the UK, a UKbranch can deduct a proportion of head office expenses, but it has tobe able to demonstrate that the proportion is reasonable by referenceto the functions performed at head office for the UK branch.The second is the deduction for interest payable to other parts of thebank on funds advanced to the UK branch. The Inland Revenue view isthat an element of this interest should not be deductible, representingthe interest on the capital which the branch would have needed if itwas a subsidiary.Many banks have argued vigorously against this disallowance but,unfortunately, a test case has not been taken to clarify the legalissue.To settle their tax affairs, many banks have accepted a disallowance ofinterest deduction based on a notional capital amount, often equal tothe cost of funding the branch's fixed assets.The Inland Revenue has been criticised in recent years for thecomplexity of its tax legislation. The 1993 legislation on the taxationof foreign exchange transactions was a case in point, and this has abig impact on banks due to the international nature of their business.Particular features of this legislation which will be of interest tobanks are the election for accounts to be prepared in a non-sterlingcurrency for tax purposes, the deferral provisions for tax onunrealised exchange gains on long-term capital assets and liabilitiesand the transitional rules which take certain balances outside the newrules for six years.These new rules have become applicable to many banks from 1 January1996 and important elections have to be made before 2 April 1996.The UK banking community has been increasingly complaining that it isbeing used as a tax collection agency for the government. This ispartly due to the vigorous approach of the Inland Revenue in recentyears in checking that banks are fully carrying out all theirwithholding tax obligations.Except in restricted circumstances, banks operating in London need towithhold tax:* from interest paid to individuals;* from interest which is not paid in the ordinary course of bankingbusiness;* from interest on quoted Eurobonds, foreign interest or foreigndividends collected as agent for UK residents (individuals orcompanies);* from foreign interest or foreign dividends where the bank is a payingagent; and* from salary payments.The main area to which the Inland Revenue has devoted resources inrecent years is in checking the first of these; that banks arecorrectly deducting income tax from interest paid to individuals.Broadly, income tax must be deducted from payments of interest toindividuals unless it is on a qualifying certificate of deposit or aqualifying time deposit of at least pounds 50,000 or the beneficialowner of the interest has notified the bank in writing that he is notusually resident in the UK.In many cases the Inland Revenue has found the documentation in respectof not ordinarily resident accounts to be inadequate and largesettlements of tax have had to be paid.The Inland Revenue is now turning its attention and audit resources toensuring that the paying and collecting agent rules, items three andfour in the list above, are being correctly applied by banks.The current legislation on this is outdated and new legislation will beincluded in the 1996 Finance Bill. The indications are that, althoughit has been announced as a deregulatory measure, it will more clearlydefine the scope of the rules and set out the practicalities ofapplying them, rather than greatly restricting the number oftransactions which fall within them.The position is broadly that a bank must deduct tax from interest onquoted Eurobonds, foreign interest or dividends where it obtainspayment of these amounts. This is particularly relevant to custodialand private client business.The main exception to the rules is where the person entitled to theproceeds is not resident in the UK, and it is here that Inland Revenueaudits have brought problems in the banks to light.The documentation supporting gross payment to non-residents has oftenbeen inadequate or out of date. It is likely that the new legislationwill set out more clearly the documents which must be kept to supportgross payment but banks need to be sure that they do not have exposuresunder the old rules as well.Many banks in London employ expatriate staff and the Inland Revenue isincreasingly looking at their salary packages to ensure that the rulesfor deduction of tax at source are fully complied with. A common areafor error is payments made in the home country. If these payments arefor work carried out in the UK tax should be deducted at source even ifpayment is made outside the UK.In a competitive environment, where cutting the cost base is paramount,tax must be given due consideration to ensure that it does not become alarge cost.Emma Lubbock is the lead tax partner in Price Waterhouse's Banking,Capital Markets and Treasury group in London and jointly leads theEuropean Financial Services Tax Practice.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996VIEWPOINT: SHAPE UP FOR EUROPEEurope has embarked on a historic endeavour of economic integration,with the final goal of a political European Union. One important stepis the Maastricht Treaty and European economic and monetary union(EMU).No one should be surprised that the debate has become more noisy andintense as deadlines draw closer. Important issues should be discussedpublicly and open dialogue and fair debate can only help this process.There are two demands on European economic and monetary union: itshould be a union of stability, and it should not become a transferunion. Only if these two preconditions are met can members reap thebenefits of a single currency in Europe. Only then will the newEurocurrency have a chance to gain broad acceptance.There is a clear European consensus, formalised in the MaastrichtTreaty, that EMU can only be based on stability. Stability must notonly be created after the union begins, it must be brought into theunion by every country wishing to become a member. To ensure this, theMaastricht Treaty contains a set of entry criteria in the areas ofinflation, interest and exchange rates as well as fiscal performance.In our opinion all entry criteria, including the fiscal referencelevels, should be strictly met. Hence, there is a growing likelihoodthat we will have to consider a small stability union comprising aboutone half of EU members, for example Germany and its neighbours which,however, account for a substantial share of total EU product.The UK, with its stability and its economic role in Europe, would be anatural part of EMU from the beginning. We hope that politicalobstacles can be removed by the time the decisions have to be taken in1998.Stability from the outset is more important than initial all-inclusivemembership. We think of European integration as an ongoing process.Each EU member country must be part of this process, but we have neverthought that entry at a later date should carry the outsider's stigma.As long as the rules are the same for each member country and as longas they are clear, we are all (the word may be allowed in this context)insiders.This has nothing to do with German 'power play' or with monetary union'on German terms'. The issue is much simpler: the Deutschmark is one ofthe world's three key currencies. Stability on world financial marketsis only possible if the issuers of the key currencies - US, Germany,Japan - ensure responsible monetary policy and low government deficits.The new European currency will be the successor to the Deutschmark andmust satisfy the same quality standards if the world financial systemis not to suffer.Hence, each country joining EMU must realise that it is assuming therights and duties of a key currency country. The prime requirement inthis respect is financial discipline, not only when joining EMU, but inthe long run as well.How successfully the European Central Bank can preserve the stabilityof money will depend a great deal on the choice of monetary policyinstruments.Instruments and operating procedures must be efficient and convincing,in particular in the starting phase, when the European Central Bankwill not have any monetary policy record. It is essential that it canrapidly prove its ability to contain inflation. This will be decisivefor the financial markets' view that the new currency is a 'high-quality currency'.In respect to the mechanics of the monetary changeover, financialmarkets need to know which steps of the conversion are regulated byadministrative measures and which are left up to the market itself.Competition between banks will help advance the process of monetaryunion.The banks will pay close attention to the interests of their customersand respond to demand for products in the Eurocurrency by makingavailable an appropriate range. In offering Europroducts, all bankswithin the monetary area will compete with each other. The emergingsingle EU financial market will no longer be hampered by nationalborders. Regulations and market entry barriers are being removed.Intense competition will compel banks to act and react rapidly.Deadlines drawing closer have a special meaning for banks since it willbe up to them to actually and practically handle first the transitionand then the new money. As banks, we will have to explain to ourcustomers that, at least, their economic future will not be jeopardisedby European monetary union and that we will be able to handle alltechnical matters competently.This means preparations have to start now, though there remainsconsiderable uncertainly about exactly what we must prepare for. In awider sense, this is not unusual, because dealing with an uncertainfuture is just another expression of risk-taking. This is the banks'business.Banks must prepare themselves well and in good time for monetary union.They must review their place in a monetary area that is caught up in aprocess of convergence and explore the strategic options offered by alarge economic area with a single currency. Now that the singleEuropean market has prompted them to reshape their business strategiesfor Europe, financial institutions have to work out the implications ofthe single currency for their own houses.First, banks must adjust to a new authority in the field of monetarypolicy - the European Central Bank - and to a different set of monetarypolicy instruments. The heterogeneous national instruments we haveknown are being unified and will be subject to unified handling aswell. Many familiar national monetary policy instruments may nowdecline in importance.Again, banks will have to examine the possible impact on their businesspolicies, specifically in the areas of liabilities management, currencytrading and securities.The range of money market products is likely to converge EU-wide. Here,banks will have to do some thinking, above all about the associatedrise in the costs of refunding as markets become more transparent.Currency trading in future will centre round three main currencies (theEurocurrency, dollar and yen), and this reduction in the number ofcurrencies and the cessation of currency risks will mean a loss ofbusiness for banks in the areas of money changing, hedging, swap dealsand arbitrage operations.Monetary union will also have an impact on the securities business,involving a far-reaching convergence of interest rates in the membercountries. This effect is already leading to portfolio shake-up in therun-up to monetary union, and that is adding considerably to thecounselling needs of private and corporate customers.Credit institutions must also adjust to meet technical requirements,most of all in the areas of organisation and data processing, paymentsand accounting. The introduction of a common European currency willinevitably entail converting all accounts and all balance sheet itemsto the new currency unit. Banks' software, too, must be converted - allthe way from their own accounting systems, via customer databases, toelectronic cash and voucher dispensing systems. All systems in theareas of deposits, credit and securities must be adjusted.The transition to new bank notes and coins will call for a hugelogistic effort. In payments, too, customers and banks must tackle theconversion of all systems: from SWIFT and inter-bank payment systems,automatic bulk transfers and payments, all the way to the electroniclinks between banks and their corporate customers.Banks would be adopting too shortsighted an approach if they only sawthe costs and drawbacks of monetary union. We must not lose sight ofthe opportunities and the earnings potential for an agile institutionthat is being created.The best practical example is the US. Americans use one currency in acountry, which is in some ways more heterogeneous than the group ofEuropean countries that will form EMU. No-one in the US would eventhink of using more than one currency when travelling from New York toMiami or to Los Angeles or doing business there.Demands that transition to monetary union be managed without so-called'competitive distortions' in the financial sector have entered thedebate with little challenge. Europe is all about competition, andcompetition does not become distorted if some are seen as likely toperform better than others.The field of competition among banks will be service for customers whowill require products in the new Eurocurrency. Should some banks beable to offer their new products better, faster and cheaper than theircompetitors, then this is the kind of competition which is designed tomake Europe more productive. It is the mainstay of the single market.Jurgen Sarrazin is chairman of Dresdner Bank, Frankfurt.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INVESTMENT BANKING: A PURSE IN A WALLETThe cashless society may be some years away, but an increasing numberof schemes are trying to bring it closer.In Europe, one of the most interesting is Mondex, based on a smart cardwhich is being tested in the UK town of Swindon by two clearing banks,National Westminster and the Midland Bank. The CSFI recently invitedthe project managers to describe its progress and discuss theimplications.The heart of Mondex is a silicon chip embedded in a plastic card whichcan be loaded with electronic cash from the holder's bank account via aspecial terminal attached to a conventional telephone. It thus becomesa 'purse' whose contents can be spent through terminals in shops (oreven transferred to other cards).The transaction is authorised by the holder's PIN and takes only a fewseconds. Each card has an 'originator', which would have to be aninstitution approved by the banking authorities, to bring the cardwithin the bounds of monetary control.According to Mondex's promoters, the advantages of the card for theconsumer are its convenience, control and security (cards are'lockable'), though anyone who loses their card would also lose themoney on it if they were uninsured. It also enables the holder towithdraw 'cash' from his or her bank account from the comfort of theirhome - something that home banking cannot do. For the retailer, thebenefits are better cost management, security, and the possibility forvalue-added functions such as customer loyalty schemes.The Swindon experiment went live in July with 1,000 consumers. Thereare now over 8,000. More than 700 retailers, or 70 % of the total, hadsigned up, car parks had been added, and buses would join soon. Mondexpayphones have now been installed on most street corners, andcardholders can obtain cash through them 24 hours a day. This providesthe 'missing link' of home banking. There are now 50 payphones, risingto 300, plus 1,000 in private homes.About pounds 500,000 changed hands over Mondex in the first fivemonths, or some pounds 25,000 a week, which the promoters said was verysatisfactory even though it only amounts to pounds 3 per cardholder aweek.The aim behind Mondex is to make it practical for everydaytransactions, even buying a bus ticket or a newspaper, which meansdriving down the cost of producing it and running the system.The aim was also to make Mondex 'democratic' - or separate it fromconsiderations of credit standing. Anyone should be able to have aMondex because it need not even be linked to a bank account. You couldbuy a fully charged card in a store and give it to someone as a gift.However, the facility to charge the card from your bank account wouldbe subject to status, and would cost money, about pounds 1.50 a month.The sense of the CSFI meeting was that Mondex could bring clearadvantages to the retailer through improved cash management, but it wasless obvious how the consumer would benefit. They would have the costand bother of managing their cards, essentially to make transactionswhich could more easily be done with cash. Unless it replaced cashcompletely, Mondex would become yet another piece of plastic to keep inan already crowded wallet.Also, for larger purchases, the consumers would still do better to usetheir credit card and enjoy the interest-free credit period, so ifMondex had a future, it would have to be in the small transaction endof the market.Some participants were worried about the potential for money launderingon Mondex cards. Could they not be used to spirit money out of shadyaccounts? The money could not be 'tagged' in the way that numberedbanknotes are.The scheme also has potentially profound implications for banks if'originators' can be non-banks. This means that a whole sector of thecash economy could operate without the help of banks. And there is noreason why originators should be banks, though Mondex is in close touchwith the Bank of England over how 'originators' should be defined andauthorised.Mondex's backers intend to run the Swindon experiment for another yearor two before deciding on a national roll-out. NatWest will not say howmany customers it will need to turn Mondex into a profit-makingproposition. What is important, it says, is to see if Mondex works, andhow it can be turned into a money spinner.The Centre for the Study of Financial Innovation. 18 Curzon Street,London WIY 7D. Tel : (0171) 493 0173.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INVESTMENT BANKING: CATS THAT GOT THE CREAMThe right people, the right place, the right time - that sums up theexperience of the leading players in international mergers andacquisitions work based in London in 1995.It was the year when the big investment in M&A professionals made inparticular by the US investment banks over the last five years paiddividends - and bonuses.The boom in cross-border and other international M&A was only part ofthe story: the volume of domestic transactions in the US and the UKalso soared.As a result, fees from M&A received uncharacteristically prominentmentions in the year-end statements of a number of the investmentbanks.At Lehman Brothers, chairman and chief executive Richard S. Fuld Jrreported that fourth quarter 'merger and aquisition fees increased 50%'compared with the same period of 1994. At both Morgan Stanley and JPMorgan, merger advisory work got more than a passing reference.Some idea of the scale of the increase in international work can begleaned from our tables. In 1994, the top 10 firms in cross-border workracked up a combined dollars 104 billion worth of deals. In 1995, theequivalent figure was dollars 215 billion. In both cases the figuresinclude some double counting, since as many as four or five advisersmay get credit for the same deal. Nevertheless, the trend is sharplyupwards.For confirmation, look no further than the table of cross-border dealsworth dollars 1 billion or more (see page 18).In 1994, The Banker tracked 27 such deals (either announced orcompleted during the year) worth a combined dollars 52 billion. Lastyear there were 39 deals in the same category, worth more than dollars95 billion.The big question is: can the boom last? Are there fundamental factorsat work that will continue to drive the world's big corporates intoeach others' arms? Is the consolidation ongoing, or has it run itscourse? Is the merger boom just a by-product of falling world interestrates combined with the extended bull run in US and, to a lesserextent, UK equities? The surge in takeover volumes in 1995 provokestempting comparisons with the previous boom at the end of the 1980s.In the UK, according to figures from stockbrokers James Capel, thevalue of deals announced or completed topped the pounds 41 billion marklast year - or roughly twice the previous record year, 1989.A similar pattern is apparent in the US, thanks mainly to an explosionin multi-billion dollar bank mergers last year.One leading investment banker in London points out that the barestatistics reflect accidents of timing. 'If you look at UK transactionslast year the numbers are influenced by a couple of very largetransactions. I tend to think of deals happening on a much moreconsistent basis. If you plot the activity over the longer term, thetrend is a lot smoother than the data suggests.'That said, he also confirms that current business levels are way up onthose for the same period a year ago. 'If you look at our existingbacklog of transactions - projects on which terms are either agreed orwhere there is a better than 50% chance of success - the total today isalready equivalent to about 60% of what we completed in 1995.' Thenormal backlog is between 20% and 30% of a year's business.One thing is certain. The deals done in 1995 were of a different orderto those done in the last boom.In the peak year of 1989 the name of the game was leverage. The two bigdeals of the year were the dollars 29.6 billion takeover of RJR Nabiscoby Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR) and Sir James Goldsmith's unsuccessfuldollars 21 billion offer for Britain's tobacco giant BAT Industries.There was unlimited cash available to fund almost any big proposition -or there was until the banks turned their backs on the proposed buyoutat United Airlines, Washington and the US courts got obstructive, andthe junk bond boom collapsed.'Compared to the last boom cycle, this one is a lot less financiallymotivated and much more strategically driven,' says Ed Annunziato, headof international M&A at Merrill Lynch (whose cross-border deal volumesplaced the firm just outside the top ten in The Banker's league tableslast year).'The strategic push is coming as a result of big changes in a handfulof industries. Regulatory change, technological change and costpressures associated with one or both - these have been importantdrivers in the growth of M&A activity.'But not the only ones. As important has been the need to squeeze outthe scale economies necessary if a business is to compete globally.'We saw unprecedented levels of activity last year - almost a feedingfrenzy,' says Jim Downing, managing director and co-head of corporatefinance at Lehman Brothers in London. 'That was partly driven by thedesire to create global positioning on the part of big businesses. Butthere was also a defensive quality to it: if your competitor takes outone of the few remaining targets you can't afford to sit back andwatch.'Having spent the first half of the 1990s streamlining their operations,many big corporates are having to live with the prospect of limitedgrowth, he argues.The answer is to acquire it. For those acquisitions, 'companies havebeen focusing on those sectors where they're choosing to be globalbusinesses,' says Downing. 'And, in contrast to the 1980s, they'redoing it in a very targeted and surgical way.'The ready availability of cheap money has played its part, too, heaccepts.But, again, comparisons with 1989 would be misleading. Having rebuilttheir balance sheets over the course of the 1990s, UK companies, forinstance, are funding deals not from funny money but from internallygenerated cash, or from justifiable bank borrowing.According to the James Capel analysis, two-thirds of the considerationpaid in UK takeovers last year was in the form of cash. Buying otherbusinesses is a better bet than sticking the cash on deposit.So long as interest rates remain low by historical standards, activityon the part of UK companies will remain high, predicts Piers vonSimson, a managing director at SBC Warburg.'Our projections envisage the generation of very substantial cashsurpluses in corporate UK this year,' he says, 'particularly in whatmight broadly be defined as the consumer and service groups.'Companies such as Tesco, Marks & Spencer and Reuters are generatinghuge amounts of cash, he points out. 'The combined Glaxo Wellcome maybe highly geared at present, but the potential cash generation over thenext couple of years tops pounds 2 billion.'The importance of the UK's contribution to Europe-wide M&A activitycannot be overstated, says Klaus Diederichs, co-head of M&A for JPMorgan in Europe. 'Eight out of every 10 big deals had a UK componentlast year.France was in second place, but a long way behind.'Diederichs sees a number of risks in predicting another record year forthe international M&A business.'First, if equity markets take a tumble, that will dent confidence.When confidence goes, deals don't close. Second, there is a danger thatprices get driven too high. Third, there is a limit as to how many moredeals can be done in the most active sectors.'For instance, a year ago there were 12 independent regionalelectricity companies (RECs) in Britain; now there are just five.' Forthese reasons, Morgan's team is working on the assumption that totalmarket volumes in the UK could fall by anything up to 20% in 1996.CSFB professes itself similarly cautious. Stephen Hester, co-head ofinvestment banking in London, says 'our internal budgets suggest a 15%decline in the market as a whole - but that would still leave 1996 thesecond most active year in history.'His concern is that M&A activity tends to peak when the economic cycleis at or just past its peak. With the cycle turning down across much ofEurope, it is more than possible that M&A activity will turn down withit.One thing is certain: the outlook hangs crucially on three keyindustries which generated a disproportionate amount of work for M&Aspecialists in 1995. They are finance, pharmaceuticals and the world oftelecommunications and media.No fewer than 23 of our 39 dollars 1 billion-plus deals fit into thesethese sectors. 'In terms of those industries,' says Merrill'sAnnunziato, 'there is going to be a lot more of the same - though inpharmaceuticals the restructuring is clearly further advanced than inthe other two sectors. As far as financial institutions and thetelecoms/media sectors are concerned, the restructuring could lastanother ten years. Certainly, in US banking, it's not remotely close tobeing over.'The deal lists of the leading investment banks bear testimony to thefrenetic activity in those three sectors over the past year.In US banking, the size and value of deals expanded sharply,culminating in the first big hostile takeover bid - Wells Fargo'sdollars 10 billion offer for First Interstate.There are still 11,000 banks in the US, and plenty of scope for thedeal-makers to be creative. But the process is not confined to the US.In Europe, for instance, CSFB was involved in 27 banking or insurance-related deals last year (either completed or pending) and acted forfinancial institutions in France, Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, Italy,Germany, Austria, Spain and the UK. The consolidation of banks in Italyand Scandinavia is proving a fruitful source of income for several ofthe M&A specialists.So too is the gradual sell-off of Credit Lyonnais' peripheral assets,some of them banking outposts, others non-bank assets.Neither of the two investment banks responsible for putting togetherthe restructuring of some dollars 26 billion worth of CL assets - nowplaced into the Consortium de Realisations (CDR) - gets credit in ourleague tables for a deal that will take 20 years to complete: Paribasacted for the French government, Lazard Freres Paris for CL.But hunting down buyers for the various assets is proving a lucrativeoccupation for most of the players in our tables. CSFB sold off BanqueColbert's regional operations in France to Financiere Meeschaert, itsParis-based asset management operations to NatWest and its Luxembourgoffshoot to Staal Bankiers, an offshoot of the Dutch Achmea Holding.Merrill sold CL's Peruvian and Chilean operations (to Banca CommercialeItaliana and Dresdner respectively) and JP Morgan advised CL BankNederland on its sale to Generale de Banque. Warburg found buyers forthe CL-owned MGM cinema chains in Britain and the Netherlands.The prospect of more big banking takeovers in the US looks a racingcertainty. But what about Europe?Morgan Stanley's head of European investment banking operations, JohnStudzinski, comments: 'If you look at the UK, there is bothdemutualisation and the consolidation of retail services in progress.'There is also plenty of scope for deals around Europe. 'The conclusionmust be that the process of integration will continue.'Much the same can be said about the pharmaceuticals industry, whereMorgan Stanley had a hand in the year's two biggest cross-border deals(acting for Marion Merrell Dow in its takeover by Hoechst of Germanyand for Sweden's Pharmacia in its dollars 13 billion merger with Upjohnof the US).It also acted for Chiron of the US in its dollars 2 billion tie-up withSwitzerland's Ciba-Geigy. Says Studzinski: 'There are at least three orfour more consolidations of a similar size to take place in theindustry. The only question is when they will happen.'In the telecoms and media sectors it was the Lazard houses that put inthe most impressive performance, racking up a string of big deals. Thefour it did for MCI Communications Corporation and the one for Seagrams(the takeover of Hollywood studios group MCA) were alone worth acombined dollars 10 billion.Goldman, which acted for the Japanese vendor in the MCA sale, also didits share of big deals in this area and Reimers is in no doubt there ismore to come.Lehman's Downing points out the bulk of the media and telecoms dealshave been in the US: 'There is scope for a lot more consolidation inEurope.' One-off factors were nonetheless apparent in one sector lastyear. That was UK utilities, and especially the RECs.Again Goldman did well, thanks to its acknowledged role as a defenceadviser, picking up four advisory mandates. While there may still besome unfinished business, there is a finite number of deals to be done.'There may be more consolidation to come, though lots of companiesappear to be running into domestic monopoly constraints,' says SBCWarburg's von Simson. The firm acted for America's Southern Electric inits successful bid for SWEB.One counterbalancing factor that could sustain UK takeover activity -particularly in the utility sector - is the threat of a Labour electionvictory in a year or so's time.'If you are an international strategist, the pressure is probably onyou to slip a UK deal in before the election,' says von Simson. 'UnderLabour, the onus is likely to be on the buyer to prove that a deal is agood thing, rather than on the regulator to show there is nothingdamaging to it.' Be that as it may, M&A specialists expect to seecontinental Europe pick up the baton. 'In 1996 you're more likely tosee a restructuring among utilities in Germany, Spain and Italy,'predicts Morgan Stanley's Studzinski. Merrill's Annunziato agrees.'German utilities have traditionally been conglomerate-owned. Deals arelikely as part of the refocusing of industry generally.' Or soinvestment bankers would like to believe. The trouble is, the longmooted 'deconglomeratisation' of Germany is proving a patchy affair.Hoechst and Viag have both shown a willingness to prune peripheralbusinesses, but few other German corporates have followed them.One reason for this is that anti-avoidance provisions in the German taxstatutes could penalise a vendor if 10% or more of a demerged company'sshares subsequently change hands within a short space of time -something that is highly likely if the demerged company is publiclyfloated.Von Simson argues that this ruling tends to be used as an excuse forinaction by German industrialists.'European Union members have all signed up to the concept of tax-freedemergers. I suspect that, if enough pressure were applied, thelegislation might be clarified or the tax authorities might give aruling that the anti-avoidance provisions did not apply.'Pressure from the international investment community will translateinto action sooner or later. There will be disposals that have theeffect of deconglomeratising German industry - though perhaps not adirect demerger along the lines of ICI/Zeneca.'CSFB's Hester agrees. It is all part of what he sees as a long-termtrend: the 'Anglo-Saxonisation of continental Europe'. The impact ofnew takeover codes, the harmonisation of accounting standards, theappearance of international investors on local share registers - all ofthis is helping to cement a change of attitude. The upturn in EuropeanM&A activity last year looks no fluke.But it will still take an enormous acceleration in the process tocompensate for a slowdown in UK merger activity - were that to happenthis year.Morgan's Diederichs points to the fact that the value of French andGerman deals combined last year was no more than a quarter of the totalrecorded in the UK. 'If the pace of activity in the UK falters,continental Europe cannot take up the slack,' he argues.The caveat is well taken; and few of the main players in this game areprepared to look beyond the next three months. But, right now, theysimply cannot believe their luck.Top cross-border advisers                        1995                        No of      dollars bn                        dealsMorgan Stanley           41          32.51Goldman Sachs            40          28.97CSFB                     50          28.82SBC Warburg              66          23.61Lazard                   46          23.42JP Morgan                34          20.96Rothschild               32          18.00Lehman                   36          15.09Schroders                34          12.68Deutsche MG              58          10.84All deals(ex UK and US domestics)                        1995                        No of      dollars bn                        dealsGoldman Sachs            52          37.66Morgan Stanley           44          35.84CSFB                     58          30.32Lazard                   57          28.49JP Morgan                42          25.48SBC Warburg              79          24.20Rothschild               50          21.96Deutsche MG              70          17.78Lehman                   36          15.09Salomon                  43          15.06Only deals completed by 31/12/95 are counted. No credit is givenfor joint ventures or minority stakes.Billion dollar cross-border deals 1995Announced or completedBuyer                          Target                       Value                                                          dollars mHoechst (Ger)                  Marion Merrell Dow (US)      7,133J P Morgan                     Lehman                               Morgan StanleyUpjohn (US)                    Pharmacia (Swed)             6,300Goldman Sachs                  Morgan Stanley                               Enskilda Secs                               JP Morgan act for                               28% shareholder VolvoSeagram (Can)                  MCA (US/Japan)               5,600Lazard                         Allen & CompanyCSFB                           Goldman SachsCrown Cork & Seal (US)         Carnaud Metalbox (Fr)        5,200*CSFB                           Lazard                               JP MorganAllianz (Ger)                  Vereinte Magdeburger/        4,995                               Elvia/ Lloyd Adriatico                               from Swiss Re (Switz)                               CSFBRTZ (UK)                       CRA (Aus)                    4,340Kleinwort Benson               Morgan StanleyCazenove                       Macquarie BankFleet Financial (US)           NatWest Bank NA (UK)         3,260*Merrill Lynch                  Goldman SachsSwiss Bank Corp (Switz)        S G Warburg                  3,060Hambro Magan                   Schroders                               SBC Warburg                               JP Morgan                               Lazard (adviser to MAM)Cable & Wireless (UK)/         Vebacom (Ger)                2,800Veba (Ger)                     NatWest MktsBZW                            Lehman BrothersGrand Metropolitan (UK)        Pet Inc (US)                 2,652Morgan Stanley                 LazardSBC WarburgRhone-Poulenc Rorer (US/Fr)    Fisons (UK)                  2,620Lehman                         SBC WarburgHambro MaganDeutsche Bank (Ger)            ITT Financial Corp/ITT       2,610                               Commercial Finance (US)                               Goldman SachsCie Fin Richemont (Switz)      Rothmans Intl (UK/Neths)     2,585Hambros                        Rothschild                               SBC WarburgCentral and SW Corp (US)       Seeboard (UK)                2,520*CSFB                           Kleinwort BensonCadbury-Schweppes (UK)         Dr Pepper (US)               2,366Goldman SachsKleinwort BensonDemerger                       US Industries/Hanson (UK)    2,200                               Rothschild                               Goldman SachsMCI Communications (US)        13.5% of News Corp (Aust)    2,200LazardBuyer                          Target                       Value                                                          dollars mCiba-Geigy (Switz)             49.9% of Chiron Corp (US)    2,100CSFB                           Morgan StanleyZurich Insurance (Switz)       Kemper Corp (US)             2,000*CSFB                           Goldman SachsSoftbank (Japan)               Ziff-Davis (US)              2,000*Morgan Stanley                 LazardWasserstein PerellaNippon Oil (Japan)             Caltex Petroleum's 50%       2,000*Wasserstein Perella            of Nippon Petroleum Refining (US)Interbrew (Belg)               John Labatt (Can)            1,960LazardWolters Kluwer (Neths)         CCH (US)                     1,900*CSFB                           Goldman SachsYPF (Arg)                      Maxus Energy Corp (US)       1,840Salomon                        CSFBSouthern Electric (US)         SWEB (UK)                    1,719SBC Warburg                    Schroders                               Goldman SachsDresdner Bank (Ger)            Kleinwort Benson (UK)        1,600Fleming                        SchrodersNational Aust Bank (Aus)       Michigan National Bank (US)  1,560Morgan StanleyCSFBPfizer (US)                    Animal health business       1,450Lazard                         of SmithKline Beecham (UK)                               Wasserstein PerellaLuxottica (Italy)              US Shoe Corp                 1,400CSFBING (Neths)                    Barings (UK)                 1,375Fleming                        BaringsBASF (Ger)                     Boots pharmaceuticals (UK)   1,335Lehman                         CSFBNational Health Labs (US)      Roche clinical lab ops                                (Switz)                     1,300Morgan Stanley                 CSFBLyonnaise des Eaux (Fr)        Northumbrian Water (UK)      1,275                               Lazard                               Kleinwort BensonSodexho (Fr)                   Gardner Merchant (UK)        1,180Schroders                      SBC WarburgInternational Paper (US)       Carter Holt Harvey (NZ)      1,140CSFB                           SalomonRupert/Al-Waleed/              25% of Fininvest (It)        1,118Kirch consortium (intl)        Morgan StanleyLehmanSBC Cablecomms (US)            Telewest (UK)                1,078Salomon                        Morgan Stanley                               Kleinwort BensonMission Energy (US)            First Hydro (UK)             1,077                               Kleinwort Benson                               BZWWarner Lambert (US)            50% of Warner Wellcome JV    1.050*                               from Glaxo Wellcome (UK)                               JP Morgan* Pending at 31.12.95.Source:  The BankerBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INVESTMENT BANKING: DIG DEEP FOR DEBTIn January, in what looked like a last act of desperation, Eurotunnel,the crisis-stricken operator of the Channel tunnel, called on the UKand French governments to guarantee a substantial bond issue to helprefinance its pounds 7.8 billion (dollars 11.8 billion) debt. The planproposed that the bond issue would involve a 'zero coupon' structure inwhich there would be low or no interest payments for about 10 years.But, far from being a miracle cure for the Chunnel operator's financialdifficulties, a closer look at the proposal showed it would merelydelay the pain and add to the company's bulging interest bill. Both theFrench and the UK governments swiftly ruled out the plan.The move follows Eurotunnel's announcement in September that it hadsuspended interest payments on its debt mountain and was startingnegotiations with its banks to rearrange its finances. Eurotunnel'sfour agent banks - National Westminster, Midland Bank, Banque Nationalede Paris and Credit Lyonnais - were to report to the rest of thebanking syndicate, comprising 225 members, mainly UK, French andJapanese banks, by 17 March.Until then, both sides were bound by a pact of secrecy from commentingpublicly on the negotiations.Traders and brokers in the UK and European corporate debt market willhave been watching keenly. Promising a record-breaking restructuring,Eurotunnel's plight could provide a feast for the UK distressed debtmarket.The crisis comes when the UK market is facing a famine in the supply ofnew names to trade, as the recovery of the UK economy continues. ManyUK companies which have been big debt trading situations are havingtheir difficulties resolved or recovering, for example, GPA andCordiant (Saatchi and Saatchi), while prospects for resolution forothers in the coming year are brightening, for example, Signet andSomerfield.While traders have been talking for some time about the possibilities,and hindrances, for a market to develop in continental Europeancountries, the dwindling supply in the UK, barring Eurotunnel, may giveextra impetus to their efforts there and in trading of UK near-par,good quality loans. Some are looking further afield, to the Far Eastand Latin America.But while Eurotunnel debt and derivatives of debt could prove to be abonanza for the corporate debt trading market, some traders admit to aworry that the market could be swamped by big pieces of debt lookingfor a home, which would depress the price. Few banks are willing tosell at the mid-January price of around 37 pence in the pound, but anupward move in the price is likely to provoke more trading.Tony Tucker, senior director of Bank of America in London, argues thatEurotunnel is big enough and diverse enough that the 'primaryprinciples of demand and sources of supply could work,' bringing aboutan equilibrium in supply and demand.Despite the uncertain outlook for the UK market, in 1995 volumes in UKand European distressed and impaired loans appear to have continued toincrease, but estimates vary widely.Bank of America estimates dollars 10 billion for 1995, up from aboutdollars 6.5 billion in 1994. Of this dollars 10 billion, Tuckerexplains that debt sales by original lenders in regularly quoted namessuch as GPA account for about one third; other original sales accountfor about another one third; while retrades among participants accountfor the remaining third.Other estimates are more modest. Don Pollard and David Newport, vice-presidents of Citibank, estimate around dollars 8 billion was traded in1995, including retrades.Richard Brennan, director of international loan sales and trading atMerrill Lynch, estimates only about dollars 2 billion of original debtwas traded in 1995, and says the original debt can trade as much as 10to 15 times.The increased volume reflects the greater number of traders andinvestors in the market. There are now at least 10-12 seriousparticipants which have each committed capital of around dollars 100-250 million and people to the market, points out Tucker. These havebrought more liquidity and competition to the market, and spreads inthe more liquid names have narrowed.Besides these new players, two inter-dealer brokers have also enteredin the last year to 18 months, Patriot Securities in New York andCanter Fitzgerald, which only deal with dealers, enabling them toretain their anonymity until the deal is done. Pollard and Newportobserve that longer term local investors, mostly foreign banks in theUK, have moved into the UK market, such as Standard Bank, BancoSantander, West Merchant Bank and ING Bank, as well as some of the UKclearing banks.They have seen a flow from the US 'vulture' type high-yield investors,to these local investors, which are looking for less risky plays andare willing to make more moderate returns. This trend has provided US-based investors with buyers for debt bought earlier in therestructuring cycle.'We probably do about half of our trades into local buyers, whereas theyear before we probably did about 80% of our trades back into USbuyers,' says Pollard.In 1995, Brennan of Merrill Lynch noticed a growing acceptance of themarket as a viable way of managing the risk contained in a bank'sportfolio of assets by a number of UK clearing banks, which have becomeactively involved both on the buy and sell side. Tucker adds thatportfolio analysis is exerting a growing influence on banks' managementof loans.A notable exception is Barclays Bank, which has not bought or sold anyof its impaired debt. Terry Bond, lending services director, explainsthat the bank has been a strong supporter of the Bank of England'sinformal philosophy on financial workouts, the London Approach, whichaims to create and maintain stability during a workout. Barclays hasbeen anxious to continue to give a lead in stability, says Bond.On the effect of debt trading on a standstill and financialreconstruction, he says: 'We still have a sense of nervousness'. Thebank would also like to see how the market develops before it positionsitself as a player.However, given the right circumstances, it might in the future considerdebt trading as an option. 'We have seen the emergence of a largenumber of responsible players in the market. There isn't necessarily afree for all which some people feared might happen; and if you have aresponsible market then it's something that you can actually learn tolive with,' Bond comments.A fertile source of original distressed debt has been the debt-riddenJapanese banks, which have been coming into the market more in 1995,driven by a need and desire politically and commercially to clean uptheir balance sheets, says Tucker. Pressure from the Ministry ofFinance (MoF) and the Bank of Japan (central bank) for more realism ontheir balance sheets, along with the Daiwa scandal and the admissionthat some of the housing loan subsidiaries were under water, is forcingthe Japanese banks to look to write off as much of their bad debts aspossible at their fiscal year end in March 1996.Many of the Japanese banks have sold out of GPA, Signet, Somerfield andIsosceles, says Tucker, but not yet out of Eurotunnel. Leading Japanesebanks, which have almost dollars 2 billion in outstanding loans toEurotunnel, were reported in January to have said that they had noplans for an early disposal of them.It is estimated that the Japanese banks have sold more than half oftheir European distressed debt, excluding Eurotunnel, over the pastthree years.In October, a series of damaging revelations, including the Daiwascandal, led to a premium being put on lending to Japanese banks, whichincreased their cost of capital and was the catalyst for some of themto sell thinner-priced, near par loans.Traders have had mixed success at tackling the potential of continentalEurope. Bank of America sees France as a growing area: it opened anadjunct office in France in 1995 and has traded the debt of all but oneof the French companies named in its price list.These include: Air France Partners Leasing; Aluminium Dunkerque, thealuminium smelting company partly owned by Pechiney; Groupe Bull, thepartially privatised computer company; and Orlyval, the tunnel betweenOrly and Paris. There are plenty of obstacles to trading in Frenchloans, however, particularly when real estate or secured mortgage orsecurity of assets are involved, which are difficult and expensive totransfer under French law. Bank of America has traded a Spanish credit,but has not done any trading in German company debt.Large syndicate deals such as Aluminium Dunkerque are unusual on theContinent; 'club deals', involving a smaller number of banks than in asyndication, are more common in continental Europe than in the UK.There are also many bilateral deals, where a company has a separatecontract with each bank, for example, in Germany, which accounts forthe difficulty of trading there, says Tucker.Pollard and Newport of Citibank observe that the UK and European markethas followed their expectations in all respects except one: trading hasbeen slower to take off in Europe than they envisaged. 'The market hasnot performed as expected with respect to geographic diversity,' theycomment.While France seems to be the next area, they admit that they have notseen the holders of French loans prepared to accept what they think isfair price. Of Germany, Pollard comments: 'The German banks seem to bereluctant to let the loans go'.Traders have also been eyeing with a certain relish recent bankingdebacles for debt trading opportunities, such as Credit Lyonnais, DaiwaBank and Banco di Napoli of Italy, which are under pressure to reducetheir size.But, so far, the few deals done have been to other members of thelending syndicates in these names, rather than through intermediaries,because of a reluctance to sell loans at less than par. Tucker of BankAmerica admits: 'There is a frustration because we have put a hugeamount of effort into it.' The hope is that new management or strongerdirectives from government will force these banks to take the hit andto sell the loans at a discount.Looking ahead to 1996, Tucker expects distressed volumes to flatten outnext year, while Pollard and Newport expect the volumes to be flat oreven down.Besides Eurotunnel, a rare potential new big name at the start of 1996was Trafalgar House, the troubled property company, but the jury wasstill out on whether it would go into a restructuring.Brennan of Merrill Lynch still sees plenty of opportunities, forexample, in convertibles and pure bonds: 'It may not be bank debt; itmay be other portions of the capital structure that will be traded.'Pollard and Newport are planning to spend more of their time this yeartrying to buy into situations on the Continent and are also hopefulthat the near-par market will continue to develop.Some traders, undaunted by limited opportunities closer to home, arelooking even further afield to the Far East and Latin America. Bank ofAmerica, for example, has been looking around Hongkong and Singapore.In these countries bank debt is still quite healthy at the moment,because yields are high and maturities are short, but Tucker believesthat sooner or later there is bound to be an oversupply.He also sees potential in Thai, Korean and Indonesian debt. At themoment he thinks Asian convertibles are interesting. He predicts that'South East Asia could be half again the size of the UK and Europeanmarket in the next three to five years.'For the more fearless, China is also potentially an enormous, butcomplicated, market. In Latin America, Mexico holds potential becauseof the numbers of defaults, but again is only for the more aggressivebrokers and traders with a high risk to return profile. It promises tobe a challenging ride for traders and investors.Loans for sale                                             Indicative                                             Bid/offer*Borrower                                     11 Jan '96Air France Partners Leasing                     70-83Aluminium Dunkerque                             80-90Anglo Cold Storage/Union                        50-75Brent Walker (3rd Pref)                         32-36Chancery                                         8-10Cordiant (Saatchi and Saatchi)                  95-97Euro Disney - Theme Park                        70-74              Hotels                            67-72Eurotunnel                                      37-42GPA-CCF                                   98.25-99.25Groupe Bull                                     93-98Isosceles Strip                                 60-62Landhurst Leasing                               5.5-7LEP                                              5-10Maxwell                                      8.5-9.25National Home Loans                             95-97Omnicorp (guaranteed)                             7-9Orlyval                                         12-20Polly Peck Int. (Loans)                      0.75-1.5Powercorp                                       25-35Premier Portfolio                               14-16Provincial Bank                                   5-8Queens Moat Snr Term                           1.5-83Houses      Jnr Term                            25-28            Convert                               5-7Rosehaugh                                       44-46Signet (Sterling Inc)                       92.5-94.5Somerfield                                      88-91* Percent of par valueSource:  Bank of AmericaBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INVESTMENT BANKING: GO FOR THE GILTTwo recent developments in the London financial markets have increasedinvestor awareness of money market funds as a viable alternative forthe management of short-term cash reserves.The collapse of Barings almost one year ago sparked a debate amongfinancial institutions concerned about the safety of their overnightcash balances.Asset managers, pension fund administrators, corporate directors andother fiduciaries have begun to question traditional depositarrangements which potentially expose their cash to a significant levelof credit risk.The second development supporting increased interest in money marketfunds is the introduction at the beginning of this year of an openmarket in gilt (UK government securities)repos.The emergence of a broad-based gilt repo market will provide money fundmanagers with a fully collateralised instrument which will greatlyenhance their ability to meet investor liquidity needs.A money market fund is essentially a stand-alone investment vehicleoperated much like other collective investment schemes. The fund isinvested in a diversified portfolio of high-grade short-terminstruments with the objective of protecting the principal value ofinvestor capital while providing liquidity and a reasonable level ofcurrent income.Money market funds are typically subject to regulatory controlsdesigned to protect principal value, including minimum qualitythresholds for investment, minimum diversification requirements andmaximum maturity levels both for instruments held by a fund and for thefund's portfolio as a whole.There are important differences between money market funds andtraditional bank deposits. A money market fund's assets are investedsolely for the benefit of its investors. Management is provided by anoutside investment adviser which is paid a fee for this service but thefund receives the full benefit of the income earned net of this fee.Banks, by comparison, are in the business of re-investing theircustomers' deposits. A bank may charge a fee for specific cashmanagement services but this fee is in addition to the favourablespread which the bank earns on the deposits themselves.A second difference between a money market fund and a bank deposit isthat the fund is structured to separate completely asset managementfrom asset custody. Unlike a bank which accepts deposits from itscustomers, the manager of a money market fund does not itself receiveor hold investor funds. All of the fund's assets are separately held ina segregated account at a custodian bank where they are 'ring-fenced'against claims of the bank's creditors.The manager's job is to direct the day-to-day investment of theseassets in accordance with the investment objectives and policies setforth in the fund's prospectus furnished to investors.The most important distinction between money market funds and bankdeposits is that investors in a money fund receive the benefits of anactively managed portfolio.A bank deposit requires the commitment of investor monies for a setperiod of time in order to earn a quoted rate of return. By contrast, amoney market fund pools investor subscriptions and actively manages thepool to provide both daily liquidity and a market rate of return. Anactively managed portfolio is continuously invested in a variety ofhigh-grade short-term instruments selected by the manager to achievethe fund's objectives. Through active management a money market fund ineffect 'securitises' its investors' cash.In the US money market funds have achieved broad acceptance as avaluable cash management tool for both institutional and individualinvestors. Total net assets of money funds are now more than dollars750 billion, with annual sales in excess of dollars 2 trillion.Approximately 48% of money market fund assets are held for benefit ofinstitutions such as retirement plans, corporations, foundations andcharities, and a variety of fiduciary accounts.In the US banks are major investors in money market funds and oftenserve, through non-bank affiliates, as sponsors and advisers to funds.Money market funds have also become accepted cash management vehiclesin other countries, notably France, where money market fund assets nowtotal in excess of dollars 250 billion, and Germany, where money fundswere first permitted in 1994 and have already attracted considerableinterest.A money market fund industry has not developed in the UK quite simplybecause, until now, there has been no need for one.The establishment and growth of money funds in the US was in directresponse to a series of developments within the banking community inthe 1970s and early 1980s when regulatory limits on the level ofinterest that could be paid by banks prevented them from givingdepositors market rates of return.This period also witnessed the failure of a number of prominent bankingand savings institutions. Money market funds were created in responseto investor demand for a safe alternative that could providecompetitive returns.Recent developments in the UK financial markets, though perhaps not asdramatic as the events giving rise to the US money fund industry, arenevertheless significant and could fuel a demand for money market fundsin the UK. The increased acceptance of such funds in major Europeanmarkets should also stimulate the use of money market funds by UKinstitutions.The collapse of Barings needs to be placed in context. It is importantto emphasise that Barings did nothing fundamentally wrong in the way ithandled its investors' overnight cash. Barings' decision to placeapproximately pounds 500 million of such cash on deposit with itsaffiliate bank conformed to the cash management practices of otherasset managers.The problem was more systemic. Unlike securities held for itscustomers, which were properly 'ring-fenced', overnight cash depositedwith the bank was reflected on its balance sheet as an unsecured assetsubject to the claims of creditors. When Barings failed it was only byvirtue of the ING acquisition that investors avoided a total loss oftheir overnight cash then on deposit with the bank.In the wake of Barings' collapse market participants have searched foralternative solutions. As a 'stopgap' remedy UK asset managers andother fiduciaries early last year began diversifying their deposits bytaking cash balances away from single institutions with which theyenjoyed an affiliation or other longstanding relationship and byspreading those assets among a number of high quality banks.Diversification clearly reduces the extent of exposure but it does notaddress the core credit risk issues. There is also the problem oflocating a sufficient number of high-grade institutions to ensure anadequate level of diversification.Money market funds take a different approach to diversification and inthe process substantially reduce credit risk exposure. By investingassets in a range of money market securities such as repos andcommercial paper, investor cash is 'securitised' and therebyeffectively protected against any potential creditor claims that mightotherwise be asserted.Within a money fund credit risk is addressed as an investment matterthrough proper portfolio diversification and compliance with minimumquality guidelines. By carefully managing its portfolio maturities amoney market fund provides its investors with both overnight cashliquidity and a market rate of return. In this way the fund serves asan effective substitute for traditional bank deposit arrangementswithout exposing investors to any significant degree of credit risk.To work effectively money market funds must have access to a range ofinvestment vehicles that will enable them to achieve their safety,liquidity and yield objectives. A key issue for a money market fund isthe ability to obtain overnight liquidity for a significant portion ofits assets in order to meet redemption requests of its investors.In the US, as well as in France and Germany, liquidity has beenprovided to market participants through a broad-based and highly liquid'repo' market. A repo, or repurchase agreement, involves the short-term(including overnight) sale of securities to a cash provider such as amoney market fund, coupled with a commitment to repurchase thesecurities at an agreed-upon time and price, thereby determining theyield during the purchaser's holding period.Repos constitute among the lowest risk means of improving short-termyields as the lender or buyer of repo can take advantage of both thecredit worthiness of its counterparties (the sellers of repo) and theavailability of high quality 'collateral,' which are the repo-edsecurities. In the US more than dollars 1trillion of repos is tradedeach day. In the European repo markets, centred in London, annual netpurchases of repos had increased to a level of over dollars 7.3 billionby the end of 1994.From 2 January of this year there are no longer any officialrestrictions on anyone repoing or lending and borrowing gilts, eitherdirectly or indirectly through intermediaries. The removal of theserestrictions means that investors may now freely use gilt repo toinvest their cash balances.As of mid-January, open market trading in gilt repos had not yetresulted in a fully liquid repo market as participants and theiradvisers were still working to resolve some lingering systems anddocumentation issues. Yet it is probably safe to say at this early datethat there is widespread interest in the development of the repo marketas a short-term investment alternative.If money market funds are to achieve the safe and liquid goals of theirshareholders it will be essential that a broad-based gilt repo marketbecomes established. In advance of this development the alternativesfor money fund portfolios are to hold time deposits of a number ofhighly rated banks, to invest in commercial paper of high-gradecorporate issuers and to engage in other strategies such as short-termfully hedged swaps into liquid instruments denominated in othercurrencies.Thus far only a handful of sterling denominated money market funds havebeen launched, and these have endeavoured to preserve maximumflexibility in their investment programmes. Most have not been able toassure investors of absolute liquidity, or 'same day' settlement onredemption of their fund shares. The advent of gilt repo, therefore, isan important step in the future development of actively managed moneymarket funds designed for UK institutional investors.William Kleh is Managing Director of AIM Global Advisors Limited(London)Total US money market assets(1)(dollars bn)Year1974                              21979                             461984                            2341989                            4281990                            4981991                            5431992                            5461993                            5651994                            6111995 (Nov)                      750(1) incl. taxable & tax-exempt fundsSource:  ICI (Investment Company Institute)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INVESTMENT BANKING: MOVE OVERInternational bankers remain concerned about competition from the WorldBank's government-funded private sector finance arm, the InternationalFinance Corporation (IFC), for business which they consider could behandled by private sector banks.A report(1) last month from the Institute of International Finance(IIF), the Washington-based group representing nearly 200 privatefinancial institutions from around the world, acknowledges that IFC hastaken on board the criticisms. But it argues that it should go further.Last year IFC issued new guidelines on Collaboration with PrivateInternational Financial Institutions. This is welcomed by IIF, whichemphasises the continuing 'strong interest of most private banks inworking in partnership with IFC'.Nonetheless, IIF stresses the substantial change in the emergingeconomies which, previously dependent on official financing, nowincreasingly have access to commercial sources.'Most of the private flows are .. concentrated in the more advanceddeveloping countries. These are the same countries where IFC is doingmost of its business. As a consequence, the potential for IFCactivities to displace services provided by private banks has increasedmeasurably.' Among nine recommendations for further action by IFC, thereport argues: 'IFC should adopt an active and transparent graduationpolicy as part of a basic reorientation away from countries that haveaccess to international capital markets toward those that do not.Generally, there should be a presumption that IFC will not supporttransactions in countries designated as having substantial access tointernational capital markets, especially transactions involving large,well-known companies.' On underwriting; 'IFC should continue to limitits underwriting of international securities to exceptional cases whereit is clear that the transaction cannot be completed without IFC'spresence.'Pointing out that IFC has adopted a policy of not competing forprivatisation mandates awarded through bidding procedures, it arguesthat a further step should be taken to 'adopt a policy of not competingfor any advisory mandates awarded through a bidding procedure.'(1)Strengthening Collaboration Between the International FinanceCorporation and the Private Financial Community.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ITALY: LOSERS NOT CHOOSERSWhen Banco di Napoli declared a 1995 half-year loss of L1,561 billion(about dollars 1 billion) last autumn, it confirmed its capacity forexploring the financial outer reaches. It had shocked markets earlierin the year by declaring a loss of almost L1,000 billion for 1994, thenrevised upwards to L1,147 billion.Yet Banco di Napoli's awful performance should not have been asurprise.Other large southern banks had extended loss-making frontiers overrecent years, and Banco di Napoli operates in the same difficultenvironment of the mezzogiorno's almost comatose economy and thetenacious grip of politicial interference for which the south isnotorious.The truth about the dismal quality of its loanbook could not be hiddenforever.On its beam ends, the Neapolitan bank started 1996 in search of rescue.It was thrown a line at the end of November, when the treasury ministryand a group of banks agreed a L2,500 billion loan at market rates, amove suggesting that the bank was suffering an awkward liquidityshortage.The loan only allows temporary respite, however, when what is needed isradical restructuring both of its capital base and operations.Indeed, a drastic re-shaping has been sought by Federico Pepe since hisappointment to the chief executive's hot seat last summer.Heavy cuts are needed in the branch network, both to reduce losses andslim assets. But this will not be enough, and a massive injection offresh capital, upwards of L3,000 billion, is also needed to put ratiosin order.Though believed to enjoy central bank support, Pepe's plans have notbeen taken on board by all fellow directors, some of whom havevigorously opposed disposal of branches.There is opposition also to dilution of the equity owned by the bank'sfoundation. Seemingly unaware of the adage that losers cannot bechoosers, Neapolitan politicians want to continue controlling the bankand calling the shots, and imagine that there are gullible whiteknights ready to put their cash into a southern Italian bank that hasgiven no satisfaction to investors.Banco di Napoli's shares were traded at L658 on 15 January, against a1995/1996 high of L1,480.A big headache for the supervisory authorities, as well as itsshareholders, Banco di Napoli is far from being the only problem inItalian banking, however.Associazione Bancaria Italiana (ABI, the Italian banking association)published a review of the 1995 half-year results of a sample of 91commercial banks, including all the major institutions, at the end oflast year.The overall picture was gloomy. Although there was a slight increase ininterest margin for banks with nationwide operations, from 1.09% oftotal assets in the first half of 1994 to 1.12% in the January to Juneperiod last year, this is considered to have resulted from transitoryimprovements in conditions.Reviewing 1995's first-half results, Stefano Preda, professor ofeconomics at Milan's Bocconi University, noted that, faced bydifficulties in maintaining interest margins, many banks have tried toboost earnings from services.'Diversification is the typical strategic response to crisis in corebusiness. However, results do not at the moment seem comforting.' Predanoted that Italy's banks have until now diversifed into sectors thatare similar to banking, mature and offering low margins and high risks.He pointed to asset management where commissions of only L250 billionwere earned on more than L115,000 billion under management.Preda considered that while Italy's banks must improve revenues, theymust also cut costs further. At more than L110 million, the averageannual cost per employee is far higher than in other sectors. The ratioof operating costs to deposits and loans has been declining since 1991,but this is not enough.Fragmentation of the banking system prevents economies of scale.'Concentration is the right path, and is obligatory in many cases wheresize is insufficiently competitive,' said Preda.ABI's figures show that while there was a general improvement in grossoperating results, and improvements in net profit for regional andprovincial banks, the large national banks' aggregate bottom line waswritten in deep red.Thanks to increased provisions and lower extraordinary gains, Italy'slarge national banks showed an aggregate post-tax loss of L866 billionin the first half of last year, compared with a profit of L445 billionin the same period of 1994. Clearly Banco di Napoli's awesome losseswere influential, but other big banks hardly shone.Even after booking L44 billion extraordinary gains, Credito Italianocould report a post-tax end-of-June profit of only L91 billion (lessthan dollars 60 million).And while Istituto Bancario San Paolo di Torino showed a bottom linesurplus of L214 billion, it fell short of past achievements and whatmight be expected of Italy's biggest bank.Troubled Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS), whose former general managerVincenzo Pennarola is appealing through legal channels against hisdismissal in November, is another of Italy's faded banking glories.It was able to report a half-year net profit of L77 billion (on totalassets of L100,174 billion) only thanks to booking L152 billion ofextraordinary gains.And Milan's Cariplo, apparently still hopeful about making an initialpublic offering of its shares, returned a half-year profit of L135billion (on total assets of L131,271 billion) that is unlikely toencourage queues of eager prospective shareholders.There are no signs of joy at Banca di Roma either. Formed from themerger of three unsparkling institutions (Banco di Roma, Banco di SantoSpirito and Cassa di Risparmio di Roma) in the late 1980s and early1990s, the bank has yet to shine.Half-year profit of the bank (total assets of L153,665 billion) was ameagre L53 billion. Moreove, the recent acquisitions of BancaMediterranea (L2 billion profit at 30 June) and Banca Nazionaledell'Agricoltura (L17 billion loss) have done nothing to strengthen theRome bank.Notwithstanding disappointing results and dodgy loan books, Italy's bigbanks nevertheless seem to seek problems.Perhaps it is because most (Cariplo, MPS, San Paolo, Banca di Roma andthe large southerners Banco di Napoli and Banco di Sicilia) stillbelong firmly in the public sector.That may also explain the apparent enthusiasm with which IMI (theinvestment bank and financial services conglomerate), its threecontrolling shareholders (Cariplo, San Paolo and MPS) and Banca di Romabought into the equity of the Mediaset television company owned byformer prime minister Silvio Berlusconi , in spite of enormous andevident conflicts of interest.At least Banco di Napoli was not among the banks which put up L400billion to take a 6% stake in Mediaset at the end of December, thoughits name does appear among the shareholders of Italy's TAV high speedtrain project.But that investment was made when the bank was reporting profits.Survival is now the issue, rather than the collection of politicalpoints that still seems to preoccupy many banks.Professor Preda sees a trend that presents ample risks and a difficultfuture if decisive structural intervention is not undertaken both inindividual banks and the system overall. Indeed, some bankers refer toa crisis situation.As Italian banking enters 1996, many questions remain unanswered, notleast, which of its members might go the way of Banco di Napoli.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FRANCE: PROFIT - OR LOSSAs expected, Paribas chief executive Andre Levy-Lang was officiallyified last December that he is under investigation by a Frenchmagistrate looking into a case of falsified accounts at a Paribassubsidiary, Ciments Francais.This procedure, on which Paribas refuses to comment, allows themagistrate to interrogate Levy-Lang. The magistrate is obviously tryingto determine if Paribas and its chief executive knew about thefalsified accounts, something that Paribas, which has instituted acivil action in the case, has always denied.Given the circumstances of the case it would seem highly unlikely thatParibas was aware of the problem at Ciments Francais.Perhaps the bigger question raised by the case is the degree to which aholding company, like Paribas, can control its subsidiaries. Andwhether a French holding company can control a French subsidiary - evenwith five representatives on the board of directors of the subsidiary -given the passive nature of boards in France vis a vis the executivechairman. Ciments Francais' executive chairman, Pierre Conso, was arespected member of the business community.The case dates back to 1991 when one of Paribas' major shareholders,the AXA insurance group, decided to get rid of its shares in CimentsFrancais, a cement group. After a bid Paribas ended up with 86% of thegroup headed by Pierre Conso. Ciments Francais reported profits ofFF401 million (dollars 77.4 million) for 1991, a year when Paribasposted a loss of FF200 million, the first in its history.In April 1992, after trying unsuccessfully to fit the new activities inwith another industrial group, Paribas announced it was selling acontrolling shareholding of 54.7% of Ciments Francais to Italcementi,part of the Pesenti family group, one of the most important family-heldgroups in Italy.The FF6.6 billion deal, arranged for the Pesenti by Mediobanca, madeItalcementi the largest cement company in Europe and the second largestin the world.In July 1992 Ciments Francais raised FF500 million in equity on themarket, guaranteed by Mediobanca and Paribas, both of which reportedlyended up stuck with the paper.At first this looked like hard luck but in the light of followingevents was perhaps a stroke of good fortune since no big internationalinvestors became mired in the deal.In October 1992 an audit of Ciments Francais commissioned byItalcementi uncovered FF2.7 billion in off balance-sheet activitiesthat had gone unreported in its official balance sheet and whichaccounted for FF655 million of the FF740 million in losses for thefirst semester of 1992. Conso was fired and later arrested.Mediobanca, which has a small shareholding in Paribas, was infuriated.Paribas deducted FF500 million from the purchase price and later tookoff another FF325 million. It also took over some of the off balance-sheet activities of Ciments Francais.The FF800 million capital gain originally announced turned into a lossfor Paribas. A report ordered by the investigating magistrate concludedthat in 1991 Ciments Francais should have posted a FF120 million lossinstead of a profit.One of the ironies in the story is that Giampiero Pesenti, head ofItalcementi, is also chairman of Gemina, the investment and financialservices group of Fiat, in which the Pesenti group as well asMediobanca also have shares.The recent Mediobanca-concocted plan to merge the activities of Geminawith the financial and industrial activities of the Ferruzzi group tocreate a super-Gemina foundered, due to surprise losses at a Geminasubsidiary, Rizzoli. This would have created the second largest groupin Italy after Fiat.Now Gemina executives are under investigation for falsified accountsand false corporate reporting. Paribas was to have taken a 5% stake inthe super-Gemina deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996AUSTRIA: POST-UNION BLUESAustria has a headache, or several. Sobered up after the excitementwhich accompanied the overwhelming vote in the 1994 referendum infavour of joining the European Union, the country is now coming toterms with the implications of membership, a year after joining.After the second election in just over a year, the once stablepolitical structure is in disarray.The government still badly needs to tackle the budget deficit, theissue which caused last year's breakdown of the ruling left/rightcoalition.The point has been made more urgent by commitment to meeting theMaastricht criteria for membership of economic and monetary union(EMU).Rather than being marginalised as just a small country on the easternfringes of the EU, Austria aims to be a senior player in the bigleague, while at the same time retaining a role as a gateway to theemerging economies of central and eastern Europe. That objective is indoubt.A slowdown in economic growth is not helping. Nor is it providing apromising background for the banks, already suffering in their homemarket from slow loan growth and pressure on margins in a seriouslyoverbanked country.Meanwhile, the political shenanigans have yet again put into abeyanceplans for privatisation of the government's stakes in the two biggestbanks. First in line is Creditanstalt, where the voting majority hasbeen up for grabs for nearly five years now; but the biggest, BankAustria, could also be affected.That is one of the problems facing the new finance minister. ViktorKlima, a Social Democrat (red) and former minister of transport, wasappointed by chancellor Franz Vranitzky (red) after Andreas Staribacherresigned.The move was widely welcomed in the banking sector as clearing the wayfor another attempt at the planned privatisations and, possibly, forsorting out the problems with the budget.Staribacher, a tax consultant, had been brought in last April toreplace longserving (red) finance minister Ferdinand Lacina, whostepped down after problems in negotiating the 1995 budget. (Last monthLacina was named to succeed Herbert Lugmayr, who is retiring, aschariman of GiroCredit, central clearing organisation for the savingsbanks.)Now the new finance minister faces the same problems as hispredecessors in 1996; the junior coalition partner, the People's Party(black), has been pushing for cuts in the generous spending on socialsecurity rather than tax increases.The election in December had been brought on by the collapse of thecoalition over the budget argument after the People's Party's newleader, Wolfgang Schussel, took a chance on improving the party'srepresentation in Parliament.His gamble failed; the reds increased their seats from 65 to 72, theblacks edged up from 52 to 53. The far right Freedom Party headed bythe populist Jorg Haider, which had previously been gaining ground andchallenging the established political set-up, stood still with 41 seatsagainst 42.That leaves the government where it started. At the time of writing,talks were still going on to renew the coalition.Whatever agreement is reached between the parties, they have to tacklethe budget issue. The deficit was expected to reach 5.3% of grossdomestic product (GDP) last year. It needs to be cut to 3% to meet theMaastricht convergence criteria. Until a budget is agreed for this yearpredictions further ahead are shaky.Some contribution is expected from the proceeds of privatisation ofextensive state holdings in industrial and commercial companies -including the banks. But the fundamentals, which caused the previoussplit, need to be sorted out.Getting the deficit under control is not being helped by the economicslowdown. The latest forecasts from GiroCredit indicate that GDPgrowth, which hit 3.0% in 1994, slipped to 2.0% last year and couldfall to 1.7% this year.The bank results have reflected the slowdown in the economy.Preliminary indications for the full year from the biggest banks showthat, while business at home was quiet, international activities helpedto produce reasonably good results.Bank Austria reported in late December that operating results for 1995should be up by 16.8% at about S4.9 billion (dollars 485 million). Thebank has been working on cutting costs: 'The domestic branch networkwas further streamlined through the closure or merger of branches.'The number of branches and business units fell from 320 to 306, andthe bank plans to merge 20 more branches in 1996.'In the home market: 'Demand for personal loans remains depressed due toslow growth in disposable income, but is stronger than in 1994.Business loans experienced growth, especially those granted to smalland medium-sized companies.'Outside Austria 'international business has surpassed expectations. In1995, the performance of all the bank's foreign offices was either goodor outstanding based on a comparison of the results posted for 1994'.Bank Austria has been working to take advantage of the fact that it isnow under the same holding company which holds a majority of GiroCredit(which is however fighting to avoid losing its its separate identity).The asset management activities of the two banks have been merged. And'agreement was reached with GiroCredit to direct external publicaccountants to examine the possibilities for merging some of theforeign offices of Bank Austria and GiroCredit'.The bank has also been developing its external links. Cariplo of Italyhas agreed to increase its holding from 4.3% to 5.6% this year.And last year Bank Austria formed a strategic link with Germany'sWestdeutsche Landesbank.'The co-operation agreement .. foresees a participation of WestLB inBank Austria in the order of about 9.1% in Bank Austria's share capitalthrough a capital increase. The two banks moreover mutually declarethemselves to be preferred partners for cross-border financialtransactions.'Creditanstalt has been particularly helped by foreign business.Chairman Guido Schmidt-Chiari reported a rise of 16% in the CA Group'safter-tax surplus to about S2.2 billion.'One dominant characteristic of the 1995 business year was thefavourable earnings situation in international business. Whileaccounting for some 50% of the consolidated balance sheet, foreignbusiness generated about two-thirds of the group's surplus for theyear.'In contrast: 'Domestic business was under heavy pressure in 1995.'The reasons for this development are to be seen in the extremely weakcredit demand during much of the year, the shift to short-term loanswith low interest rates and a general squeeze on the interest margin.'GiroCredit, which as well as being the central institution for thesavings banks is a commercial bank in its own right, had a good yearwith operating profit up 56% at S1.53 billion. The year was eventful,including a reorganisation of risk management, restructuring the equityinvestment portfolio and 'going public'.To achieve this, the bank converted the whole of its outstandingparticipating capital, with a nominal value of S300 million, intopreference shares which were offered to the public. 'Despite theunfavourable market climate at the time, the issue was oversubscribed.The preference stock is widely held, having been placed with privateand institutional investors in Austria and abroad.'The problems of the banks were highlighted by rating agency Moody's inits December 1995 review. The agency pointed to five challenges:* Widespread overcapacity within the domestic banking system;* Aggressive retail fund pricing coupled with relentless pressure onloan margins which, together, continue to define the generally poorprofitability of Austrian banks;* Slack loan demand for the foreseeable future as the Austrian economyitself shows renewed signs of slowing down;* High overhead ratios that are the product not only of underlying thincore operating revenues but also of relatively high cost structures;* The need, at least for some of the major banks, to rebuild their trueeconomic capital that, to an extent, had been impacted by the releaseof hidden reserves (either through the sale of assets or reductions inoverprovisioning) during the recession.'Moody's added: 'Looking ahead, the Austrian banking system as a wholemay have difficulties in pursuing any further far-reaching and morepainful restructuring after a number of years of targeted andmoderately successful cost containment measures.'The agency highlighted the excessive number of banks. 'From a retailbanking point of view, Austria remains overbranched. With the exceptionof Belgium, its banking system is the most overbanked in the EuropeanUnion with any one bank or bank branch serving, on average, a mere1,384 people. Germany comes relatively close with 1,533 people served.'Consolidation and restructuring within the banking system are needed.Some progress has been made in the savings sector. But at the end ofthe day developments depend on political influence and convincingentrenched interests of the need to adapt to the new open environmentof EU membership.Sorting out the privatisation programme would be a good starting point.It would help to shape the future direction of the banks, as well asmaking a significant, if one-off, contribution to cutting the budgetdeficit.Bank Austria is majority owned by the (historically red) City ofVienna; but the Federal government has indicated its intention ofselling off its 22.8% voting stake. That has not prevented chiefexecutive Gerhard Randa from making long-term plans.The greatest uncertainty is over Creditanstalt, where the long-runningsaga of the sale has made it difficult for the management to planahead.While he was finance minister, Staribacher had called in JP Morgan toput a value on the Federal government's stake - just under half thecapital but holding 70.5% of the votes.Morgan determined that, while the bank was worth some S28-30 billion intotal, the government's controlling stake should command a premium.That implied a valuation of some S18 billion, a useful contribution tocutting the deficit (The Banker, 8/95, p31).The coalition's collapse and the election meant that the sale was againput off (The Banker, 11/95, p4). Now Klima has the chance to start theprocess again. As usual, politics intervenes.The sale offer had progressed as far as inviting indicative offers forthe Creditanstalt stake. It is believed that the consortium includingFirst Austrian Bank and Italy's Generali insurance group (known as the'Austrian solution'), which has been showing interest for some time,put down a marker. It is not known whether there were any other firmapproaches.The nub of the issue is whether Austria will be prepared to allow atraditionally black bank which goes back to the old Habsburg empire topass out of Austrian control.Germany's Allianz insurance group had shown an interest, but backedoff; Switzerland's CS Holding group pulled out of a firm offer when itmet an increasingly xenophobic reaction.Lacina, finance minister at the time, is believed to have at leastinitially favoured the CS Holding approach. Klima is understood to haveopposed the deal, believing that the bank should stay in Austrianhands.Now he is in the driving seat. The problem will be to reconcilenational pride with giving value to the purchaser(s) of theCreditanstalt stake and at the same time realising as much benefit aspossible to help cut the budget deficit.There is a strong belief that the sales of the Federal government'sbank stakes will go ahead this year. That will be some relief toeverybody.Austrian banks' interim results June 1995(schillings million)                           Capital &  % change    Total   % change                           reserves    (12/94)    assets   (12/94)Creditanstalt-Bankverein     25,778     -1.5     637,159     3.2Bank Austria                 22,965      0.0     670,243     5.3GiroCredit                   16,740      0.0     328,550     0.4Raiffeisen Zentralbank Osterreich                  11,700      1.7     224,300     3.4Bank fur Arbeit & Wirtschaft  9,376      2.2     225,258     0.9PSK Banking Group             8,770      3.4     250,156    16.5First Austrian Bank           8,532(1)   0.0     210,896     2.2                              Net-      Non-                   %                            interest  interest   Operating   change                             income    income      resultCreditanstalt-Bankverein      4,544     3,211      2,237      -6.6Bank Austria                  5,778     2,345      1,966      17.4GiroCredit                    1,445       766        678     227.5Raiffeisen Zentralbank Osterreich                     763       519      1,282      25.2Bank fur Arbeit & Wirtschaft  1,575       407        620      12.5PSK Banking Group             1,517       853        847      20.3First Austrian Bank           2,014     1,082        744      -1.2(1) excludes supplementary capitalUSdollars = 9.7337 schillings (6/95)Source:  The BankerBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996CZECH REPUBLIC: THE SECOND TIME AROUNDParliamentary elections at the end of June are already casting ashadow. Not that anyone expects the present coalition government led byprime minister Vaclav Klaus and his Civic Democratic Party to lose. Noris there likely to be any disruption of the economic and politicalstability which has characterised the Czech transition to a marketeconomy, easily the smoothest and most successful in post-communistcentral and east Europe.As Klaus has recently observed, his government, in office since June1992, is already the longest serving since the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire in 1918 led to the creation of an independentCzechoslovakia - and ultimately to the emergence of the Czech republicin 1992, when Slovakia split away.This does not mean that this year's elections for the 200-seat chamberof deputies (and later in the year for the newly-created 81-membersenate, or upper house) is likely to see another Klaus walkover.According to the opinion polls, the main opposition group, the SocialDemocratic Party, led by Milos Zeman, has moved up from 6.5% of thevote at the 1992 election to around 20% support against 25-27% forVaclav Klaus's Civic Democratic Party.By contrast, the two junior partners in the present coalition, theCivic Democratic Alliance and Christian Democratic Union/Czech People'sParty, look like mustering around 6-8% of the vote, just aboutsufficient to satisfy the 5% minimum to secure representation in thenew house. So do the communists, which makes the Czech republic theonly country in the region where former communists (reformed orunreformed) have no prospect of being voted back into power.But, while the elections are unlikely to see an upset, they arenonetheless having an influence on the local political debate. Issues,such as reform of the health service, education, pensions, and publictransport, which have tended to be neglected amid the broad politicalconsensus about the reform process, have been moving up the peckingorder.So have questions arising from what prime minister Klaus has himselfdescribed as the 'early post-transformation stage' to which 'Czechsociety has now progressed'.Longer-term questions about industrial policy, financial sectorregulation, and the role of banks and investment funds in corporategovernance have been prompted by a series of takeovers of companies andinvestment funds and by several bank failures.Last year's yawning trade deficit has underlined a growing debate aboutCzech competitiveness. Can a country of 10 million people offer a homemarket large enough to support industrial companies and financialservices groups capable of competing successfully in today's globalmarket place? Differences between the government and the central bankover exchange rate policy have become increasingly public. The tradedeficit appears to strengthen the case for the Czech crown to bedevalued: the heavy, continuing inflow of foreign capital creates astrong argument for revaluation.The investment inflow is one measure of the international recognitionthe so far successful transformation of the Czech economy has beenreceiving.Foreign direct and portfolio investment has been flooding in, bringingthe cumulative total since the transition began in 1990 to well overdollars 5 billion.In October the government fully liberalised all current accounttransactions and also freed many capital account transactions, thusachieving convertibility in terms of the International Monetary Fund'sArticle VIII.Then, in November, the Czech republic chalked up a notable double. Thecountry became the first in post-communist central and east Europe tobe accepted for membership of the industrial nations' club, theOrganisation for Economic Co-operation & Development.In the same month, the country was the first in the region to beawarded an 'A-stable' investment grade rating by Standard & Poor's, theUS credit rating agency.The Czech economy, meanwhile, is expected to grow by another 4-5% thisyear, for the third year running. Prime minister Klaus prefers to callthe downturn in the early 1990s not a recession but 'a transformationshake-out' - a 'shake-out of the non-viable economic activities whichcould exist only in protected Comecon markets, with distorted pricestructures and huge subsidies'.Unemployment never rose by very much, and is now less than 3% and stillfalling. Productivity is rising. Inflation has fallen to singlefigures, and is still declining. The Czech crown has been holdingsteady on the world's exchanges. And, as Klaus is keen to point out,Czech living standards (using purchasing power parity) are already backto or above the level of the poorer member countries in the EuropeanUnion.The only possibly worrying feature in an otherwise impressive record isthe trade deficit. Last year it looked set to reach dollars 3.5billion, up sharply from dollars 470 million in 1994. But here, too,Klaus sees this as natural in the early post-transformation stage ofthe Czech economy.Not only are imports likely to increase as the pace of industrialoutput and construction quickens. Exports are also likely to bediverted to the home market as the growth of investment and consumptionaccelerates. With the country's overall international credibilitystanding high, and investment pouring in, financing the trade deficitposes no problem, at least for the present.Vaclav Klaus goes further. He sees no reason to change the exchangerate, unlike Josef Tosovsky, the able central bank governor, who hasbeen worried by the impact of heavy monetary inflows, especially short-term speculative capital, upon the domestic money supply, and thus uponinflationary pressure. According to Klaus, a devaluation would notsolve, at least in the short run, the balance of trade deficit, while arevaluation - especially a small revaluation - would not discouragemonetary inflows.Instead, the two may settle for a more modest change in exchange ratepolicy. This would be to widen the band within which the Czech crowntrades against the dollars/DM currency basket. At present the band islimited to 0.5% either side of parity.Changing the band to as much as 3%, or possibly even 5%, either side ofparity could help to deter speculative flows as well as provide somescope to promote competitiveness.Competitiveness has already been improving to some extent. Industrialproductivity has risen. The low level of unemployment, despite large,continuing lay-offs, indicates that the manpower shake-out in somesectors has been absorbed by the fast growing small business andservices sectors.'The low level of unemployment is a bottleneck to higher growth,' saysJosef Tosovsky of the National Bank; 'manpower and other resources arestill being hoarded by inefficient firms'.Lubomir Soudek, chairman and chief executive of Skoda Plzen, thecountry's largest heavy engineering firm, makes a similar point.'Czech industry faces several competitive disadvantages. We still lagbehind in technology. There are still big problems over working methodsand ethics, including lower labour productivity because of outdatedmanagement methods.The general lack of capital is a major hindrance.'Short-term loans from local Czech banks are not on as good terms asthose offered by western banks to their clients. Finally, a drawbackthat cannot be overlooked is the relatively low level of directgovernment support for Czech industry.'As Soudek indicates, prime minister Klaus is inclined to leave thingsto the market. But, for a long while, banks and other creditorsappeared reluctant to enforce the bankruptcy laws.These were considerably strengthened in 1993 and another amendment toquicken liquidation proceedings is in preparation now. It is onlyrecently, however, that the rate of enforcement has picked up. Betweenlate 1992 and May 1995 a total of 4,500 bankruptcy petitions werefiled, but only 600 bankruptcies were declared.There are other indications that the pace of restructuring in Czechindustry may be about to quicken. Last year the second and final waveof the Czech republic's voucher privatisation programme was completed,raising the share of the country's gross domestic product generated bythe private sector to more than 70%. The flow of foreign directinvestment also boomed in 1995, in part boosted by the partialprivatisation sale of SPT Telecom to the Swiss and Dutchtelecommunications groups.As Lubomir Soudek of Skoda Plzen says, many Czech companies are toosmall to compete with the largest multinationals.In October Stratton, a US investment company owned by Michael Dingman,a Bahamas-based industrialist, announced that it had bought stakes ineight leading Czech companies (in shipping, glass-making, pulp andpaper, and oil and gas exploration) from Prague-based Harvard Capital &Consulting, the big privatisation investment fund group.Stratton proposed to inject marketing, management, and financialexpertise into the eight firms, regarding itself as a medium-terminvestor.Eventually, it would sell its shares on to strategic investors or floatthem on the market. Meanwhile, Stratton and Harvard (which hadsubsequently bought in the market further shares in the same companies)would vote their shares jointly.This was followed by a move against other big privatisation investmentfunds by a little-known Czech firm called Motoinvest acting in concertwith Plzenska Banka and Agrobanka, two local banks. In a series ofstock market raids, Motoinvest bought blocks of shares in sixinvestment funds run by established local fund managers, saying that itwould dispense with the existing management and run the funds itself.Shortly afterwards, Bankers Trust bought by agreement 40% stakes in twoinvestment funds run by Ceska Sporitelna (Czech Savings Bank),intending to sell the stakes on to Western institutional investors.Each of these moves, but especially Motoinvest's, sent a shock wavethrough the relatively staid world of Czech fund management.Motoinvest's ploy demonstrated the funds' vulnerability as long astheir own shares trade at big discounts to net asset value. The obviousconclusion was that fund managers need to generate much better returnson their portfolio of investments in privatised companies.The government was also prompted to act more speedily to tighten up theregulatory framework. The lack of transparency on the Prague StockExchange has long been criticised as a major shortcoming and a sourceof weakness. In future, acquisitions of stakes of more than 10% in acompany will have to be disclosed.At the same time, the law is being changed to allow investment funds,which have hitherto been restricted to a maximum 20% holding in any onecompany, to elect to become managerial funds permitted to acquiremajority stakes in Czech companies.Big changes also appear to be impending in the banking sector. Foreignbanks were becoming a major force in the local corporate and investmentbanking markets when the National Bank temporarily stopped issuing newbanking licences in late 1993 and set about trying to encourage theemergence through mergers of a tier of middle-sized local banks.Now, with the failure of these hopes (despite the impending merger ofBanka Hana and Zemska Banka) and with the Czech government aboutformally to announce its bid for European Union membership, theNational Bank is thinking of lifting or easing the ban on new licences,with the UK's Midland Bank apparently heading the list of possible newarrivals.Meanwhile, two of the four large local banks, Ceska Sporitelna andCeskoslovenska Obchodni Banka (the former foreign trade bank), are at'the very preliminary stage' of discussing the possibility of a merger.These talks may never come to anything. But they point to one possibleway forward. The big local banks in the Czech republic (like those inHungary, another country of 10 million people) are relatively tinycompared with the foreign banks with which they increasingly have tocompete, such as the big German, Austrian, American (including now GECapital), Swiss, and Dutch banks building up key positions in theregion's banking and financial markets.Sooner or later, the 'big' local banks will have to follow their majorcorporate clients as they expand abroad, just as Western banks had toin their day.As competition builds up in the run-up to European Union membership,the big Czech (and Hungarian, Polish and other) banks will need to seekstrategic partners of their own or, alternatively, try to outgrow thelimitations of their own local home market by making acquisitionselsewhere in the region.In banking, as in other sectors, the second and perhaps the harderstage of the transformation of the Czech economy is getting seriouslyunder way.Czech Republic: Key indicators                                         1992  1993  1994 1995* 1996**Private sector: % GDP                    27.7  45.1  56.3  70.0    naGrowth: % GDP change                     -6.4  -0.9   2.6   4.0   4.8Unemployment: % end year                  2.6   3.5   3.2   2.8   2.8Inflation: % end year                    12.7  18.2  10.2   9.1   8.0Budget balance: % GDP                    -3.3   1.4   1.0   0.0   0.0Trade balance: dlrs bn                   -1.0   0.3  -0.4  -3.8    naCurrent account: dlrs bn                  0.6   0.4   0.3  -1.9  -2.3Net external debt: dlrs bn                8.6   3.9   2.8    na    naForeign direct investment: dlrs bn        0.9   0.5   0.9   2.0    naExchange rate: koruny to USdlrs end year 28.9  30.0  28.2  26.7    na               koruny to DM end year     17.9  17.3  18.0  18.6    na*  latest or end year estimate** projectedSource:  EBRD & othersBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996GLOBAL BANKING: HOME AND AWAYThe world's Top 50 global banks appear to have slowed their expansionabroad as the trend towards consolidation in domestic banking sectorstakes hold.The Banker's latest survey of global banking suggests that, while somehave expanded their percentage of overseas assets, others have returnedtheir focus to domestic markets.The top ranking continues to be headed by the UK's Standard Charteredwith its percentage of assets abroad remaining above 70%. However, forthe second year running, the bank has relied on Hongkong for more than50% of its pre-tax profits. Nevertheless, it does have an extensivenetwork throughout the high-growth region of Asia; predators withambitions in the area would find Standard Chartered a temptingacquisition. In January, rumours were circulating, with the UK'sNational Westminster Bank, ranked 13th globally, as a potential bidder.One new entry into the top five is ABN-Amro Bank, whose overseas assetsfigure this year of 61% includes those assets domiciled overseas bookedthrough the Netherlands. This figure looks set to increase further forin 1994, the number of the bank's overseas branches increased from 461to 540.The Netherland's second largest bank, ING Bank, is also a bank thatfocuses on international activities, having entered obscure foreignmarkets such as North Korea and Cuba before its rivals. Its acquisitionof failed Barings will enhance its international activities. However,the lack of information provided by the bank on its overseas assetsmakes a comparison with ABN-Amro difficult. It is not surprising tofind the Dutch banks venturing abroad, given their saturated homemarket.The top players continue to include the 'Big Three' from Switzerland,but their position in the global rankings has changed as they vie togain control of their domestic market.Swiss Bank Corporation expanded domestically in 1994 throughacquisition, co-operation agreements and minority stakes, losing sevenplaces in the rankings as the percentage of its assets held abroad fellfrom 53% to 47%.Union Bank of Switzerland also expanded domestically by acquiring fiveregional banks, resulting in a drop in its ranking to fourth fromsecond. CS Holdings made its large domestic acquisition of SwissVolksbank in 1993, followed in 1994 with the absorption ofSwitzerland's largest regional bank, New Bank of Argovie.However, such actions at home do not represent a change in overallglobal strategy. Swiss Bank Corp took over the UK's SG Warburg in 1995and CS Holdings has risen to second place in this year's rankings. Itsassets in the US through investment banking subsidiary CS First Bostonrepresent 30% of group total assets.Other strong European representations come from the five French bankswhich hold more than 40% of their assets abroad. Surprisingly, troubledCredit Lyonnais, under pressure to dispose of assets to pay for itsoverexpansion in the 1980s, now leads the French pack with 53.6%.According to the controversial rescue plan announced in early 1995,Credit Lyonnais was ordered to sell off 30% of its foreign assets.Deutsche Bank leads the four German banks in the list, with 43% ofassets abroad as of end December 1994. Deutsche Bank's chairman HilmarKopper said in November that the bank was only 'half German' and hasdesigns to become a global player in wholesale operations. With a 2.7%share of the European Union market, it is the market leader and isstrengthening its investment banking operations in London throughsubsidiary Deutsche Morgan Grenfell.Better disclosure from Dresdner Bank indicates that 33% of its assetsare held abroad, and this figure looks set to rise further with lastyear's acquisition of the UK's Kleinwort Benson.Other developments among the European banks include a drop in BancoSantander's assets abroad, from 38.6% to 29.7%, as a result ofabsorbing failed Banesto. Banco Bilbao Vizcaya now assumes the positionof top global Spanish bank. In December, the UK's National WestminsterBank sold off its US retail and commercial banking operations as aresult of competition arising from the rapid pace of consolidation inthe US banking market.However, one of the bank's strategies is to build up NatWest Marketsinternationally and it has recently expanded its futures operations inAsia.Outside Europe, Japan continues to be represented by 10 banks with twonewcomers, Mitsubishi Trust & Banking and Sumitomo Trust & Banking, inthis year's list through better disclosure of their overseasactivities. Their annual reports indicate ambitions to expand abroad,especially in China and the Asia region. This is not surprising, giventhe prolonged recession at home. However, a merger on 1 April betweenBank of Tokyo, the most international of the Japanese banks, and thedomestically stronger Mitsubishi Bank will create the world's largestbank, but with a higher proportion of the new banks' assets residing athome.Of the three Australian banks in the list, a contrast of strategiesexists between National Australia Bank and Westpac. National AustraliaBank continues to expand abroad with its acquisition of MichiganNational Corp of the US, increasing its overseas assets figure to 47%.This will be reflected in next year's survey. Meanwhile Westpac iscontinuing to refocus on its domestic market after reckless over-expansion in the 1980s, resulting in 1992 in a loss equivalent to onethird of its then Tier One capital.Of the six US banks in the ranking, JP Morgan, Bankers Trust andCiticorp all hold over 45% of their assets abroad. However, withpossible new regulations regarding interstate banking, US banks maytake advantage of the new opportunities to expand domestically.Indeed, a process of consolidation is under way within the US bankingsector and in 1995, the biggest bank in the US was created by themerger between Chemical Banking and Chase Manhattan. Now they hold23.6% and 29.8% of assets abroad respectively, with the merger creatinga more powerful domestic than international franchise. For the moment.Where they come fromEurope                  (25)North America           (10)Japan                   (10)Asia excl. Japan         (5)Source:  The BankerHow we did itThe Banker's annual listing of global banks ranks the Top 100 largestbanks in the world according to their percentage of assets basedoverseas. They all have a presence in London, New York and Tokyo.Figures have been obtained from the banks or from their annual reports.The ideal measure consists of assets booked through overseas offices aswell as overseas assets booked through domestic ones.In some cases, through lack of information, estimates such as incomegenerated abroad have been used as the next best indicator.To enable a comparison of global reach, asset figures in seven leadingfinancial centres are provided. However, in most cases the givenfigures will exclude those assets domiciled in those overseas centreswhich have been booked through domestic offices. Nevertheless, they doprovide an indication of the relative sizes of foreign banks'operations.Owing to the lack of information for London, employee totals have beenused, drawn from the November 1995 issue.For Hongkong figures include the banks' subsidiaries but not theirbranches.For Singapore, figures also include contingent liabilities andcommitments.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996JAPAN: HASHIMOTO TO THE RESCUEHistory cannot record many cases of a country swapping prime ministersfor the sake of its banks and yet this is what has happened in Japan.With the fate of the bankrupt housing loan corporations (Jusen) hangingin the balance, and thus that of the banking system too, politicaltough guy Ryutaro Hashimoto has taken over from mild-mannered TomiichiMurayama the role of premier and also that of defender of the financialsystem.Hashimoto would have become prime minister sooner or later - hiselection last year as president of the majority Liberal DemocraticParty (LDP) ensured that. But Murayama's sudden resignation in earlyJanuary was precipitated not so much by a process of natural selectionas by fears that the parliamentary opposition would make mincemeat ofhim over the Jusen affair. If he is to save his own political skin, andthe reputation of the parliamentary coalition in which he served astrade and industry minister, Hashimoto has to champion the Jusenrescue.The issue is extremely important, not only for Japan but equally forinternational financial markets. The fragile Japanese banking systemcould be plunged back into turmoil if the Jusen scheme is turned into apolitical football. The so-called Japan premium would reappear ininterbank markets, the Tokyo stock market would likely reverse itsrecent gains and a dangerous downward economic spiral could result.With so much at stake it was small wonder that Murayama, who is 71years old and weary from the burden of 18 months in office, shouldshrink from facing what threatened to be a full frontal challenge onceJapan's national Diet reconvened on 22 January. The Shinshintoopposition party now has at its head Ichiro Ozawa, a man every bit asruthless politically as Hashimoto and who will seize any opportunity tobring down the ruling coalition.In a country like Japan which loves to hate its bankers, Shanshinto hasnothing to lose and everything to gain by capitalising on the Jusenissue.Japanese voters are often assumed to be docile but there is asurprising degree of popular outrage over the scheme devised lastDecember by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to rescue the mortgagelending firm - using Yen 685 billion or dollars 6.8 billion of taxpayersubsidies in the process .Even now, some five years after the collapse of Japan's bubble economy,bankers are still being berated by politicians and the public forcausing the bubble. That banks were forced into financing speculativeassets in the late 1980s after financial deregulation sent many formerclients in search of capital market finance rather than bank borrowingsis overlooked.Virtually everyone is baying for the blood of the bankers and Ozawa isan astute enough politician to exploit the popular ire and try to bringabout the downfall of the Hashimoto government over the Jusen issue.Few in Japan would argue with Shinshinto's right to force the coalitionto seek a popular mandate after its unseemly power grab in 1993, butthe few who realise what is at stake wish the opposition had chosenanother issue on which to go to war.The Jusen scheme represented the coping stone of an elaborate edificeconstructed by the finance minister under its former political headMasayoshi Takemura, who heads the minority Sakigaki party withinHashimoto's coalition. Under initiatives announced late last year, theMoF arranged first for banks to come clean on their bubble-economy badloans, to beef up their management systems and to agree to a ResolutionTrust-type body being set up, financed by a steep hike in depositinsurance premiums.The ministry also promised to thoroughly overhaul itself and to renderits opaque supervision of Japan's financial system more transparent andaccountable in future.But it was the Jusen scheme (which involved a considerable financialsacrifice on the part of Japanese banks) that finally tippedinternational confidence back in Japan's favour. Now, this could be injeopardy once more.The Jusen problem is big by any measure. Out of total loans of aroundYen 13 trillion the seven firms (which began with residential mortgagelending before splurging on commercial real estate financing in thebubble economy) have seen some Yen 6.3 trillion worth go bad. Most isattributable to banks and it represents one-third of the Yen 18trillion in loans which the MoF says is now irrecoverable in theJapanese financial system.The public has selected the wrong target in pillorying the banks overthe Jusen scheme. Taxpayers' money is needed not so much because banks(which founded and financed the housing corporations) have provedunwilling or unable to shoulder the full burden of writing off badloans, but because hundreds of agricultural co-operatives which alsolent to the Jusen are shirking their share of the burden.The co-ops, with formidable deposit-gathering powers through theirtrading connections with farmers, have agreed to accept only afractional part of the Jusen loan write-offs relative to the size oftheir exposure. Such is the co-ops' political influence, (especiallywith Hashimoto's Liberal Democratic Party which depends heavily uponthe rural vote), that few politicians are prepared to attack thempublicly .Banks are easy meat by comparison and even though there is risk forJapan in jeopardising again the health of the banking system thetemptation to make political capita}il out of the Jusen issue appearsirresistible. If the Jusen scheme were to unravel, banks would beforced to follow lengthy legal procedures in order to liquidate theseinstitutions and to crystallise their losses. The banking system wouldsee its international credit ratings sink even lower than they havedone already and more banks could suffer runs as the failed Hyogo Bankdid.This cannot be allowed to happen, not only because of the systemic riskit implies but also because Japan's fragile economic recovery willalmost certainly stall if banks do not soon become engines of creditcreation again. One reason why Japan's economy has been so weak for solong - real GDP has grown by under l% on average over the past fouryears - is because what little recovery has taken place has beenfinanced by a run down of savings and by tax rebates. Bank credit hasbeen absent.Loans outstanding at Japan's 11 commercial or 'city' banks actuallyfell by 1.4% from a year earlier to Yen 218.03 trillion by the end ofDecember, according to the Federation of Bankers Associations of Japan.While loans at the three long-term credit banks and seven trust bankshave risen marginally, banks in general simply are not confident enoughabout their balance sheets to engage in the kind of aggressive consumerand business lending needed to underpin a substantial rise in demand.Japanese banks badly need more generous tax treatment in writing offbad debt but the quid pro quo for this was that they agree to shouldera heavy part of the Jusen rescue burden. If the scheme falls through,so too presumably do the tax concessions.Despite the critical importance of restoring the banking system to fullhealth in Japan, few people are prepared to sacrifice themselves forthis cause. This became painfully obvious when Hashimoto began castingaround for a new finance minister to replace Takemura, who himself wasonly too eager to take theoopportunity offered by Murayama'sresignation to jump out of the hot seat.Finally, Hashimoto had to turn 66-year-old Wataru Kubo, secretarygeneral of the Social Democratic Party (SDP), the second largest forcewithin the ruling three-party coalition to make the 'sacrifice' ofoffering himself up as finance minister. What is normally regarded as aplum job would have gone to an LDP man but all the likely candidatesdeclined it.Although Kubo's appointment assures Hashimoto of socialist partysupport for the controversial Jusen scheme, political analysts say thatby putting the SDP stalwart in the direct firing line the new primeminister has provided himself with a sacrificial lamb in the event thata senior minister has to resign to take responsibility for the Jusenscheme.Hashimoto will insist that taxpayer's money being put into it shouldprove at least partly repayable, if the Resolution Trust-typeinstitution being set up as part of the scheme succeeds in collectingbad debts and realising collateral.A significant part of these bad debts is owed by organised crime(Yakuza) syndicates which borrowed from Jusen during the bubble but arenow refusing to repay loans. Bankers try to collect at their peril -sometimes literally on pain of death. The bad debt issue could wellprove to be fatal for the aspirations of some Japanese politicians too,to say nothing of its impact on Japan's financial system and economy.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TAIWAN: GIVE US A SMILEService quality and conservative management appeared to be the keys forsuccess in Taiwan's rocky financial market last year and may wellcontinue to be the formula in 1996, according to local bankers andanalysts.Even though Taiwan maintained a 6.4% rate of real economic growth and20% growth in exports, the island's domestic economy remained cool.Financial markets were hit by the continued depression in the propertymarket and a stock market that lost about 27% of its value during theyear, factors which also slowed expansion of private consumption.The outbreak of a number of financial scandals, a rising number ofbankruptcies and intensification of tensions with mainland China in thesecond half of the year added to the perception of gloom in thedomestic economy, despite the strongest export sector performance inyears.Indicators of the sluggish financial environment included soft growthin the M2 money supply, which slowed from 13.1% in January to 8.4% byNovember.More critical for bankers was the relatively cool growth in loans andinvestments, which rose by only 12.1% over the first 10 months of 1995,compared to 15.1% during the same period in 1994. Moreover, thepercentage of non-performing loans rose to a high 3.1% by November,according to Central Bank of China data.Taiwan's major state-owned banks, which are particularly vulnerable toexposure in loans to the property market and small enterprises, lookedlikely to just barely meet earnings targets for the first half of the1996 fiscal year (which began 1 July 1995).Earnings for the top three state-owned commercial banks suffered fromthe impact of a rising share of non-performing loans and losses insecurities investments.During the first five months of their fiscal year (from July toNovember) compared to the year-ago period, the pre-tax earnings forFirst Commercial Bank slipped 14% to NTdollars 2.8 billion, while HuaNan Commercial Bank suffered a 22% decline to NTdollars 2.7 million andthe Chang Hwa Commercial Bank's pre-tax earnings reached only NTdollars2.4 billion, about 5% off the year ago period.On 31 December, the First Commercial Bank had deposits of NTdollars614.1 billion and loans of NTdollars 499.9 billion, followed by Hua NanCommercial Bank with NTdollars 604.5 billion in deposits and NTdollars480.4 billion in ordinary loans, and the Chang Hwa Commercial Bank withNTdollars 593.3 billion in deposits and NTdollars 460.1 billion inloans.Despite the soft conditions, the island's 16 newer private banks(mostly established in 1991-92) continued to attract a rising share ofdeposits and loans. With NTdollars 11.3 billion in total deposits andNTdollars 10.6 billion in loans, the combined weight of the new banksapproached the scale of a major state-owned bank.But the pace of growth of the new banks slowed markedly from previousyears and their ranks showed more signs of differentiation in businessperformance.E. Sun Bank emerged as the leader in deposits for the first time withNTdollars 82.7 billion, up 37% over last year, followed closely byCosmos Bank with NTdollars 82.6 billion and Taishin International Bankwith NTdollars 80.6 billion.Six other banks reported deposits over NTdollars 70 billion. But thefastest growth was tallied by En Tie Commercial Bank, the newestentrant, with 46%, followed by Bank Sinopac with 42% expansion indeposits.Growth in loans was clearly far slower than for deposits last year forthe new banks. Only five had extended over NTdollars 70 billion inloans by the end of 1995, led by Cosmos with NTdollars 75.9 billion, E.Sun Bank with NTdollars 73.9 billion, and Taishin International Bankwith NTdollars 73.5 billion.Indeed, virtually all banks faced difficulties in finding outlets forrising deposits. None of the 16 new banks listed more loans thandeposits by year-end, averaging 94%.Still, the new banks were more effective in this area than the threestate-owned commercial banks, among which the highest ratio was talliedby First Commercial with a year-end 81.4% ratio of loans to deposits,according to data published in the Commercial Times (8 January 1996).More significantly, only five of the 16 newer private banks tallied pre-tax earnings over 7% on revenues in what was the fourth year ofoperation for most of them.Overall, the new banks earned an average of NTdollars 630 million lastyear and tallied a profitability rating of 5.88%, according to earlydata collected by the vernacular Economic Daily News (5 January 1996).Bank Sinopac was the most profitable bank with 7.83% of pre-taxearnings compared to revenues with a reported NTdollars 807 million innet earnings, followed by the Asia Pacific Bank, E. Sun Bank, TaishinInternational Bank, and the Dah An Commercial Bank.Four other banks scored pre-tax profitability rating over 6%, but sevenfailed to reach this mark, with Bao Dao Commercial reporting the lowestprofitability ratio with 3.52% on NTdollars 352 million in pre-tax netearnings.Noted Professor Yin Nai-ping of the banking department of Taipei'sNational Chengchi University: 'We are now beginning to see thepolarisation of the new banks into those that are well managed andefficient and those that have less healthy management practices,including excessive dealings with affiliates of associated businessgroups.'Banking insiders indicate that banks that played it safe by reducinginvestment in securities and high-risk lending and those that turned toconsumer loans in 1995 came out with more positive results on the year-end balance sheets.The earnings of several new banks were hit hard by the end to write offnon-performing loans, particularly banks that focused lendingstrategies on smaller enterprises and the property sector.According to the Commercial Times (3 January 1996), Union CommercialBank wrote off close to NTdollars 200 million, the Dah An CommercialBank took a hit of about a NTdollars 100 million, and Pan Asia suffereda NTdollars 80 million in bad loans, mostly to corporate clients.On the flip side, a number of banks improved their balance sheetsmarkedly by shifting the focus of lending strategy to individual andconsumer loans.Huang Yungjen, general manager of E. Sun Bank, said ESB's share ofloans to corporations and individuals had shifted from about 60:40 inprevious years to 55:45% last year and that the target is half-and-halfin 1996.'The consumer lending market is mature here given the per capita incomeof over USdollars 10,000, and in relatively poor economic conditions,extending more consumer loans is a good way to disperse risk,' Huangnoted, adding that 'we can put more effort on corporate loans when theeconomy improves'.Huang said ESB also gained through a management priority on loan'quality over quantity.' While the non-performing loan ratio for the 16new banks averaged 3.15% by October 1995, ESB had a 1.9% ratio, thanksin part to diversification to consumer lending and close riskmanagement of major clients with loans over NTdollars 50 million withassigned staff and a headquarters computer database.Huang also noted that ESB gained by playing the stock marketcautiously. 'We held down the investments by our trust department tobetween NTdollars 100-200 million and ended up losing only aboutNTdollars 30 million, compared to other private banks that lost as muchas NTdollars 200 million,' Huang said.Yet despite the growing scale of the new banks, Chien Hung-Tao, generalmanager of Hua Nan, maintains that they do not yet pose a major threat.'As the new banks are under strong pressure from shareholders to turnprofits and as they bear higher costs, they cannot use low lendingrates to compete with us nor can they compete in terms of foreignexchange services,' Chien noted.Where the state-owned banks are feeling the heat from the new privatebanks is in personnel. 'Service attitude at the new banks is clearlybetter because they steal good employees from us,' complained anotherexecutive in a top three state-owned bank. A key concern for state-owned banks is whether a draft law allowing them greater flexibility inpersonnel management will be passed this year.For the new year, local bankers express cautious optimism. A forecastissued by the Central Bank of China in late December anticipates thatconsumer and investor confidence will revive after Taiwan's firstdirect Presidential election on 23 March, and with continued strongexport growth and accelerated public infrastructure spending in thesecond half, maintain a moderate 6.48% economic growth rate in 1996.But analysts note that the new year contains a number of majorpolitical uncertainties, mostly focused around the Presidentialelection. While incumbent President Lee Teng-hui of the rulingKuomintang is favoured by most pundits to win the poll, the processwill also entail two potential cabinet reshuffles.As a new legislature was elected in early December, Lee has to appointa premier in February for approval by the new Legislative Yuan, but thewinner of the presidential poll will also need to name a premier aswell, probably by May.Moreover, as the Kuomintang's majority in the 164-seat Legislative Yuanwas reduced to a handful (85 seats), the new legislative environmentwill be less predictable and the weight of the grassroots oppositionDemocratic Progressive Party (53 seats) and the right-wing New Party(21 seats) on financial policy more evident.Not the least of bankers' concerns is whether mainland Chinese leaderswill move to moderate the current hard-line stance toward Taipei,particularly if Lee, who has been pilloried in the controlled mainlandpress, is elected.ESB's Huang Yung-jen noted that his bank's targets for 1996 are setconservatively 'as there are a large number of uncertainties'.'As the government tries to implement the plans to turn Taiwan into anAsia-Pacific regional operating and financial centre, the pace ofinternationalisation will accelerate as will the competitive pressurefrom foreign banks,' Huang noted.'Expectations are that the economy won't be worse than last year, butalso not much better,' Huang said. 'Many say that conditions mayimprove after the Presidential election and that relations withmainland China will settle down afterward, but this remains to be seen.'So we will retain a conservative approach and work to maintain thequality of loans, improve the effectiveness of capital use, and putmore stress on consumer loans and other products for the individualmarket to lower overall risk.'1996 will be a key year for a number of new banks, particularly asthree, Grand Commercial, Dah An and the Chinese Bank, will becomeeligible to apply for listing on the Taiwan Stock Exchange next year.But TSE regulations also require that companies hoping to list as afirst grade stock must maintain pre-tax earnings to revenue ratios ofover 6% during the two years before application and that the latteryear's profit rate must be higher.Of the three, Dah An and the Chinese Bank both attained earnings over6% (7.2% and 6.41%, respectively), and plan to better this performancein 1996.However, Grand Commercial, which only tallied a 4.2% profit rate onNTdollars 530 million in pre-tax earnings, will only be able to applyfor second-class listing, even if it attains its ambitious target ofNTdollars 988 million in earnings this year. The remaining banks areunder no less pressure to attain this earnings rate during the comingtwo years.Roger Chuang, executive vice-president of the Grand Commercial Bank,said: 'We hope that after the Presidential election the overallenvironment will improve and the stock market will revive. withcontinued strong traditional business and improvement in non-coreareas, we should boost our earnings up to NTdollars 988 million.'New private banks' deposits and loans(NTdollars billion)                            Deposits  % change  Loans  % changeGrand Commercial Bank         77.1       33%     70.4     30%Dah An Commercial Bank        68.9       26%     68.8     26%Union Commercial Bank         73.8       28%     68.0     23%The Chinese Bank              72.5       21%     70.6     20%Far Eastern Int'Bank          54.0       33%     52.4     23%Asia Pacific Bank             66.4       25%     54.5     19%Bank SinoPac                  75.6       42%     68.2     34%E Sun Bank                    82.7       37%     73.9     35%Cosmos Bank                   82.6       24%     75.9     19%Pan Asia Commercial Bank      66.7       14%     65.0     20%Chung Hsing Bank              66.4       26%     65.7     23%Taishin Intern'l Bank         80.6       38%     73.5     27%Fubon Commercial Bank         69.3       16%     66.5     21%Our Bank                      70.6       28%     67.1     30%Bao Dao Commercial Bank       72.2       29%     65.7     34%En Tie Commercial Bank        52.0       46%     50.6     34%USdollars = NTdollars 27.4) As of 31 December 1995Source:  Bureau of Monetary Affairs, Ministry of Finance;Economic Daily NewsBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TAIWAN: STORM DAMAGETaiwan's financial authorities offered a draft programme to strengthenthe supervision of monetary institutions as part of an effort torebuild confidence in the island's financial sector in late December.It had been racked by several scandals in the latter half of 1995, oneof which led to the censure of the central bank governor.The series of scandals began in late July with a NTdollars 20 billionrun on the Changhua City Fourth Credit Co-operative after exposure ofembezzlement by its general manager for stock speculation thatultimately led to the co-operative's absorption into the Taiwan Co-operative Bank (TCB). Since then, a number of farmers associations'credit branches have also experienced bank runs.No sooner had this storm calmed than a NTdollars 10 billion run hit theTaipei-based International Bills Finance Co (IBFC) in early August inthe wake of the arrest of a 29-year-old IBFC dealer on charges offorgery and embezzlement in another stock market speculation scandal,which included the state-run Bank of Taiwan among its victims.In early December, the private Overseas Chinese Bank (OCB), in whichthe finance ministry is the largest stockholder with 14.7%, suffered arun of over NTdollars 10 billion when local media reported that a bankshareholder had allegedly borrowed more than NTdollars 6 billionwithout adequate collateral.Former OCB executive director Liang Po-hsun, a construction tycoon, wasforced to resign his executive post in the wake of the scandal and thebank was stabilised with the aid of a rescue package by local banks,but may face prosecution.Although the impact of these events has so far been limited, theiroccurrence has sparked official and private concern for the health ofthe financial system and criticism of alleged slow reaction and poorsupervision on the part of monetary authorities.In September, the Executive Yuan (cabinet) approved administrativepunishments for 54 officials in connection with the Changhua and IBFCscandals, including Deputy Finance Minister Chen Mu-tsai and DeputyCentral Bank of China Governor Chin Cheng-hsiung.The Control Yuan, the highest government watchdog organ, followed byvoting on 29 December to censure Central Bank of China Governor SheuYuan-tung and six other acting or retired officials of the Bank ofTaiwan for the IBFC affair. Moreover, Premier Lien Chan instructed thefinance ministry and the central bank to develop a plan to intensifymonitoring of the island's over 4,000 financial institutions. On 28December, Finance Minister Lin Chen-kuo and Central Bank of ChinaGovernor Sheu Yuan-dong issued a draft programme to intensifyinspection and monitoring of over 4,000 financial institutions anddealing with financial crises through a new division of monitoringresponsibilities among the finance ministry, the central bank, theCentral Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC) and local governments.Under the plan, the Taiwan Co-operative Bank will no longer supervisebasic level financial institutions, such as credit co-operatives orfarmers and credit branches of fishermen's associations.From 1 July 1996, the CDIC will monitor such institutions which havejoined the insurance deposit programme, and local governments (namely,the Taiwan Provincial Government and the Taipei City and KaohsiungCity) will be responsible for supervising non-CDIC member institutionsin their districts.Responsibility for monitoring and crisis management over the island'sbanks (including overseas branches) will be divided as follows:* The Ministry of Finance will monitor new commercial banks establishedafter 1991 and the state-managed Farmers' Bank of China, the Chang HwaCommercial Bank and the Taiwan Enterprise Bank;* The Central Bank of China will supervise the rest of the domesticbanking sector, including the state-run Chiao Tung Bank, the Export-Import Bank of China, the Bank of Taiwan, the Land Bank of Taiwan, theTCB, the Hua Nan Commercial Bank, the First Commercial Bank, and theInternational Commercial Bank of China (ICBC).Lin stated that, beginning 1 July 1996, branches of foreign banksoriginating in Europe, the Americas and Africa will be inspected by thefinance ministry, while the remainder will be monitored by the centralbank.The finance ministry will monitor the entire insurance sector, whilethe central bank will oversee inspection of all bills financecompanies.Lin also said that the deputy finance minister and deputy CBC governorwill jointly head a MOF-CBC financial inspection oversight committeethat will be empowered to adjust the method and rate of inspections.Lin added that top executives of financial institutions will berequired to attend inspection meetings and that the finance ministrywill push to have internal auditors responsible not to management butto the boards of directors or examiners to improve the quality ofinternal auditing.Lin also stated that his ministry would propose a new law to separatethe credit function from the island's farmers and fishermen'sassociation to bring these operations under the inspection system.Sheu added that 'this is not a division of powers but an arrangement toenhance the effectiveness of inspection and monitoring'.'This is the first stage of improvement of the monitoring andinspection system,' Sheu said. 'After a year or two, we will review tomake further improvements.'Lin said that both agencies agreed that 'establishing an unitary agencyfor monetary inspection is not feasible at present'.In the meantime, prospects for passage by the Legislative Yuan of aproposed statute to liberalise the personnel management of state-runbanks remain dim, he noted.Hua Nan Commercial Bank General Manager Chien Hung-tao said thescandals serve as 'a warning that banks need to continuously upgrademanagement practices'.'The Changhua City co-operative case was clearly one of wrong-doing bytop management, while the IBFC scandal was created by a working-leveltrader,' Chien noted. 'Obviously internal auditing and managementstructures need to be strengthened in all banks.'Chien added that Hua Nan was now adopting a policy of moving employeesto new posts every two to three years and urging branch managers toheighten awareness. 'Times are no longer so relaxed as before and youcan't blindly trust employees,' he warned. One banking analyst notedthat the finance ministry feels that 'it would be very difficult to getstatutes on firewalls to control affiliated trading between financialunits of conglomerates passed by the Legislative Yuan now as suchproposals would spark sharp opposition from the private banks'.However, the analyst related that the finance ministry and central bank'are already surveying conglomerate assets and their utilisationquietly, even if they will not release such information openly'.'But if the banking and other laws aren't revised, such problems willcontinue to haunt the financial system,' he warned.A watershed may occur, for good or ill, shortly as many analystsanticipate a major reshuffling of the finance ministry and central bankwhen a new cabinet is appointed.President Lee Teng-hui is obliged to appoint a new premier in earlyFebruary in response to last December's election of a new LegislativeYuan, but any premier confirmed by the legislature in February willplay a caretaker role through Taiwan's first direct Presidentialelection on 23 March, after which the new president will have theoption of naming a new premier.In the meantime, depositors may be finding their own solution touncertainty. According to central bank data, basic financialinstitutions lost nearly NTdollars 175 billion in deposits from Augustto November last year, while deposits in the island's postal savingssystem rose over NTdollars 83 billion since July to reach a recordNTdollars 1.94 trillion by des lower interest rates.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TAIWAN: SIX FOR THE HIGH JUMPThe government's highest supervisory body, the Control Yuan, decided tocensure Central Bank of China Governor Sheu Yuan-dong and five otherserving or former officials of the central bank and the Bank of Taiwanin connection with the International Bills Finance Co (IBFC) scandallast December.The Control Yuan's impeachment case said that Sheu, who was Bank ofTaiwan chairman until last May, mismanaged personnel relating to theBoT trust department and did not exercise proper control over the trustunit.The Control Yuan brief stated that such mismanagement had sown theseeds for the subsequent scandal as the former IBFC trader Yang Jui-yenillegally borrowed NTdollars 39 billion from the BoT trust department.Sheu declared that he would not resign, and he and the five otherpersons impeached denied the charges. 'There are many misunderstandingsand claims not in accordance with fact (in the impeachment),' saidSheu, who said he will put his case to The Committee on the Disciplineof Public Functionaries of the Judicial Yuan, which will now considerthe degree of punishment.Professor Yin Nai-ping of the Department of Banking at Taipei'sNational Chengchi University said the impeachment amounts to accounting'to the public for the flurry of financial scandals'.Yin noted that Sheu would probably not be faced with a severe penalty'as he was not directly involved in the IBFC case and in fact thecentral bank and the finance ministry coped with that scandalrelatively effectively'. He aded: 'But it will definitely hurt hisreputation.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ASIA NOTES: CHINA'S MARKET LAUNCHChina passed another important financial landmark on 1 January, withthe launch of its unified interbank market.The new system, being operated by the Foreign Exchange Trading Centrein Shanghai, enables local banks and financial institutions to lend oraccept short-term deposits of one day up to less than four months.It is using the same computer network as the foreign exchange market,linking 35 cities in China. On the first day of trading it linked 27cities.'It is a very important step forward with respect to China's financialreforms,' comments Benny Chiu, research manager of HongkongBank ChinaServices. He believes all the local banks and financial institutions,such as investment and trust companies, will use the new market.Stanley Wong, treasurer of Standard Chartered Bank in Hongkong,believes that the development of the interbank market system and ofstabilised interest rates will enable a yield curve to be established,which will in turn enable a forward market for the renminbi to bedeveloped.Foreign banks are barred from doing renminbi business and so do nothave access to the new interbank market.Until now China has had regional interbank markets with differingoperations and mechanisms. The Shanghai market was estimated to havehandled R200 billion (dollars 24 billion)of transactions last year.Chiu explains that the new national market provides more structure andformality by unifying the regional markets under the same regulationsand operations. It will also provide more market-based interest rates.On 1 April, The People's Bank of China will start open marketoperations formally, by which it will be able to offer interest ratesand control money supply.This will enable the authorities to exercise macro-economic control ofthe implementation of monetary policy, says Chiu.Wong explains that, prior to the new system, local banks in China havetended to lend or borrow among themselves on a city-by-city basis or ona bilateral basis, lending and passing on surpluses or liquidity amongthemselves at bilaterally agreed interest rates.Difficulties arose in moving liquidity from one city to another. Forexample, a shortage in Shanghai could not be readily met by a surplusin Beijing.This resulted in a disparity in interest rates, which ranged between 10-15%.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ASIA NOTES: INDONESIA WIDENS BANDBank Indonesia (central bank), in a further liberalisation ofIndonesia's currency, widened the band within which the rupiah would befreely traded from early January. The Bank has also issued guidelinesfor a new regulation allowing banks to do derivatives transactions inforeign exchange and interest rates, but not in securities and bonds.The rupiah now trades within a 3% range in the intervention band, upfrom 2%, that is, about 66 rupiah around an announced mid-rate, set byBank Indonesia against a basket of currencies. The Bank has alsocreated an inner 2% 'convergence' band, effectively within the 3% band,for transactions with the finance ministry and government.Bank Indonesia's recent band widening is the latest in a series whichbegan in December 1993. The shift creates more autonomy and flexibilityfor the implementation of monetary policy.Bank Indonesia is also pursuing a policy of depreciating the rupiah tothe US dollar by 4-5% a year to maintain export competiveness, sincethe country still has a big current account deficit estimated by thegovernment at dollars 7.94 billion in fiscal 1995-96, or about 3.8% ofgross domestic product.John Flint, treasury manager with Hongkong and Shanghai BankingCorporation in Indonesia, comments that, given that interest rates inother Asian countries, such as Thailand and Malaysia, have come downquite aggressively so far this year, 'the chances are that peoplelooking for yield enhancement trades will move a little bit more to therupiah now.'Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ASIA NOTES: WELCOME TO BURMAThe Burmese military government announced in late December that it willallow foreign banks with representative offices in Rangoon, thecapital, to set up joint ventures with private Burmese banks. It isreported that foreign banks would have to provide at least 35% of theequity capital.The invitation seems to have met with a lukewarm response from mostforeign banks in the country. Foreign bank sources say that most of the22 foreign banks with representative offices would prefer to have fullbranch operations.Standard Chartered Bank, while looking at the options available, has noimmediate plans to do anything more than run its representative office,says John Brinsden, resident director for institutional banking for thesub-region.Brinsden believes that the Burmese government's move in allowing jointventures with foreign banks is 'the first step down the road to theireventually allowing foreign banks to actually run full branches there -but that could be another two years or so.'Besides the 22 foreign banks that already have representative offices,a further 10 have been issued licences to open such offices. Of the 32banks, most originate from Asia. The rest include four French banks;Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation and Standard Chartered from theUK; and Bank of Nova Scotia from Canada.Burma has two state-owned banks, 11 non-exchange private banks and fourexchange private banks. Government related agents account for a largenumber of the shareholders in the four exchange private banks.The biggest constraint on growth and foreign investment remains therepressive military government, which in November rejected requests bythe opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), headed by Aung SanSuu Kyi, for dialogue in a constitutional convention. Burma's rulingmilitary junta has consistently refused to recognise the results of the1990 general elections, in which the NLD won 80% of the vote.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MACAU: BEIJING BOUNTYLike Hongkong, Macau is an anomaly in Asia. The enclave, on the SouthChina coast, represents one of the last two vestiges of Europeancolonialism in the Chinese empire. In less than 18 months' time it willbe the last such outpost, as the sovereignty of Hongkong returns toChina.Macau's own transition back to Chinese rule will not occur until 1999and most observers agree that this will be far smoother than even themost optimistic predictions for Hongkong's return to the MiddleKingdom.These political developments will have repercussions on the bankingsectors of the two regions and on individual banks. The most pressingcredit risks of banks in Hongkong are derived from their vulnerabilityto uncertainties surrounding the upcoming transition. Macau banks arelikely to be indirectly affected and this will become one of the mostsignificant issues for the banks in the coming years.As a regional and international financial centre, Macau has beenconclusively overshadowed by the breathtaking growth of Hongkong. Incontrast to the British authorities in the territory, which adopted alaissez-faire policy with regard to financial and banking affairs,Portugal restricted banks from operating in the enclave, at least until1982.During that year, the monetary authorities in Macau implemented a newbanking law which eased restrictions on foreign banks setting up shopin the enclave and in the following five years, about 10 such banksopened branches. At the end of 1995, the banking sector comprised sixlocally-incorporated banks and 18 foreign banks. Nevertheless, thedifference in the size of the two banking systems is immense: Macau'stotal banking assets are just 2% the size of Hongkong's.Ironically, China's flagship financial institution, the Bank of China,is by far the largest bank in the enclave, accounting for 33% of thebanking sector's total assets. Moreover, it is the dominant shareholderof the largest locally-incorporated bank, Tai Fung Bank.The growing presence of the Bank of China in Macau reflects the closerties between the mainland and the enclave in the lead-up to 1999. Thiswas further manifested on 16 October, 1995 when the Bank of China beganissuing Macau bank notes. Until then, Banco Nacional Ultramarino (BNU),the enclave's de facto central bank, was the only bank to perform suchan activity. In the wake of this landmark note issue, the Bank of Chinais expected to play a wider role in Macau's monetary affairs, in muchthe same manner that it has and continues to do so in Hongkong.Banks in Macau share many of the same strengths and weaknesses aslocally-incorporated Hongkong banks. They enjoy strong profits derivedlargely from handsome earnings on their mortgage lending activities.With the property market at this stage reasonably strong andcharacterised by a low level of defaults, they have been able to boaststrong asset quality. At the same time, however, the banks in Macauexhibit a noticeable lack of diversification in their assets.Like their Hongkong counterparts, they are engaged overwhelmingly injust two business activities: trade finance and property-relatedlending. This has been accentuated by the flight of variousmanufacturing concerns to South China in search of lower operatingcosts. Therefore, while their asset quality now may be strong, theunderlying quality of their assets is quite weak and renders themvulnerable to a change in the fortunes of the property market. Thisissue will become particularly salient in light of both Hongkong's andMacau's sovereign transition.As a consequence of the oversupply of residential apartments in Macau,local banks have been continuing their expansion into South China,principally through trade finance and syndicated lending, and this hasseen their risk exposures to the region correspondingly rise. Theproportion of China-related credits on Macau banks' books is alsolikely to increase in line with growing integration between the enclaveand the mainland and a potential easing of China's monetary policy.Although they share many of the same characteristics, banks in Macauare less profitable, less liquid and not as well capitalised as theirHongkong counterparts. Lending accounts for a greater proportion oftheir asset bases, but they have a slightly higher share of loans andadvances geared towards lower risk yet lower yielding trade financing.On a regional scale, their performance as a group, measured by acomposite weighting of their profitability, liquidity and capitaladequacy is only slightly above average*.Further opportunities essentially lie in South China, as will becomeevident, given the limited prospects for expansion locally. This washighlighted in the first three quarters of 1995 with the total loans ofthe banking sector growing by a very subdued 4.5% compared to the sameperiod of 1994.The relationship between banks in Hongkong and Macau go beyond sharedcharacteristics and operating similarities. Macau's pataca is pegged tothe Hongkong dollar and in a few year's time the territory and theenclave will be part of the same sovereign state.In 1983 and 1984, when Sino-British negotiations regarding the futureof Hongkong were at their most tenuous and Hongkong was in the midst ofa recession, this prompted runs on a number of Macau banks.Given that the Hongkong dollar is pegged to the US dollar, Macau'sinterest rate cycle closely follows both Hongkong's and America's. In1994 and most of 1995, this gave rise to a difficult operatingenvironment for local banks, with interest spreads being slightlysqueezed.The close relationship and intricate link between Hongkong and Macauwill clearly be demonstrated over the next two years, with developmentsaffecting banks in Hongkong likely to have a ripple effect on Macaubanks.If the socio-political situation of Hongkong or South China takes aturn for the worse, Macau banks are likely to suffer considerablehardship. This is despite the fact that Macau's own transition toChinese sovereignty is expected to be rather smooth in light of thefact that relations between Beijing and Lisbon have been moreharmonious than those between London and Beijing.Portugal even offered Macau back to Beijing in 1974 after the formerturned socialist. Macau's transition is almost regarded as an aside incomparison to the international attention Hongkong and 1997 isreceiving. The enclave's value in terms of strategic financialperformance is far less than the territory's.Macau banks will be operating in a period of uncertainty in theintermediate term for geopolitical reasons clearly beyond theircontrol. Nevertheless, following an increasingly closer degree ofintegration between the enclave and South China, the banks' assets areset to expand if the economic conditions are ripe. At this stage thereis unlikely to be a sharp shift in the composition of the banks' loanbooks and thus mortgage lending and trade finance will very muchcontinue to characterise their business activities.In this context will be the growing influence of the Bank of China bothin its actual operations in the enclave and greater say in Macau'smonetary affairs. In the meantime, the world is watching eventsunfolding as its high profile neighbour which will undoubtedly have asignificant impact on developments in Macau.*The Best Banks in Asia published by Thomson BankWatch, December 1995.Chris Tang and Andrew Seiz are senior analysts at the Hongkong officeof credit rating agency Thomson BankWatch.Selected industry averages Macao and Hongkong banksHongkong                        1994      1993     1992Return on average assets (%)    2.07      2.06     1.75Return on average equity (%)   21.59     22.36    22.79Leverage (times)                9.30      9.59    10.18Quasi-liquid assets ratio (%)  47.74     48.97    51.38Macau                           1994      1993     1992Return on average assets (%)    1.97      2.05     1.72Return on average equity (%)   29.31     33.89    33.03Leverage (times)               13.50     14.31    17.08Quasi-liquid assets ratio (%)  37.55     31.66    36.53Source:  Boletim Oficial de MacauBanks in Macau31/3/95Patacas million                                   Total      Total        %                                  assets    deposits    changeBank of China                     37,361     26,326       6.6Banco Comercial Portugues         25,285     20,499     266.7Banco Nacional Ultramarino        13,941      7,151      21.3Banco Tai Fung                    12,800     10,398      24.5Banco Portugues do Atlantico      10,722         52     -99.6Banco Seng Heng                    6,716      6,074      39.2Banco Totta & Acores               5,505      2,390     -32.1Banco Comercial de Macau (Asia)    5,319      4,031      13.6Banco Luso Internacional           4,052      3,453      39.6Banco Weng Hang                    3,789      3,103      22.0Hong Kong Banking Corp             3,458      2,885       9.8Banco Delta Asia                   1,873      1,423      18.0Banco Nacional de Paris            1,498        223     -21.5Overseas Trust Bank                  961        883     101.3Guangdong Development Bank           870        423     208.5Banco Citibank                       741        719     -14.7Standard Chartered Bank              632        569     -12.2Banco da America (Macau)             512        335       2.5Deutsche Bank                        469         54     -54.5                                   Total        %    Annualised                                   loans     change    profitBank of China                     15,758       3.04     113.4Banco Comercial Portugues          2,178      -9.30      12.9Banco Nacional Ultramarino         3,550     -12.46      23.8Banco Tai Fung                     5,701      12.03      76.6Banco Portugues do Atlantico       1,077       51.8      12.9Banco Seng Heng                    3,539        5.4      21.8Banco Totta & Acores               1,917       -7.3      16.1Banco Comercial de Macau (Asia)    2,903       18.7      10.2Banco Luso Internacional           2,402       16.8      16.2Banco Weng Hang                    2,091       15.7      20.8Hong Kong Banking Corp             2,363       -2.6      19.5Banco Delta Asia                   1,027       28.1       1.9Banco Nacional de Paris              682       29.2       2.2Overseas Trust Bank                  445       21.5       4.4Guangdong Development Bank           280      136.7       0.1Banco Citibank                         6      -51.8      -0.4Standard Chartered Bank              455       -1.9       3.1Banco da America (Macau)             364       32.7       3.9Deutsche Bank                        444       30.8       2.0dollars = 7.988 patacas (3/95)Source:  Boletim Oficial de MacauMarket share of banks in country of originCountry               % of assetsPortugal                  44.5China                     28.0Macau                     21.8Hongkong                   3.2Other                      2.5Source:  Thomson BankwatchBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996LATIN NOTES: ZEDILLO'S BIG BAILOUTThe loan restructuring at Mexico's leading bank Banamex marks a turningpoint in the Zedillo government's effort to resolve the post-devaluation crisis in the financial system.Proponents of this move view the Banamex agreement as a big step towardending the year-old crisis, but critics fear the deal establishes aprecedent for mushrooming subsidies to the banking industry.At issue is the government's agreement in mid-December to issue 10-yearbonds to Banamex for dollars 2 billion in Banamex loans, acquired bythe official bank deposit insurance agency Fobaproa. Payments on anestimated 43% of the loans sold to Fobaproa were already past due, withmost of the remaining debts classified as high-risk and many expectedto become non-performing during 1996. The Banacci financial group thatcontrols Banamex will increase its capitalisation by dollars 1.1billion during 1996.Even critics of the deal agree that this will enhance the quality ofBanamex's loan portfolio and substantially improve its capital ratio.At the time of the deal, Banamex management estimated that gross past-due loans had increased from Mexdollars 15.3 billion at end-Septemberto more than Mexdollars 17 billion by December. The loan sale toFobaproa reduced the bank's past-due loans by more than a third; theratio of past-due to total loans outstanding fell from 12.8% at end-September to 9% or less.Banamex's commitment to a capital increase should boost its capitaladequacy ratio from 10.4% in December to 15% when recapitalisation iscompleted this year. About half of the dollars 1.1 billion capitalinfusion is expected to be raised through equity and debt issues incapital markets; over dollars 500 million will be generated frominternal funding sources.The biggest concern raised by the Banamex operation is the precedentthat it establishes for expanded federal support for bank restructuringthis year.The quid pro quo of government purchase of troubled loans in exchangefor bank commitments to recapitalisation was established in mid-1995 byfederal agreements to buy dollars 1.5 billion debts from Probursa andSerfin.But the extension of the bank-support programme to the country'slargest - and one of its most financially sound - financialinstitutions signals that all banks will be offered the option ofnegotiating a similar agreement.Banco Mexicano, a financially solid subsidiary of the Invermexicofinancial group, followed Banamex with a deal in late December to selldollars 900 million in loans to Fobaproa and pledge a capital increaseof dollars 500 million by the end of 1996.Questions over the scale of the government's open-ended fiscalcommitment to bank bail-outs will intensify in the wake of the Zedillogovernment's decision to extend the ADE programme - which subsidisesinterest relief for individual and small-business debtors - by threemonths to end-April.About 75% of an estimated 2.1 million problem loans targeted for ADErelief - mainly credit card and mortgage debt - had been restructuredby year-end 1995. The hike in interest rates in the fourth quarter hasmagnified the cost of the subsidy for the fixed concessionary ratesapplied to restructured debts, and the extension appears certain topush ADE costs above the dollars 2.3 billion budgeted.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996LATIN NOTES: BANESPA GOOD HEALTH RECIPEThe Cardoso government's decision to end the year-old federalintervention in Sao Paulo's troubled state bank Banespa provides asymbol of the improving economic and banking outlook for Brazil.While the return of Banespa management to state control marks a setbackfor reformers who favoured outright privatisation, most analysts creditthe Cardoso government for implementing long overdue measures to slashstaffing and restructure assets that have left Brazil's largest statebank in better financial health.The Banespa action in mid-January helped a resurgence in economicconfidence, fuelled by further progress on the government's agenda forsocial security, fiscal and administrative reforms that underpin itsstabilisation and growth programme.A flurry of concern in mid-1995 over deterioration in the currentaccount balance and inflation has faded as the trade account hasreturned to surplus and price growth has slowed. Monthly surpluses inthe second semester narrowed the trade deficit for the first 11 monthsof 1995 to dollars 3.1 billion, while consumer inflation in 1995 fellto a 22-year low at 23.2%.And with international reserves hovering near dollars 50 billion, thereal was holding firm above 0.97 units to the dollar in January.The banking industry should benefit from the improving economicenvironment as stabilisation in current account and inflation trendswidens the central bank's room for easing interest rates lower in 1996.President Fernando Henrique Cardoso's has indicated that he will movecautiously in cutting interest rates. But with GDP growth this yearexpected to approach 5% and minimal risk of an inflation resurgence,banks should show steady growth in lending activity over 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996LATIN NOTES: NOW, WHERE WERE WE?Argentina's commercial banks began this year roughly where they leftoff in December 1994, before the Mexican crisis triggered a plunge inpeso osits as Argentine investors scrambled to protect themselves fromdevaluation risk by seeking safety in dollars.After bottoming out around dollars 37 billion in March 1995, Argentinebank deposits have clawed back lost ground to reach dollars 45.1billion in peso and dollar holdings - about the level on the eve of theMexico scare.Investors' persistent preference for hard currency is evident in thesteady climb of dollar deposits to more than dollars 24 billion, somedollars 3.2 billion higher than peso deposits in the banking system.Industry analysts expect growth in peso and dollar deposits to continueas economic growth recovers, setting the stage for a revival in dormantcorporate lending business by the year end. The fall in consumerinflation to less than 2% in 1995 points to further decline in interestrates from their March 1995 peak.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MEXICO: NO EASY RECIPEQ The Mexican government has built an extensive - and costly - safetynet of programmes to prevent the considerable liquidity and assetquality blems of the banking industry over the past year triggering awider crisis in the financial system.What has been the level of government financial assistance to the banksover the past year and how much will it need to allocate to supportprogrammes in 1996? Also, how would you characterise the government'scurrent policy on bank intervention, especially in the light of recentmoves regarding Inverlat and Banamex?A Preventing or containing a financial crisis is not an end in itself.The ultimate goal of the authorities should always be the protection ofthe real sector of the economy and, thereby, the welfare of thepopulation. However, an immediate objective is maintaining andstrengthening the financial system, which has the banking system at itscore. This is essential to enable banks to efficiently perform theirmain role, credit intermediation, without which the functioning of anymodern economy would be impossible.Managing financial crises is never easy, nor susceptible to recipes ofgeneral application. However, there are some basic principles to beobserved, among which the following must be included: preventing thedevelopment of systemic risk; avoiding an unwarranted expansion ofcentral bank credit; shunning political and other pressures to bail outstockholders of financial institutions while, at the same time,protecting the legitimate interests of both creditors and borrowers;minimising the fiscal costs that may be inherent to the policiesadopted to overcome the crisis and, if feasible, distributing thesecosts over a number of years, and interfering the least possible withthe normal functioning of markets.In order to deal with the impact of the December 1994 devaluation oncommercial banks a comprehensive package was adopted and is currentlybeing applied. The components of the package are the following: adollar liquidity facility; a temporary capitalisationprogramme(PROCAPTE); adoption of the Investment Unit (UDI) scheme tomanage the problem of accelerated, and not contractually foreseen,amortisation of credits in real terms caused by inflation; easing ofsome restrictions concerning participation in the capital of commercialbanks in order to attract new investors, both foreign and domestic;acquisition of a fraction of banks' loan portfolios in a two to oneratio of new capital paid in by stockholders, so as to provide anincentive for banks to maintain adequate levels of provisions andcapitalisation; strengthening of supervision; and a debtor supportprogramme(ADE) to encourage additional loan restructuring, prevent thedevelopment of non-payment practices, provide interest relief and offera legal truce to debtors.The projected fiscal cost represents a net present value of Mexdollars90.8 billion (dollars 12.1 billion), equivalent to 5.5% of estimatedGDP for 1995. The fiscal cost of the ADE programme in 1995 was absorbedvia the application of a fraction of the fiscal surplus generated inthat year. The remainder, an amount which in net present value terms isequivalent to 4.7% of 1995's expected GDP, will be generated graduallythroughout the life of the programmes. A portion of this cost will befinanced by the commercial banks themselves.Direct intervention in troubled institutions has been limited to a fewcases. Recourse to this sort of action by the National Banking andSecurities Commission takes place only to the extent that otheroptions, such as merger or outright sale, are viable at all or within areasonable term. Banks' stockholders lose their investment, or seetheir participation diluted, should the state, through FOBAPROA, becomean owner. In that eventuality, FOBAPROA would only be a temporary owneras it would immediately proceed to find new suitable shareholders.Q Monetary policy has been the focus of considerable controversy anddebate over the past year. Some complain that an excessively tightpolicy threatens to deepen the recession, others feel the fall in theCetes (Treasury Bill) rate last September may have been too rapid.What are the primary objectives for monetary policy in 1996 and whatbenchmarks has the Banco de Mexico established for money supply growth?A As stated in the Law of Banco de Mexico, the primary objective ofmonetary policy is price stability. Consequently, it is imperative thatmonetary policy in 1996 be aimed at fostering the convergence of thepublic's inflation expectations towards the objective announced by thegovernment. To this end, central bank policy should be defined in termsof a variable under its control and which the public can easilymonitor. For 1996, as in the previous year, Banco de Mexico decided toset a limit on the increase of its net domestic assets. It is expectedthat the expansion of the demand for base money in 1996 will be in theorder of Mexdollars 18 billion. The needed growth of the supply of basemoney will originate from the accumulation of net internationalreserves and a maximum increase of Mexdollars 15 billion in netdomestic assets of the central bank.In its monetary programme for 1996, a widely distributed document,Banco de Mexico announced quarterly limits on the growth of its netdomestic assets.These limits take into account the seasonal behaviour of the demand forbase money and the expected path of net international reservesaccumulation.It must be stressed that in accordance with the stabilisation programmeadopted by Mexico, monetary policy, combined with other measures takenby the Federal Government, has been geared towards attaining, amongothers, two very important objectives: a steady reduction of theinflation rate and lower interest rates. The latter, however, will notbe achieved by artificial means but rather as a consequence ofgenerating expectations of declining inflation. It is a mistake tocompare, as some analysts do, the level of the Cetes rate in the mostrecent primary auction (about 41%) with the rate of past annualinflation observed at end-year 1995. It is prospective inflation thatmatters. If the market expects lower inflation in the future, it isonly natural for nominal interest rates to fall.Q The Zedillo government established a 1996 consumer inflation targetof 20.5% and GDP growth target of 3% in the document accompanying thefederal budget last November. Do you see the inflation target asrealistic and how will the central bank balance the conflicting demandsof curbing inflation and stimulating growth during 1996?A Mexico's experience, in line with those of many other countries,confirms that monetary policy makes its best contribution to economicgrowth and employment when it is aimed at achieving price stability.Banco de Mexico will assuredly contribute its full efforts in order toaccomplish the economic programme's 20.5% annual inflation objective.Nonetheless, having an explicit inflation target does not necessarilyimply that the central bank is making a projection of future pricebehaviour. It is a well-known fact that a central bank cannot directlycontrol changes in the general price level. Its influence overinflation is indirect, through the effects of its actions on aggregatedemand. Furthermore, there are several variables, not under theinfluence of central banks, which have a marked incidence on thebehaviour of prices. In sum, the proper monetary policy is a necessaryand useful, although not sufficient condition to ensure the attainmentof an inflation target.To the extent that the average exchange rate in 1996 coincides withthat included in the programme, and indirect taxes, prices of goods andservices produced by the public sector, foreign inflation, andinternational prices of raw materials remain roughly in line with theprojections in the economic programme, an annual inflation of 20.5% iswithin reach. At any rate, the monetary programme was designed on thebasis of the 20.5% inflation assumption and will not be modified.Q The peso's devaluation of more than 120% from December 1994 to yearend 1995 has ushered in a sweeping overhaul in exchange rate policy.What is the Banco de Mexico's current exchange rate policy, whatcriteria will guide future interventions and to what extent will theBank permit the peso to depreciate during 1996 especially with thegovernment's stated goal of an average exchange rate of 7.7 new pesosto the dollars?A On 22 December, 1994 Mexico adopted a floating exchange rate regime.From mid- March to October 1995, Banco de Mexico did not intervene inthe foreign exchange market. However, during the last two months ofthat year it did so four times in order to reduce unwarrantedvolatility in the market.Like most central banks, Banco de Mexico recognises that occasionalinterventions may be necessary to smooth out erratic movements in theexchange rate. Sporadic interventions do not mean that Banco de Mexicohas a real exchange rate objective. The market determines the exchangerate and, therefore, the latter is by definition an equilibrium rate.In that sense, the exchange rate can be neither undevalued norovervalued.In order to present the 1996 Budget to Congress, which includes itemsdenominated in foreign currency, the government had to have an estimateof the average nominal exchange rate for the year. However, thisestimate, 7.7 pesos per dollar, should not be interpreted as a goal. Itis not a revealed specific support level for the peso which the centralbank is bound to defend.Q Do you believe that the existing central bank law goes far enough inestablishing and protecting the Banco de Mexico's role as anindependent monetary authority?A In August 1993, Congress approved an amendment to the MexicanConstitution whereby the central bank was granted autonomy. The new lawfor Banco de Mexico was passed and came into effect on 1 April 1994.For autonomy to be effective, the central bank must have control overall of its credit operations. Thus, the Constitution states that noauthority may order Banco de Mexico to grant financing, either throughcredit of any sort or through acquisition of assets.One of the foundations of the autonomy of Banco de Mexico is theindependence of judgment of the persons responsible for conducting thebank's affairs. Thus, its administration has been entrusted to a five-member board chaired by a governor. The governor is named for a six-year term starting at the beginning of the fourth calendar year of thesix-year presidential term, while the four deputy governors areappointed for overlapping eight-year terms, each one being designatedevery two years.Thus, the composition of the board assures the stability and continuityof policy that is brought about by a long-term perspective in thesetting of policy. Board members can only be removed for reasons ofserious offence, as defined in the law.Existing central bank legislation in Mexico indeed goes far enough inprotecting the central bank's role as an independent monetaryauthority.Critics should read the pertinent Mexican legislation and modify theircharacterisation of Banco de Mexico as an institution subservient tothe federal government's economic and political interests.Those who claim that in spite of the respective legal provisionsautonomy has not been effective in practice bear the burden of proof.Such assertions overlook the fact that for a long period Banco deMexico has not granted net financing to the federal government.At times, critics seem to argue that central bank autonomy means havingthe power to select the exchange rate regime. In Mexico, as in nearlyall countries, that decision rests on the government.Q Do you believe that present international support (from the US, IMF,World Bank and other institutions) is sufficient to preserve exchangerate and broader economic stabilisation during 1996?A In the weeks following the December 1994 devaluation, financialmarkets reacted violently, as fears mounted that the government andother borrowers would not comply with payments to non-residents due inthe short-term.Mexico's crisis had immediate effects upon several markets, mainly inLatin America, and there was a serious risk of systemic repercussions.The gravity of the situation called for exceptional internationalassistance. Thus, a financial package was put together with the help ofthe United States, Canada, the International Monetary Fund and the Bankfor International Settlements. This package has allowed Mexico tocomply with its obligations and has thus facilitated the stabilisationof financial markets. To date, Mexico has drawn dollars 20.8 billiondollars net, far less than originally estimated, and in all likelihoodwill not need additional support. As early as May 1995, renewedpossibilities for placing Mexican paper in international markets haveemerged and are gradually increasing.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996GHANA: RERUN THE GOLD RUSHLong known mainly for its gold and cocoa exports, Ghana hasrestructured and diversified its economy enough to go from backwater tobona fide emerging market in ten years.In a business climate that is already flourishing by Africa's humblestandards, new opportunities are arising in what is being called thecontinent's most ambitious privatisation effort. The Jerry Rawlingsgovernment is working closely with the World Bank to sell off thecountry's largest bank, two smaller ones it also owns, and other keystate assets in communications, transport, insurance and other sectors.No matter how much promotion is done, no one expects it will be easy toconvince potential buyers to invest in Africa. But the run-up isnevertheless providing extensive advisory work for the handful ofstrong privately owned banks that already exist in Ghana. Add the heavydemand for financing that the country's private banks already face,plus the related business they see via the small but growing localstock market, and you have a serious operational challenge for thepeople who run them.The busy environment has begun attracting experienced internationaltalent to Accra, where a decade of sustained 5% annual gross domesticproduct (GDP) growth has brought Mercedes SLs, satellite dishes andcellular phones popping up alongside the more traditional trappings ofAfrican life.In have come people like CJ Best, a veteran US banker who arrived in1994 to manage CAL Merchant Bank under the auspices of an internationalpublic/private sector co-operative venture called the AfricanManagement Services Co. (AMSCO). 'It's an exciting time to be here,' hesaid. 'The whole economy has become much more dynamic. Ghana has thepotential to become a focal point for all of Anglophone West Africa.'From headquarters in Amsterdam just across from the ING tower, AMSCOuses a combination of government and corporate funds to help owners ofpromising African companies locate new full-time managers with the hard-to-find skills they need. It then provides them with training grantsand networking opportunities throughout their contracts to help buildcompetitiveness in their firms.CAL was launched by a private Ghanaian group that had IFC financing in1990 when the government first allowed private competition in banking.Since then it has built up dollars 39.4 million in assets and stronglocal market shares in trade finance, capital markets and advisoryservices. It needed a general manager who could build it into aninstitution that top clients in New York and London would use.For that AMSCO found them Best, who had specialised in African financefor more than 20 years at Chase Manhattan, the New York branch ofUnited Bank for Africa, and elsewhere. His job is to help build CAL'sgrowth into the international merchant bank of choice at a time whenGhana is poised to attract additional private investment from abroad.He plans to devote much of 1996 to giving all his employeescomprehensive training through resources provided by AMSCO's ManagementDevelopment Fund, whose donors include bilateral aid agencies from theUS and Europe, and hopefully turn the bank into a globally competitiveinstitution that will set a precedent for Ghana and all of Africa.'A lot of my work involves training by example, both on questions ofoverall management and specific needs such as credit analysis, all thevarious elements of risk and so on,' he said.'We've historically provided a lot of letters of credit to Ghanaiancompanies, and now are building up a corporate finance group thatshould be at full strength in about 12 months.'CAL is a rarity in Ghanaian banking in that it has no governmentownership.It and the other local niche players which deal with an internationalclientele such as Ecobank, Databank, and the local affiliates ofBarclays and Standard Chartered, have a unique vantage point on theplanned privatisation of the country's largest financial institutions.They are closely involved in plans to prepare larger competitors forsale under contracts funded by the World Bank, which recently said thesmall private banks were 'more adept and efficient at financialintermediation' than those the government owns.Topping the for-sale list is Ghana Commercial Bank, the country'slargest with dollars 141 million in Tier One capital, almost half ofthe country's banking assets, and an established internationalpresence.Two smaller domestic lenders, Social Security Bank and NationalInvestment Bank, also are on the block. The idea is to bring thegovernment shareholding down to 40% in each case, with 30% being listedon the stock exchange and another 30% going to a foreign strategicpartner who can bring in new management sophistication and aninternational network to support the country's growing export strengthsin gold, timber, cocoa and other commodities.All three banks could spell interesting opportunities if offered at theright price. But investors are wary of 1994's 70% inflation and 40%currency devaluation against the dollar, and few international bankshave shown interest lately in buying minority stakes in emergingmarkets. Except for South Africa, they seem unwilling to take onAfrica's risks, especially in the wake of the Meridian-BIAO collapse.That leaves much promotional work for the World Bank-funded advisoryteams.Best's team at CAL, for example, is working with Johannesburg-basedNedcor and KPMG Peat Marwick to get National Investment Bank ready forsale.Another South African institution, Standard Bank, is working withCoopers & Lybrand on a similar effort for Social Security Bank, whileCredit Commercial de France and Price Waterhouse are working on GhanaCommercial Bank. No one yet knows if any eventual buyers can beattracted from Europe, Asia, the US, South Africa, or anywhere else, orwhat sort of incentive packages they might require.'If any place in Africa outside of South Africa is attractive tointernational commercial banks, Ghana would be,' said World Bankfinancial sector specialist Elie Saleeby. 'But the question is whethertheir strategic plans leave them in a mood for buying anywhere.'The privatisations are intended to be the crowning achievement of theFinancial Sector Adjustment Programme (FINSAP), a restructuring effortthat has received dollars 200 million of World Bank funding since 1987.It has prompted big changes in Ghana's state-run institutions,including a cleaning up of balance sheets through transfer of non-performing public and private sector assets to a government trust,reform of daily operations and introduction of new prudentialregulations.'Noteworthy achievements have been made in Ghana,' Saleeby said. 'It isa financial sector where significant efficiencies have been introduced,although there is still more to be done. It's emerging fast, and likeall emerging markets there will be hiccups from time to time. But thegreatest challenge is to maintain momentum, and they've done a fairlygood job of maintaining it so far.'The goal is to get Ghana's leading banks up to international standards.The World Bank argues that can only come with the participation of topinternational partners as core investors. Emerging market bank watcherssay such transactions can be a good way for the host institution toobtain valuable capital, access to new management, and globaloperational links that it cannot get at home.Polish export finance specialist BRE, for example, sold a 21% stake toCommerzbank a year ago, thus gaining 'a leg up on its domestic andinternational competition' and a reputation as 'the most innovativePolish bank' in the view of Creditanstalt Investment Bank analysts. INGand Allied Irish Bank hold similarly sized chunks of other Polishbanks, and in December GE Capital Services paid dollars 87 million fora controlling 32.5% stake in Hungary's Budapest Bank, which CreditSuisse had considered but then rejected a year earlier.That, though, was Europe. Africa may be of far less interest tostrategic investors of that calibre from Western Europe and the US,perhaps opening a door for banks from South African banks to buy theirway into Ghana. How much it would cost is unknown, but sources close tothe process say the transactions could take another year or more toconclude, and may require deferred payment plans of other sizeableincentives. The Rawlings government has meanwhile already floated 30%of Social Security Bank on the local stock exchange, and now may do thesame with the two other banks on its list.Meanwhile, CS First Boston and Ecobank have also just begun World Bank-funded advisory work on the upcoming privatisation of Ghana Telecom,set to be the biggest divestiture since 1994's dollars 450 million saleof part of the state holding in Ashanti Goldfields to portfolioinvestors through a GDR and local capital market issue. Ghana Airwaysand the Tema oil refinery are also set for sale. It all adds up to bigbusiness for the country's few private banks.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996BARCLAYS TESTS BARCLAYZONEBarclays Bank has launched a three-month pilot to test the acceptanceof an interactive share dealing branch system. The touch-screenmultimedia system, called BarclayZone, provides a two-way video linkbetween the customer and Barclays Stockbrokers based in Glasgow. Itprovides information, advice and facilities for share registration anddealing. The pilot will take place in three branches and will testcustomers' appetite for such a service with the possibility forextension to other services such as taxation services, wills, unittrusts, portfolio management and travel or health insurance.A successful pilot will also see BarclayZone sites opening in airports,train stations and out of town shopping centres.BarclayZone has accounted for a 'significant investment'. It wasdeveloped by Barclays Multimedia, a division of Barclays GroupOperations Technology, which was set up in mid-1992 by Joseph de Feo,head of Barclays' IT department. It is the latest in a series of remotebanking services that were launched by Barclays in 1995.Those included a multimedia kiosk developed in conjunction with ThomasCook to provide travel and related financial services, a home shoppingservice via the Internet called BarclaySquare and a home bankingservice via PC for personal customers, called Barclays PC Banking,available at the end of this month.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996REUTERS LAUNCHES KOBRAReuters, the news, information and dealing room systems' vendor, haslaunched a software package, Kobra, to provide users with tools tocreate their own information selection, manipulation and display. Kobraenables users, with a constant standard display, to mix informationfrom different information sources on one screen.Based on object-oriented technology, whereby programs are broken upinto modules (objects) and functions, Kobra integrates different typesof information (data, text and graphics) in real time.Kobra comes in four different versions targeting different levels ofuser.Run mode provides users with access to pre-arranged displays.Montage mode is for more specialised users to build their own displays.Link mode builds on functionality provided by the Montage mode butprovides links between items coming in from different sources.Development mode is designed as a toolkit for creating objects that canbe used on any of the other levels of workstation.Reuters has also ventured further into the information superhighway byacquiring a 2.5% stake in Yahoo, a software browser for the Internet.This extends Reuters' policy of supplying news services on a wholesalebasis to various Internet suppliers (including Yahoo, the MicrosoftNetwork and Compuserve); a relationship analogous to Reuters supplyingnews services to newspapers.Peter Thomas, director media relations, Reuters, says: 'We see theInternet as an opportunity for us but, as everybody else, we continueto research the best way for it to be utilised'. He continues: 'Becauseof its performance and security issues it is not something that we candirectly use at this stage, but technology is moving very fast'.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996PRICE OF LOTUS NOTES CUTLotus Corporation has changed the pricing structure of its leadingmessaging and groupware product, Lotus Notes, which is used by morethat 3.3 million people. The wholly-owned subsidiary of IBM (TheBanker, 7/95, p89), has cut the price of the desktop version of LotusNotes by more than half (58%) in an attempt to 'accelerate sales anddeployment' of the product.However, Lotus has increased the price of the Notes server products,required to run Notes in the network environment, to bring them more inline with other client-server products which use a lower client costand a higher server cost, according to Jim Moffat, communications'product manager, Lotus (UK). Before the announcement the client and theserver products' pricing structure was the same.'Because of the performance enhancements to the product, we aresupporting many more users for our server, and because customers buymany more clients than servers, the cost of ownership is actually goingdown drastically,' says Moffat.The announcement came prior to the shipment of Notes Release 4 whichstarted last month in the US and Europe. The product includes newfeatures such as intelligent agents to make it easier to store, andnavigate through, information; Internet access via the InterNotes WebNavigator; and tools for developing Web applications. Lotus also has anew Notes Mail client.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NEW DERIVATIVES MESSAGING STANDARDSSWIFT, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication,has introduced a new series of derivatives message standards. Inconjunction with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association(ISDA), the trade association for over-the-counter derivatives, SWIFThas introduced message standards for single currency interest rate swapconfirmation, cross currency interest rate swap confirmation andinterest rate reset confirmation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TELERATE LIVE CHANGESIn separate announcements, Dow Jones Telerate announced that it isamalgamating its dealing room television service, Telerate Live, withthe service transmitted by its majority owned subsidiary, EuropeanBusiness News (EBN).Telerate claims that under the new arrangement the price for theservice will be free and the coverage of the service will be extendedfrom the UK to include the Continent. The announcement also means thatTelerate no longer needs pay EBN to produce its TV service. Productionis now shared with Flextech, a subsidiary of US's TCI, which owns 30%of EBN.Dow Jones will continue to support Dow Jones Investor Network theforerunner for Telerate Live which is broadcast in the US.Bloomberg, on the other hand, has announced the availability of itsdealing room television service to the European market. It intends theservice to be transmitted to all its customers' terminals free ofcharge. Bloomberg believes the pricing structure will encourage morepeople to take its terminals.There is an appetite for such TV services in the dealing room but priceis a key issue. Dow Jones Telerate may have miscalculated by chargingfor their service. A city insider adds: 'I do not think that Dow Jonesdeveloped separate programme material that was so new in its contentand presentation that made it of value to the City'.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996BOLERO CHOOSES SWIFTBolero, a pan-European initiative for the automation of commercialtrade documentation, has selected SWIFT to build the main component ofits system, the central registry. The registry, which sits at the heartof the Bolero system, is designed to store and maintain informationabout all transactions going through Bolero.The announcement comes following the withdrawal from the scheme of theprevious central registry developers, Cable & Wireless, on the groundsthat they were hoping to set up their own competing service.Cable & Wireless had participated in, and partly sponsored, the Boleroproject and pilot which comprised 25 multi-national organisations andsix banks.The project was designed to prove the technical feasibility of theautomation of bills of lading.Other sponsors included the European Commission which paid 50% of theestimated ECU3.7 million pilot and Unisource (an alliance between thetelecoms suppliers of Sweden, Holland, Spain and Switzerland). Thepilot came to a successful end in mid-September.The Bolero User Association Bank usersBanque Nationale de Paris    MeesPiersonBarclays Bank                National Westminster BankChase Manhattan Bank         Rabobank NederlandCitibank                     Royal Bank of ScotlandCommerzbank                  SBC-WarburgCredit Lyonnais              SE-BankenDeutsche Bank                Societe GeneraleGenerale Banque              Standard Chartered BankHSBC Holdings                Svenska HandelsbankenING Bank                     Westpac Banking CorporationBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TFS PARTS FROM SYNTEGRAThomson Financial Services (TFS) has pulled out of its year oldpartnership with Syntegra, the systems' integration division of BritishTelecom. The partnership was set up after the Bank of England'sappointment of Syntegra and Swift as network providers to the UKsecurities industry's electronic share settlement system, Crest.Syntegra and TFS entered the agreement on the proviso that Syntegrawould develop the SettleNet service whereas Thomson would at a laterstage bring expertise and added value to that service.Explains Kevin Milne, director Thomson Financial Services:'Unfortunately, despite our best efforts to reach a detailed contractwith Syntegra, we have been unable to do so. It now looks as thoughSyntegra's policy has changed so that an agreement with TFS no longerlooks possible'.Syntegra was surprised by Thomson's announcement but did not feel theannouncement would affect its positioning which it claims stands ataround 60% of the Crest networking market.Crestco, the company that owns Crest, has commented that the break-updoes not affect the development of Crest, scheduled to go live on 15July 1996.On 15 January network trials began. During that time workstations wererolled out.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TECHNOLOGY: CONVERT OR CRASHWhen European political leaders confirmed the timetable for EuropeanMonetary Union (EMU) at the December Madrid summit, media coveragefocused on the currency's new name and on which countries might meetthe macro-economic convergence criteria by 1999.Little or no attention was devoted to the practical question of whetherthe banks will be ready to meet the timetable. But, whatever thepolitical and economic hurdles which EMU must overcome, the challengeof making the necessary changes to computer systems within the bankingindustry may prove to be its most serious handicap.As the sector is already dogged by a constant stream of softwarefailures, the risk of development problems on IT projects on the scaleof EMU preparation is considerable. This problem will be exacerbated bya demand for specialist IT skills, which will be in limited supply.So it is imperative that immediate action should be taken to preparefor the conversion of banks' computer systems to handle a singlecurrency, if the deadlines for EMU are to be met. However, continueduncertainty over the details of the currency changeover is impedingprogress.EMU will involve largescale enhancement or rewrite of multiple systemsacross most parts of a bank, all of which must interrelate and completewithin the same ambitious timescale.To say there is a significant systems delivery risk is anunderstatement - experience suggests there is a certainty of majorsystems development failure in many banks and a very high likelihood ofknock-on impact on other projects and business functions. Moreover, ifa software development fails once an irrevocable commitment is made toEMU, there will be no fallback option if a bank intends trading after E-Day.Nor will these likely failings be isolated incidents. The transition toEMU will be exposed to the weakest link in the chain. If any one memberof a payments network is behind, for example, then an EMU-compatiblenetwork cannot go live. Similarly, if a particular segment of thebanking industry in a given country is not ready, then conversion tothe new currency at the retail level cannot take place.Failsafe approaches to systems development do exist. However, theyusually involve more protracted development timescales and theiradoption would jeopardise the ambitious deadlines for EMU.A typical big bank has hundreds of separate systems in operation, eachwith its own natural life cycle. The additional step of adapting thesesystems for EMU may invalidate previous decisions regarding investmentpriorities and shorten the shelf-life of individual systems.For larger banks, the development costs of preparing IT systems for thesingle currency are therefore expected to exceed ECU60 million.However, following recent cutbacks, banks have little spare capacity inIT development. For this reason, EMU investment needs to beincorporated into IT planning cycles as a matter of urgency.It is important that banks undertake both a 'top down' and a 'bottomup' assessment of the systems impact of EMU, to arrive at a realisticunderstanding of the changes required and a credible assessment of thetiming and resourcing implications.A recent report, European Monetary Union - critical IT supply-sideissues, produced by CGS, evaluated the demand which EMU will place onthe IT services industry, and whether the industry has the capacity tomeet this demand.The only comprehensive estimate of the systems cost of EMU to banksstands at ECU5 billion. Based on this figure and on assessments derivedfrom experience of working on EMU projects in Germany, the Netherlandsand France, CGS has modelled the likely pattern of demand for ITservices.While concluding that demand is unlikely to exceed the capacity of theIT services industry, the CGS findings reveal that considerableuncertainty still remains because:* estimates of the demand itself are shrouded in doubt;* the supply of appropriate IT resources cannot be turned on at will;* the timing of this sudden demand surge coincides with other demandpeaks.Although European political leaders have agreed upon the timetable forEMU, the structures necessary to support the unification process remainambiguous and undecided. As yet no legal framework exists and there isscarcely more clarity now than a year ago on the crucial question of adual currency operation.Moreover, little work has been done to estimate how the demand for Euro-denominated accounts will affect different sectors of the economy. Eventhe characteristics of the new currency itself - such as interestcalculation and capitalisation rules - remain undefined. So to estimatethe full scale of the technological transition with any accuracy isextremely difficult.The costs of currency changeover published to date are minimumestimates only and, in the manner of all such calculations, will tendto creep upwards as detailed requirements become clearer. Indeed, asfigures were based on the assumption of a Big Bang conversion and aperiod of dual currency operation now seems more likely, IT costs arelikely to be inflated by at least 50%.One thing is certain, however: IT resources are not interchangeablecommodities and specialist skills in limited supply are likely topresent real supply side bottlenecks, despite theoretical capacity inthe IT industry as a whole.First, larger banks and retail banks are more likely to use in-housedeveloped systems than smaller and wholesale banks. The danger will bewhere internally developed old systems, supporting core parts of thebusiness, require major redevelopment to accommodate EMU. These are thevery systems where banks may be least able to turn to externalresources to make the necessary changes.Second, for industry segments such as international branch banking, andfunctional areas such as treasury, the critical path for EMU will bethe changes made by package vendors.From an EMU perspective, packaged software, which is written to beflexible, is likely to accommodate change more easily than much of theold bespoke software in banks. Vendors typically have limited financialresilience, however, and may be reluctant to act until the uncertaintysurrounding EMU is eliminated. And there will undoubtedly be a smallminority of package vendors who experience problems in implementing thenecessary changes for EMU.As these problems will become clear only late in the day, affectedbanks will have little opportunity to develop alternative systems.Given the scale of effort demanded, it is reasonable to expect banksacross Europe to respond to the prospect of a single currency with afrenzy of detailed planning and impact assessment. Unfortunately,progress is far from uniform. This is in part a question of politicalgeography. In Germany, the Netherlands and France, for example, CGS isworking with banks which have a 'sleeves up' attitude to EMU, based ona conviction that it will happen. By contrast, at least one UK clearingbank has devoted neither time, thought, nor resources to the issue,based on a conviction that, for the UK at least, EMU will not happen.All European banks face the same dilemma: they can wait until 1998 todiscover whether their country will join EMU, when it will be too lateto implement the systems changes, forcing a negative decision; or theycan invest now for an outcome which may not arise.It is unclear whether governments, or even banks themselves, appreciatejust how large an effort is involved in preparing banks' IT systems forEMU, or indeed the urgency of moving on to a war footing today toensure that the necessary changes are properly planned and executed.It is essential that institutions such as central banks and bankingfederations should seek to encourage a more coordinated approach tocurrency changeover, if the deadlines for the single currency are to bemet.The first step should be the establishment of guidelines for banks toassess the systems impact of EMU, combined with milestones at whichbanks must explain their plans and monitor progress.Early warning systems should also be established to enable problemswithin individual institutions to be identified swiftly and rectifiedbefore the point of irretrievable breakdown is reached.Finally, contingency plans should be set in place, perhaps includingsoftware rescue services, temporary bureau processing, or systems loansbetween banks.The significance of IT preparation for EMU should not beunderestimated.Otherwise, come 1998, some countries may find themselves unable toparticipate in EMU, irrespective of their success in achieving economicconvergence criteria.IT preparation may seem a mundane consideration in comparison to thecontinuing debate on the economic and political implications of EMU.Nevertheless, it is an indisputable fact that no country will be ableto proceed with EMU unless its national banking community has madesufficient progress in making the necessary modifications to computersystems.John Rushton is senior manager for CGS, a European computer servicescompanyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TECHNOLOGY: EUROPE'S IT BOOMThe European IT software and services market is forecast to grow 8% ayear for the next five years, boosting market size to more than dollars130 billion by the year 2000, according to Input, a global intelligenceand consulting firm.In another report published in January, European Software and ServicesMarket - Competitive Analysis, 1995, Input ranks the market shares ofthe leading European software and service vendors.In 1994, the top 20 vendors accumulated revenues of dollars 29.6billion or 35.7% of the total European market of dollars 83.3 billion.The report highlights IBM's domination in Europe, which holds the topslot in France, Germany and the UK. However, it has had its positioneroded in the Nordic region by the formation of groups throughacquisition, for example, Celsius in Sweden; by forceful niche playersin Denmark; and robust defence of their markets by local vendors inFinland and Norway.US vendors such as CSC, Andersen Consulting and EDS continue todominate tenders for big contracts, except for SAP of Germany.In the Netherlands, national vendors - Philips, BSO-Origin, Raet,Roccade, Getronics - have recently announced alliances to extend theirgeographical reach and extend their service portfolios.The report also highlights the emergence of new entrants, for example,telecommunications vendors, such as MCI and AT&T, which continue toextend their range of services.They have done this either through acquisition, for example, MCIacquired SHL for dollars 1 billion last year; or by the creation of aprofessional services unit internally, for example, AT&T Solutions.AT&T is now in the throes of a major restructuring.The report observes that some vendors are relationship builders ratherthan technology experts. They are using 'value-based pricing' todifferentiate themselves from the competition and establish long-termrelationships with clients based on improvement in business, ratherthan IT, metrics.Among banks worldwide, expenditure for outsourcing, systems integrationand network services is growing at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR)of 15%, says Input in a study of worldwide banking informationservices.Outsourcing is increasing at a CAGR of 19%, since banks are now usingoutsourcing to handle business functions, network management anddesktop services as well as application and platform systemsoperations.A recent survey by Information Week of the biggest information systemsspenders in Europe in 1995 put three banks among the top 10: BarclaysBank was the third biggest spender with dollars 1.3 billion; ABN AmroHoldings was fifth with dollars 960 million; and Deutsche Bank wasninth with dollars 814 million.Leading European software and services vendorsEurope, 1994                                                   Estimated                                                     sector    Market                                        Country     revenue     shareRank     Vendor                         of origin   (dlrs m)     (%) 1    IBM                               US            7,890       9.5 2    CGS                               France        2,025       2.4 3    Siemens Nixdorf International     Germany       1,905       2.3 4    Digital Equipment Corporation     US            1,765       2.1 5    Reuters                           UK            1,755       2.1 6    EDS                               US            1,585       1.9 7    Microsoft                         US            1,260       1.5 8    ICL                               UK            1,150       1.4 9    Bull                              France        1,115       1.310    Andersen Consulting               US            1,065       1.311    Computer Associates               US              955       1.112    Sema                              France          950       1.113    Finsiel                           Italy           905       1.114    Olivetti                          Italy           895       1.115    Oracle                            US              815       1.016    SAP                               Germany         800       1.017    AT&T                              US              795       1.018    Hewlett Packard                   US              735       0.919    Datev                             Germany         640       0.820    CSC                               US              635       0.8Top 20 Total                                         29,640      35.7Total Market                                         83,300     100.0Source:  InputBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TECHNOLOGY: FRAUD BUSTERSLast September three fraudsters were jailed for a pounds 120,000swindle which involved the first home-made high street cash dispenser.More than 300 bank and building society customers were fooled by theHalifax 'card cash' dispenser which had been carefully built into thefront of an equally fictitious mortgage broker's premises in EastLondon.According to Moira Lavery of lawyers, Dibb Lupton and Broomhead, notone of the victims realised, as they tried in vain to withdraw cash,that their personal identification numbers and card details had beensecretly recorded to make counterfeit cards, later used to plundertheir accounts.While these fraudsters were caught and were jailed for up to fouryears, the fake cash dispenser they built highlights the lengthsfraudsters will go to and the ingenuity used against financialinstitutions and the public.The Lebanese loop, a piece of camera film inserted into an automatedteller machine (ATM), is another ingenious device to defraudcardholders.For Lorna Harris, head of the fraud prevention unit of the UK'sAssociation for Payment Clearing Services (APACS), the struggle is notto get complacent and to be ever vigilant against new types of fraud.Although plastic card fraud can never be fully eradicated, considerableprogress is being made in limiting losses.In the UK, plastic card fraud losses have declined rapidly in recentyears since the peak in 1991 when losses reached pounds 165.5 million.In 1994 fraud losses fell to pounds 96.8 million , 25% lower than in1993, and Lorna Harris says the 1995 figure is expected to show afurther downward trend.Why the improvement? APACS attributes the success to better co-operation between banks, retailers and the public and the banks'authorisation strategy introduced in 1992.Before then about 10-12% of all plastic card transactions requiredauthorisation but, since the banks got together and developed anapproach across all retail sectors from April 1994, some 30% of allcard transactions are authorised and fraud losses in certain retailsectors have fallen as much as 75%.For banks, fraud is not seen as a competitive issue and the UK banks'willingness to co-operate with each other, along with the existence ofan umbrella body such as APACS, is viewed as critical to recentsuccess. Also, the negotiation of a tariff reduction with BritishTelecom lowered the cost of authorisation calls for retailers and addedto the spirit of co-operation.In other countries, card fraud has been rising and global figures forVisa show a worldwide confirmed fraud total of dollars 675 million forthe year ending June 1995. The US accounts for 58.2% of this figure.Many countries, however, the US included, do not have an inter-industryumbrella organisation such as APACS in the UK and many believe that thelack of such a coordinating vehicle has been the reason behind growinglosses in these countries.New approaches are being used to limit card losses which are stilldominated by lost/stolen cards which make up 71.1% of the latest UKlosses. The emergence of 'hot card' checking has become invaluable incutting fraud.With 5,000 cards lost or stolen every day out of a total of 86 millioncards issued in the UK the problem for issuers, retailers and customershas been growing with retail outlets, such as petrol stations, beingthe most fraud prone, accounting for around a quarter of all losses.In the petrol sector, with a high volume of low-value transactions, theuse of on-line authorisation has proved inappropriate and 'hot card'checking, using a simple swipe mechanism, has proved very effective. Acashier can tell within seconds whether a credit, debit or chequeguarantee card is being used fraudulently.In the last three years hot card files and hot card broadcasting havehelped to combat fraud and provide a low-cost alternative to on-lineauthorisation.The market leader, CardClear, uses terrestrial television networks totransmit data on lost/stolen cards to retailers and hopes to have 5,300installed sites by 1997.CardClear managing director, Brian Raven, says hot card broadcastinghas been endorsed by the UK banks for use in the petrol sector andsince October 1993 Barclaycard's losses (largest UK card issuer) inthat sector have fallen by 54%. Raven also believes that cross-borderfraud is growing (from 13.2% of all losses in 1992 to 21.7% in 1994)and that the market need for hot-card broadcasting will expand.CardClear hopes to use satellite broadcasting to carry its service intocontinental Europe for use by European banks on a pan-European basis.In January it announced a three-year agreement with UK petrol retailer,Mobil, to install its hot card system in Mobil's 700 retail outletsthroughout the country. And Raven hopes to provide a range ofinformation services to retail and other market sectors .One recent card innovation, however, does not appear to have been thateffective. The photocard has been described more as a novelty than afraud prevention tool and surveys from Norway and New Zealand indicatethat it has no more advantages than a card without a photo.While two leading banks in the UK have introduced photocards, the take-up has only been a modest 30% and industry statistics show that only500,000 photocards have been issued, amounting to just 0.6% of the UKmarket.Sophisticated new technology is also expected to provide significantimprovements in combating card fraud, with new products to be launchedsoon.'Europay believes that neural networks are an important element of itsrisk management strategy, along with the introduction of smart cards,'says Patrick Nelson, business development manager for the UK andIreland for Europay International, Europe's leading internationalpayments organisation.'Counterfeit fraud is still very much a risk for card issuers andacquirers across Europe and many local systems are unable to deal withthis problem.'Europay's new neural net fraud prevention system, set for launch inthe first quarter this year, identifies likely patterns of fraud basedon a merchant's international activity.'This means that, unlike other neural network systems that analysecardholder behaviour, Europay's system is able to flag suspiciouspurchases without any delay to the cardholder at the point of sale. Byfocusing on fraudulent or targeted merchants such as stores sellingbrands of upmarket Swiss watches, the system has the potential toprevent 12% of international fraud volumes.'Nelson explains: 'Europay chose neural network technology to complementits existing fraud prevention measures as it can be quickly adapted totake into consideration changing circumstances and does not requirestrict models to be imposed from the outset. For the past 12 monthsEuropay has been working with Nestor to refine its system by using datacollected from clearing payment transactions.'After rigorously testing the system on its mainframes to make sure itcan cope with huge volumes of data, Europay is now in a position to beable to deliver the system to members either as a stand-alone productor to complement the technology they have developed themselves.'By tailoring the system to meet the individual requirements of eachbank, Europay is confident that neural network technology will play akey role in fighting fraud across Europe.' The smart card alsorepresents another big step forward in fraud prevention.France already has a 'chip' card in action which has proved hugelysuccessful against crime. But it lacks international compatibility. Inthe UK, a strategic approach to add chips to plastic cards has beenestablished through APACS. The so-called ICC project is expected tohave a chip card in production by the end of 1997.Although the chip project was prompted by concerns over fraud, and therealisation that magnetic strip technology was reaching the end of itslife cycle, APACS soon became aware that the industry costs ofintroducing the new chip technology could not be justified on projectedfraud savings alone.APACS notes that the recent growth in electronic commerce has placed anew imperative on financial institutions to be able to offer securepayment services. The Internet is a prime example of the need for suchsecure payments.Chip-enabled plastic, as such, is a good entry point as the card is auseful mechanism for transporting the chip which, in turn, is goodtechnology for storing the tokens necessary for secure services.The UK aims to have 50% of its point-of-sale terminal base converted tochip delivering 65% by value of UK transaction turnover by the end ofthe millennium. It is anticipated that the whole of the ATM networkwill be converted in a similar period or earlier.The project, which includes the active involvement of the majorschemes, Europay (representing Mastercard), Visa and Switch shouldprovide a quantum leap in card security.Smart cards will provide the future technology for the paymentsindustry.Initially, experts suggest, the new cards will probably be programmedwith a signature comparison facility, along with an ability to checkthe card user's pin code.But if the technology improves, so-called biometric information couldbe included, possibly involving a finger-print scan, dynamic signatureverification, back of hand vein checks, retina scans and - perhaps oneday - voice recognition. This will certainly give tomorrow's fraudstersplenty to ponder.Trends in UK plastic card fraudPounds millions fraud losses1990                125.61991                165.51992                165.01993                129.81994                 96.8Source:  APACSBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE BANKER via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996THE BOTTOM LINEThe outlook for European economies and financial institutions over theshort, medium and long term bears considerable scrutiny. Uncertaintiesand unknowables notwithstanding, the prospect of much faster changethan many people believe or can absorb is, or should be, of majorconcern. The fall of communism in the late 1980s led to a cataclysm incentral and eastern Europe; the spillover, the spectacular economicgrowth in Asia, and the pervasive impact of technology are factors thatmany in western Europe may not have fully taken on board.As historian Eric Hobsbawm noted in Age of Extremes: 'Perhaps the moststriking characteristic of the end of the twentieth century is thetension between the accelerating process of globalisation and theinability of both public institutions and the collective behaviour ofhuman beings to come to terms with it.'Although western Europe is not alone in wrestling with these issues,history and tradition weigh heavily on those in the EU; radical changewill not come easily. Already this year the spectre of economicweakness and reduced growth has spread across the continent and touchedthe strongest economy, Germany. Recent figures showing risingunemployment, lower growth expectations and expected larger budgetdeficits have altered perceptions of Germany and, as a result, Europeoverall.Analysts believe the near term risk in Europe is one of deflation ascountries, while continuing to keep a hold on inflation, struggle tomeet Maastricht convergence criteria for European economic and monetaryunion (EMU) and strong core currencies erode competitiveness.However, the risks are also much broader. Much is at stake and monetaryunion is only one aspect of a Europe needing to reposition itself in afast-changing global environment.But EMU represents the prime challenge now and 1996 is critical ifunion is to proceed. By the end of this year experts believe it will beclear whether January 1999 will be the genuine starting date, and ifthe project is viable.A consensus appears to be emerging that a small group of countriescould start, but that both Germany and France would have to beincluded, as anything less than two major economies would not beacceptable. Will the convergence criteria be met? Some recent viewssuggest that Germany and France are now likely to have deficits in 1997of 3.3% of gross domestic product (GDP), in excess of the official 3.0%criteria, but that governments would not object to such modestovershooting.The problem comes if the current economic downturn persists and thedeficits rise to the 4% of GDP range. Governments would then find itdifficult to accept such large overshootings, even if other criteriawere more or less acceptable. Does Europe, from the handful ofcountries that could make 1999 to those which cannot, have the will tomeet the targets and strive for long-term goals?Alexandre Lamfalussy, president of the European Monetary Institute, theforerunner of the European Central Bank, made encouraging noises inlate January. 'European citizens are just as mature and well-informedas financial market operators. Over time experience has taught them toassess the effects of economic policy decisions from the viewpointwhich goes beyond the short term.'They are, therefore, aware of the overriding necessity of bringing therising trend of public spending on social security, health care andpension schemes under control - because they know that in the long termthese increases will jeopardise the whole of our social welfaresystem.' Unfortunately, Lamfalussy appears more hopeful than realistic.Evidence suggests that, except perhaps for the Germans, governments,the public and financial institutions are not well aware of the long-term implications of EMU and have scarcely addressed the issue beyondnarrow, parochial parameters.Most banks appear not to be technically prepared even if the politicalgo-ahead is given. And what will be the relationship between thehandful of countries that could make 1999 and those which do not?Uncertainties multiply and even if Lamfalussy's optimistic opinion of'European citizens' is accepted, much still needs to be done to makethe partnership between the political decision-makers and the privatesector on EMU really work. There is little evidence to show thatfinancial institutions are taking a proactive stance on anything to dowith EMU.Can a wait and see policy work? If the 1999 start founders, as itmight, and delays are ruled unacceptable, as is likely, the lack of anEMU process will have severe long-term implications. EMU, like it ornot, is Europe's response to globalisation and if a void ensues thenEurope will be the loser.Looking longer term to 2006, what are the prospects? The onlycertainties appear to be that Asia will not stand still and thattechnology will continue to reshape employment. Since the industrialrevolution technology has shifted employment upstream; today thatprocess is accelerating and politicians' rhetoric that more educationis needed belies the fact that fewer real jobs in certain sectors arebeing created and fewer are likely to be created.EMU represents a long-term strategy for Europe. It may not be perfectbut if governments, the public and also banks do not take a proactiveapproach there will be no strategy. Europeans need to look to theirfuture and act accordingly.Back to Headline List