WT03-B40-1IA060-000326-B017-75http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb20.html 205.156.212.5 19970115014700 text/html 76337HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:43:40 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:56:04 GMTContent-length: 76147Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb20.html Sample Issue Copyright AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNet October 25, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AHOLD IN 50/50 JOINT VENTURE IN SPAIN (84 words) GRIMMA TO UPGRADE UKRAINIAN SUGAR PLANTS (88 words) SCOTTISH AND NEWCASTLE TAKES CONTROL OF SOUTH AFRICAN BREWER (107 words) ESTONIAN BREWER SELLS STAKE TO FINNISH GROUP (180 words) FYFFES SELLS STAKE IN BANANA FIRM TO DOLE (112 words) LA MODERNA TO CLINCH DEAL WITH ROYAL VAN NAMEN (200 words) DANISCO LIFTS SALES TURNOVER BY 14% (191 words) ROYAL GREENLAND IN FISH JOINT VENTURE WITH RUSSIAN COMPANY (118 words) BASS CRITICISED FOR HOOPERS HOOCH CAMPAIGN (94 words) SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES ACQUIRES POLISH BEER MAKER (193 words) BONGRAIN REPORTS SLIGHT RISE IN TURNOVER (295 words) BONGRAIN FINALISES ACCORD WITH MAJOR CZECH CHEESE MAKER (112 words) UNILEVER OPENS FIRST SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH CENTRE IN CHINA (137 words) VRANKEN GROUP BUYS HEIDSIECK CHAMPAGNE FROM SEAGRAM (326 words) DANISH GROUP BUYS PFIZER'S CHY-MAX DAIRY CLOTTING AGENT RANGE (200 words) DANONE TAKES CONTROLLING STAKE IN CHINESE BREWER, DONGXIBU (264 words) AAIR: RESEARCH INTO BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RECYCLED/RE-USED PLASTICS (302 words) BIOTECHNOLOGY: NEW MEANS OF BOOSTING WHEAT PRODUCTION (346 words) RESEARCH PATENTS: NEW EUROPEAN PATENT SEARCH SERVICE WILL HELP AVOID DUPLICATION (534 words) FRENCH RESEARCHERS MAP COFFEE GENOME (327 words) EU/ROMANIA: ECU 10 MILLION FOR AN AGRI-INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMME (406 words) RESEARCHER TRAINING: FELLOWSHIPS OFFERED IN IRISH FOOD INDUSTRY (357 words) EU/BULGARIA: ECU 5 MILLION FOR AGRI-INDUSTRY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (407 words) COSMETICS: EU COMMISSION GUARANTEES SAFETY OF RAW MATERIALS USED (841 words) BIOMEDECINE: YEW TREE YIELDS CANCER-FIGHTING PRODUCT (365 words) PYRETHRINS: EU PROJECT SEEKS TO RE-CONQUER NATURAL INSECTICIDE MARKET (555 words) FARM PRODUCT PROMOTION: COMMISSION PLEASED WITH COMPANY POLICY (727 words) BEER: GREEN PAPER ON EXCLUSIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS IMMINENT (706 words) SPIRITS: RUSSIAN AND CHILEAN "PROTECTIONISM" CRITICISED (992 words) COMMISSION FINANCES STUDY OF FOOD PRODUCT MARKET IN KOREA (216 words) EXTRACTION SOLVENTS: COMMISSION PROPOSED TO UPDATE 1988 DIRECTIVE (233 words) INWARD PROCESSING: COOPERATIVES OPPOSE EU COMMISSION PROPOSAL (483 words) CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996AHOLD IN 50/50 JOINT VENTURE IN SPAINfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Dutch supermarkets group AHOLD said it had closed a 50/50 joint venture inSpain with Barcelona-based CAPRABO. It said the joint venture, dubbedSTORE 2000, would develop supermarket and hypermarket chains throughoutSpain. Its first activity is the takeover of 10 supermarkets in Madridfrom ALFARO. Caprabo was founded in 1959 and operates 90 supermarkets andhypermarkets with total sales of 85 billion Pesetas and a staff of 3,500.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996GRIMMA TO UPGRADE UKRAINIAN SUGAR PLANTSfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Germany's MASCHINEN- UND ANLAGENBAU GRIMMA (MAG) said it was seeking aDM100 million contract to modernise five sugar refineries in Ukraine.Grimma is negotiating with various banks to arrange the necessary creditsto finance the work, but intends only to provide equipment and know-howitself. Ukraine, like other countries in the Commonwealth of IndependentStates, is struggling to revive its run-down industry and wean itself offdependence on bartered sugar imports from Cuba.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SCOTTISH AND NEWCASTLE TAKES CONTROL OF SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29One of the largest brewing groups in Britain, SCOTTISH AND NEWCASTLE, hasbought a 75% stake in niche South African beer maker MITCHELL'S BREWERYfor an undisclosed amount. Mitchell's started operations in Kynsna onSouth Africa's south coast in 1983, adding further small brewingoperations in Cape Town in 1989 and Johannesburg in 1991. The companycurrently produces around 1,500 hectolitres of beer a month, giving it adomestic market share of less than 1%. The South African market isdominated by SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES which has a 97 % market share.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ESTONIAN BREWER SELLS STAKE TO FINNISH GROUPfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Estonian brewer TARTU OLLETEHAS, has agreed to sell 15% of its shares toFinland's OLVI. The Estonian brewer said the deal would boost its exportsby means of Olvi's sales network and become the best brewer in the Balticstates. Olvi is encroaching on a Baltic market which has so far been thepreserve of BALTIC BEVERAGE HOLDING, a joint venture between HARTWALL ANDPRIPPS RINGNES, owned by Norwegian food conglomerate ORKLA and VOLVO, ofSweden. Olvi paid Nkr10 million for the shares. It also said it wanted toput at least a quarter of its shares onto the burgeoning Tallinn stockexchange. Tartu Olletehas had share capital of Nkr7.5 million and turnoverlast year of Nkr175 million. The brewer is owned by MAGNUM KONSUMER, whichis also the main stakeholder in the TALLINN PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY, whichrecently sold 10% of its shares to foreign investors. Both parties haveagreed that next year 25% of Tartu shares will be listed on the Tallinnstock exchange.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FYFFES SELLS STAKE IN BANANA FIRM TO DOLEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Irish fruit wholesaler and distributor FYFFES Plc has sold its 50%shareholding in the BANANA TRADING CORPORATION to a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of DOLE FOOD COMPANY Inc for a total consideration of USD26.3million. Fyffes has also entered into new long-term shipping agreementswith Dole for shipping part of its banana requirements from Latin America.Fyffes said the shipping agreements would be of benefit to Fyffes and Doleand would give both companies significant economies of scale. BananaTrading Corporation owns a Guatemalan banana farming business along withother related assets including certain banana farming assets in Honduara.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996LA MODERNA TO CLINCH DEAL WITH ROYAL VAN NAMENfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Mexican conglomerate EMPRESAS LA MODERNA is close to a deal to buy Dutchfresh produce distributor ROYAL VAN NAMEN. With annual sales of some USD50million, Van Namen is one of Europe's largest produce distributors andwould add to La Moderna's growing network of distribution in the Americas.Produce would be shipped to Europe from the Americas and vice-versa. LaModerna grows and buys fresh produce from Chile to Canada. About 75% ofits production is currently sold in the United States and Canada. Thefragmented fresh produce market - with the largest player capturing only7% of the market - is fertile ground for La Moderna to leverage its vastdistribution capabilities Demand in the US fresh produce market isexpected to grow more than 10% a year. A pure cigarette company just threeyears ago, La Moderna has expanded into agri-biotechnology and packaging.Its agri-biotechnology division consists of a fresh produce division and aseeds company SEMINIS. The group's produce division exported USD250million worth of vegetables last year. Moderna's produce companyBIONOVAJUST merged with Oakland-based DNA PLANT TECHNOLOGY to form DNAPHOLDINGS.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996DANISCO LIFTS SALES TURNOVER BY 14%from AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Diversified Danish agri-foods group DANISCO has reported a sales turnoverfigure of 16.1 billion Kroner in the 1995/96 financial year ending April30 - up 14% on the previous year. 69% of the total was earned on exportsales. Profits were up 10% at Dkr 1.8 billion. Danisco, whose business isconcentrated on food products and packaging (with eleven divisions),invested a total of Dkr 976 million and devoted 296 million to researchand development. One of its main subsidiaries is Danisco Distillers, whichcontrols all of Denmark's domestic and international wines and spiritsbusiness and has sole ownership over Danisco Distillers Berlin. DaniscoDistillers is also the biggest producer of yeast-based alcohol in Denmark.Three of the group's subsidiaries have concluded commercial representationagreements with several of the big names in the international wines andspirits trade, such as Better Brands, Selected Wines & Spirits, now knownas Allied Domecq Spirits & Wines, and Peter F. Herring. In the financialyear ending April 30, 1996, Danisco Distillers had a net turnover of Dkr1.2 billion.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996ROYAL GREENLAND IN FISH JOINT VENTURE WITH RUSSIAN COMPANYfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The ROYAL GREENLAND fish products company, based in Nuuk, Greenland, andthe Russian firm JSC SEVRYBA in Murmansk have set up a partnership deal,called ROYAL RIBA, with its headquarters in Aalborg, in order to marketsome 750,000 tonnes of Russian fish a year. With an annual sales turnoverof 2.6 billion Danish Kroner, Royal Greenland is one of the biggest fishprocessing concerns in the world. It sells a whole range of fish products,although concentrates mainly on shrimps, which account for 51% of itsturnover. Royal Greenland has three factories in Denmark and in Julybought the Wilhelmshaven, Germany-based company, JADEFOOD.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BASS CRITICISED FOR HOOPERS HOOCH CAMPAIGNfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The advertising campaign launched by British brewer BASS to promote its"Hoopers Hooch" low-alcohol fizzy drink has drawn criticism inprofessional circles and from authorities worried about the temptation ofalcohol for young consumers. For similar reasons, Carlsberg Tetley wasrecently forced to change the labelling on its "Tchickhead" brand andWhitbread has been censured by Alcohol Concern for the implicit incitationto violence and the anti-social behaviour that its "Lemon Jag" and"Vanilla Heist" beers inspire amongst youngsters..Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES ACQUIRES POLISH BEER MAKERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29SOUTH AFRICAN BREWERIES, together with EURO AGRO CENTRUM, has acquired 52%of the capital of the Polish brewery group TYSKIE in Tychy. SAB, which hasmade enormous strides on overseas markets since 1993, has thus moved upinto fourth place on the world brewers' league, with a total productioncapacity of 38 million hectolitres, behind ANHEUSER BUSCH (107 millionhectolitres), HEINEKEN (64 million hectolitres.) and MILLER, a subsidiaryof the US Philip Morris group (54 million hectolitres). With the Tychybrewery, as well as the Lech brewery in Poznan, in which they already hada controlling stake, SAB and EAC now hold 20% of the Polish beer market.Elsewhere in Eastern Europe, SAB is now the biggest brewery group inHungary and is set to become Romania's number one too. In the 1995/96 year(ending March 31), SAB turned out 24.6 million hectolitres of beer inSouth Africa and 11.4 million hectolitres abroad. SAB has just made a loanissue on the international capital market for USD300 million, in order toraise funds to reinforce its long-term strategy.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BONGRAIN REPORTS SLIGHT RISE IN TURNOVERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Back home in France, Bongrain has just published its latest half-yearlyresults, which show a slight increase in sales turnover to 5.055 billionFrench Francs, up from FF 4.935 billion at end-June 1995. Sales were badlyaffected by poor weather conditions in June, but picked up sharply inJuly, which will help lift second half 1996 figures. Bongrain's turnoveralso progressed at international level.The French group's operating profits, which in the first half of 1995 hadreached FF 312.2 million, fell back to FF 250.3 million, as a result ofseveral different factors. For a start, manufacturers have not been ableto offset the increase in the price of milk paid to producers in relationto its cheese-making quality by a rise in retail prices from Autumn 1995onwards. And at the same time, by-products and surpluses have lost a lotof their value (-20% in the case of lactoserum, for example) - somethingwhich accounted for nearly half the drop in operating profits.Bongrain has meanwhile continued to invest in the main brand names and inadvertising at European and international level. The group has alsomanaged to reinforce its presence on new markets.Bongrain's overall profit in the first half of this year works out at FF148.1 million (FF 184 million in the previous six-monthly period), and netgroup profits at FF 129.5 million compared with 164.6 million for thefirst six months of 1995.Although no forecasts were made for the year as a whole, Bongrain isexpecting a difficult year. The company is nonetheless pressing on withits innovation strategy, with several major launches on the cards for itssubsidiaries.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BONGRAIN FINALISES ACCORD WITH MAJOR CZECH CHEESE MAKERfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29French food group BONGRAIN, which already has a foothold in the CzechRepublic via its PRIBINA subsidiary, is busy finalising an agreement totake over the Povltavske Mlekarny cheese-making concern, to the South Eastof Prague. The Czech firm, one of the biggest in the dairy sector,produces soft cheese and fresh cheese, as well as other dairy products. Ithas an annual turnover of more than 100 million French Francs and employs275 people. Thanks to this latest transaction, Bongrain will become soleowner of the Hermelin soft cheese brand sold by Pribina and PvltavskeMlekarny.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996UNILEVER OPENS FIRST SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH CENTRE IN CHINAfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The Anglo-Dutch agri-foods and consumer products group UNILEVER opened onOctober 7 its first scientific research centre in China, which is to serveas a starting point for a successful partnership between the food industryand academia in the country. Set up in Shanghai's Institute of organicchemicals, the new research centre will help Unilever to draw on thestrength of the local Chinese scientific world and, at the same time,steer the locals towards developing the most suitable technologies. Theresearch centre will use its scientific know-how to help match consumerpreferences with Unilever's branded products as a means of boosting salesin China, and particularly the business of the twelve joint ventures theAnglo-Dutch group already has in the country.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996VRANKEN GROUP BUYS HEIDSIECK CHAMPAGNE FROM SEAGRAMfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Canadian drinks group SEAGRAM announced on October 14 that it had signed adeal to sell its famous champagne Heidsieck Monopole to Vranken. Thesell-off covers not only the brand name, but also the business premisesand stocks - some 4.5 million bottles or more than three years of sales -and roughly 130 hectares of vineyards. Heidsieck Monopole's 70-strongworkforce will also be taken on by the Vranken group and no redundanciesare foreseen. The price tag on the transaction was not revealed, but it isestimated in professional circles to be in excess of USD400 million.Paul-Francois Vranken, a Belgian businessman who set foot in the Champagneregion just 20 years ago, has become, through successive acquisitions andlaunches of new brands like Charles Lafitte and La Demoiselle, the fifthbiggest champagne trader, producing some 8.5 million bottles in 1995 andwith a sales turnover of more than 600 million French Francs. Untilrecently, Mr Vranken was still short of a big brand name - a gap that hewill now try to fill by relaunching the Heidsieck Monopole.To start with, he launched the Charles Lafitte and La Demoiselle brands ofchampagne. Then, in 1994, he brought his company into a new phase ofexternal growth by taking over the Barancourt house which has a salesturnover of more than two million bottles of champagne a year, and thenthrough the acquisition of Champagnes Charbaut (with sales of 1.2 millionbottles). These acquisitions enabled the Vranken group to sell more than8.5 million bottles of champagne this year and post a turnover of nearlyFF 700 million.Last year, Heidsieck Monopole sold 1.2 million bottles of champagne,three-quarters if which were intended for the export market. FromSeagram's point of view, this transaction is a follow-up to therestructuring plan its champagne branch launched last Spring.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996DANISH GROUP BUYS PFIZER'S CHY-MAX DAIRY CLOTTING AGENT RANGEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The Danish group CHR. HANSEN has strengthened its position as marketleader in the field of dairy clotting agents by acquiring from PFIZER ofthe United States the CHY-MAX range, along with all patents and relatedrights. A production contract has just been signed with the Americancompany, which will continue to manufacture the CHY-MAX range of clottingagents at its Indiana factory in the US. Last year, the CHY-MAX productrange's worldwide turnover was nearly USUSD14 million, according to acommunique, which did not, however, reveal the price tag on thetransaction with HANSEN. CHY-MAX is a range of dairy clotting agentsproduced via fermentation and used in cheese-making. Chr. Hansen alreadyowned a similar range of products called CHYMOGEN. The Danish company,better known as a major supplier of food ingredients, is a subsidiary ofChr. Hansen Holding A/S, a firm specialised in biotechnology applicationsfor food ingredients, anti-allergy treatment and for technologicalservices for agriculture. The holding company has a workforce of about2,000 in 30 different countries, and, for the 1994/1995 financial year,reported a turnover of 1.8 billion Danish Kroner.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996DANONE TAKES CONTROLLING STAKE IN CHINESE BREWER, DONGXIBUfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29French agri-foods group DANONE has strengthened its foothold in therapidly-growing Chinese beer market, by taking a 60% stake in the WUHANDONGXIHU BEER COMPANY, the fifth biggest brewer in China. Thanks to thisacquisition, the French group has moved up to fourth place on the Chinesebeer market, according to Danone, although it did not reveal the price tagon its latest investment. The Chinese market, which is now as big as 160million hectolitres of beer, is still very fragmented. Dongxinu is fifthin the league table, with a production figure of 2.9 million hectolitresof beer a year. Situated in Wuhan, in the Hubei province (in centralChina), Dongxihu holds 40% of the market in the province, which is home to60 million people.Last January, Danone had announced plans for a joint venture with Haomen,the tenth biggest beer maker in China, based in the Beijing region. Chinaitself has the second largest market for beer in the world, behind theUnited States. And the market is expanding rapidly. It is set to cross the200 million hectolitre mark by the year 2000, making it the biggest marketin the world.Last year, the Danone group turned out 25 million hectolitres of beer(Kronenbourg). It is the leading brewer in France, Italy and Spain and thesecond biggest in Europe. In China, Danone is also present on the marketfor biscuits, fresh dairy products (Danone brand), Chinese milk-baseddrinks (Wahaha) and sauces (Amoy).Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996AAIR: RESEARCH INTO BARRIER PROPERTIES OF RECYCLED/RE-USED PLASTICSfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The December 1994 Directive on packaging and packaging waste setsambitious targets for recovery and states that recycling and re-use mustcontribute an important part of recovery. Recycling of plastics can giverise to concern about the migration of contaminants from the recycledplastic into a packaged food. One component of a research projectcurrently being carried out in the United Kingdom under the EU-sponsoredAgriculture and Agro-Industry R&D programme (AAIR) is studying theeffectiveness of a virgin layer of plastic (PET) (polyethyleneterephthalate) in limiting the migration of chemicals from recycled PET,i.e. three-layer plastic bottles (for soft drinks) were made with a buriedlayer of either virgin PET or PET contaminated deliberately withchemicals, and migration levels were measured in parts per million (ppm).The results of research work undertaken so far show that even with a highlevel of deliberate contamination of the middle layer of the 3-layerbottles, with hightly mobile model contaminants, migration was notdetectable after the standard conditions of 10 days at 40 degrees C or even after 6 months at room temperature.This has brought the research workers to the conclusion that an intact PETlayer represents an efficient functional barrier against migration fromcontaminants encapsulated in a recycled PET material under normalconditions of use for soft drinks. The results also allow the conclusionthat the 25% recycled material employed in this test could be increased toany technically feasible percentage provided that the characteristics ofthe functional barrier layer remained unchanged.For more information : Contact Dr Laurence Castle, Ministry of AgricultureFisheries and Food, CSL Food Science Laboratory, Colney, Norwich NR 7UQ,United Kingdom. Tel: (+44) 01603/259-350 - Fax: (+44) 01603/501-123;E-mail: 1.castleCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BIOTECHNOLOGY: NEW MEANS OF BOOSTING WHEAT PRODUCTIONfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The use of modern biotechnology processes is the best way of raising worldproduction of wheat and meeting growing demand for this staple food,concludes a study published on October 18 by the International Centre forthe Improvement of Wheat and Maize. The Mexico-based research centreemploys scientists from some 40 different countries, including two giantwheat and corn producer nations - the United States and France.Thanks to biotechnology, more wheat can be harvested from the same surfacearea using the same amount of water for irrigation and the same quantityof fertilizers; it can also help keep the impact on the environment to aminimum, pointed out Matt Reynolds, the main author of the study. Othermeans of boosting production - expanding the sown surface area or wideruse of fertilizers - are not viable in the long term, argues thescientist. "We can use biotechnology to identify the geneticcharacteristics of adaptation and resistance to insects and diseases",said Mr Reynolds, adding that the size of the grains and the taste ofwheat were equally important.The development of a new prototype wheat crop and the idea of leaving theears to develop over a longer period of time are among the other solutionssuggested by the study to the problem of meeting rising world demand forcereals. The Mexican research centre's study also recommends the use of"hybrid" crops, which are more hardy and resistant to disease, insects andparasites than older generations of crops, even though they are not fitfor reproduction. The authors of the study point out that a possiblestagnation of wheat yields would further aggravate the problems of povertyand famine in the world, since wheat is "the staple food of humanity"."While the world population is growing at a rate of 2.5% a year, wheatyields are increasing by only 1% a year", pointed out Timothy Reeves,Director of the International Centre for the Improvement of Wheat andMaize.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996RESEARCH PATENTS: NEW EUROPEAN PATENT SEARCH SERVICE WILL HELP AVOIDDUPLICATIONfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29For the last few months, European scientists have been able to draw on anew European patent search service called QUICK SCAN, which the EuropeanCommission would like to promote among a wider user base. It is targetingsmall and medium-sized enterprises in particular, because this new service- one of the various support measures offered under the Community'sspecific programme for the dissemination and exploitation of the resultsof research and technological development activities (INNOVATION) - canhelp avoid duplication of research effort and unnecessary expense oninvestment.According to the European Commission's estimates, up to ECU 25 billion iswasted every year in the EU in duplicating research and development workalready carried out elsewhere. This problem is of particular relevance tosmall and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) which are less likely to haveaccess to the patent information system (a study carried out by theEuropean Patent Office last year showed that over 60% of European SMEs donot have access to the system). In this context, the aim of the QUICK SCANactivity is two-fold: it not only helps avoid duplication of research andthus promote more efficient use of funding resources, but it can alsoraise awareness of the patent information system.The Commission has sought to keep the methodology of the new service assimple as possible. It falls under the "Technology Validation andTechnology Transfer" action line of the INNOVATION programme and projectsare subjected to a "novelty check" by the search division of the EuropeanPatent Office (EPO). This check compares the technical developmentsproposed by the project with the existing state-of-the-art in thatparticular area thus enabling a well-informed evaluation of the innovativecharacter of the proposal.During the months of April and May 1996, no less than 100 projectproposals selected for the definition phase under the INNOVATION programmewere submitted for assessment. 13% of these were not suitable for scanningby the EPO for reasons of either form or content. Following the scan, 30%of all projects submitted were classified as being "novel". In 57% ofcases, however, the novelty of the project, or parts of it, was questioned.In at least two cases, the QUICK SCAN search results led to a completeredirection of the project due to the discovery of information on existingresearch not known to the consortium carrying out the research project. Ina few other cases, QUICK SCAN provided valuable information on possiblecompetitors, pointed towards interesting prior R&D work or possible endusers of a new technology.In the eyes of the European Commission, this first exercise has clearlydemonstrated the cost effectiveness of the QUICK SCAN activity. Generallyspeaking, it estimates that the costs of the scan itself amounted to onlyone-tenth of the funding that has been directly saved as a result of thescan.For further information, please contact:European CommissionDG XIII - Telecommunications, Information Market and Exploitation ofResearchMr M. Schmiemann - Unit D/1rue Alcide de Gasperi (EUFO 21/65)L-2920 LuxembourgFax: (+352) 4301-32073Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FRENCH RESEARCHERS MAP COFFEE GENOMEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Researchers at the ORSTOM Institute in Montpellier have succeeded inmapping the coffee genome, break-through that is expected to improve plantselection. Launched at the beginning of the 1990s, research into the genestructure of coffee was carried out by the Laboratory for geneticresources and the improvement of tropical plants (LRGAPT) attached toORSTOM (the French Institute of scientific research for development andcooperation) in collaboration with the Nestle research centre in Tours.The map was drawn up through the molecular analysis of plant materialprovided by researchers at the Man coffee genetics station in the IvoryCoast, where several thousand varieties collected across Africa have beennurtured and studied for almost thirty years. The map is of Coffeacanephora, more commonly known as the Robusta variety, which is grown inWest Africa, Brazil, Indonesia, Thailand and Vietnam. It may, however,also be used for other varieties, notably the more widespread Arabica.Using molecular markers, it is possible with a genetic map to identify andlocate the genes carried by the chromosomes, enabling scientists toidentify genes of agronomic interest at an early stage of development:disease resistance, yield, bean size, caffeine content, etc. The map willmake the selection of coffee plants more rapid and effective. It has untilnow taken ten years to assess the potential of new strains. Moreover,selection has traditionally been a very expensive process, because of thelarge areas needed for trials and the array of tests to assess the qualityof a coffee variety. In the longer term, the map may be used ingenetically modifying coffee plants. LRGATP researchers will soon applytheir map in the context of a programme in Kenya to control the transferof a diseases resistance gene identified in Robusta to the Arabicavariety. Joint projects have also been launched in the Ivory Coast andCosta Rica.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU/ROMANIA: ECU 10 MILLION FOR AN AGRI-INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMMEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29In the framework of the European Commission-coordinated PHARE programme ofassistance for economic reforms in Central and East Europe, the 1996Agricultural Programme for Romania was approved at the end of November1995. The European Union is to contribute up to a maximum of ECU 10million to this programme of technical assistance in the field ofagriculture and agri-industry, which must be fully contracted by the endof 1997. The main components of the programme cover technical andfinancial assistance to newly-established agri-foods industries andcompanies.Breakdown of actions.- Technical assistance worth ECU 3,500,000 to help pay for advisoryservices, training equipment for development of national extensionservice, demonstration farms and producer groups, and for a strategicreview of agricultural and rural knowledge/information systems andproviders in Romania.- Technical and capital assistance of ECU 1 million for a commercial cropinformation service. The funds will help update a remote sensing data baseand establish private companies with minority state participationproviding crop and related information to industry and public sector as acommercial service- Financial assistance for investment to the tune of ECU 4,000,000 will bemade available to the Romanian agri-industry and farm sector via equitycapital placed through banks and under the 1992 PHARE Agricultural CreditGuarantee Fund project. Back-up technical assistance will also be providedto establish new forms of equity and financial support meeting the needsof newly-created industries and agri-foods enterprises.- Technical assistance worth ECU 1.5 million will help the Romanians tointegrate their policies and standards with the EU's own stock oflegislation and norms (the acquis communautaire). EU experts will alsohelp the Romanians with their reforms and the development of decentralisedrural development initiatives and institutional implementationcapabilities, as well as providing policy advice and technical support forthe Ministry of Agriculture and Food's reform and development.For further information about this programme, please contact:PHARE PMU in Ministry of Agriculture and Food,17 Boulevard Carol ler, Sector 2,RO-Bucharest,Romania.Tel: (+40) 1/312 40 31/614 28 42Fax: (+40) 1/312 40 29.orEuropean Commission,DGIA, B-4, SC27 02/23,200 rue de la Loi,B-1049, Brussels,BelgiumTel: (+32) 2/296 56 78Fax: (+32) 2/299 16 66Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996RESEARCHER TRAINING: FELLOWSHIPS OFFERED IN IRISH FOOD INDUSTRYfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Under the European Community's specific programme for the training andmobility of researchers (TMR), which supports the mobility of researchersacross Europe, the TMR Information Centre in Dublin has singled outseveral big Irish agri-foods companies which are willing to receive TMRfellows from other EU Member States. Any post-doctoral researchers who maybe interested in working with these companies, will receive financialsupport from the TMR programme budget.For reasons of confidentiality, the names of the companies volunteering tohost research fellows have not been revealed by the Irish TMR InformationCentre. There are three companies in the agri-foods industry offering totake in research workers:* Company C:A major food producer with strong links to University College, Cork andTeagasc (the Irish Agricultural Research Agency). The research workinvolved, which would be carried out in collaboration with theseorganisations, would cover:- spreadability of fats and butter;- stabilisation of fresh dairy products with dairy ingredients andhydrocolloids;- fermentation of fresh dairy products.* Company D:A manufacturer of veterinary and human pharmaceuticals interested inlocating researchers with a pharmacy background and experience in newproduct formulation and drug delivery systems.* Company E:A company in the consumer food and drink area seeking:- a molecular biologist to work on the development of novel yeast strains;- an organic chemist with experience of GC, GC-sniff and MS to work on thecharacterisation of volatile heterocyclic compounds significant in flavour;- a GC/MS researcher w ith good practical experience of statisticalanalysis and a knowledge of sensors to work on the development of patternrecognition algorithms for process control in beverage production;- a physicist or chemical/biochemical engineer with a knowledge ofinstrumentation to help develop an instrumental technique forcharacterising bubble collapse in low density foams.For further information on these fellowships, please contact: TMRInformation CentreForbairt, GlasnevinDublin 11,IrelandFax: (+353) 1/8370172E-mail: MobilityCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EU/BULGARIA: ECU 5 MILLION FOR AGRI-INDUSTRY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29In the framework of the PHARE programme of assistance for economic reformsin Central and East Europe, the European Commission last year approved the1996 Agricultural Programme for Bulgaria, under which the European Unionis to contribute up to ECU 5 million for technical assistance in the fieldof agriculture and agri-industry, by the end of 1997. With most of thetechnical work now out of the way, the main components of the programmecover technical assistance to training, agriculture policy formation andquality control of food products.Main components of the assistance programme.- Technical assistance worth ECU 2 million to help the National VeterinaryService, National Service for Plant Protection, Quarantine andAgrochemicals, National Inspection Laboratories for Grain and GrainForages and for Field Testing and Seed Control align progressively with EUstandards.- ECU 600,000 will be devoted to advice and training for BulgarianMinistry officials and others responsible for key policies foragricultural reform and European integration.- ECU 1.8 million will be provided for technical assistance to helpnational implementation of the Land Information System piloted in 1995; tofurther strengthen the National Advisory Service; and develop marketinformation and other supporting systems to help private farmers marketproduce more effectively, develop marketing channels and meet exportquality standards.- Another ECU 600,000 will be provided to pay for technical assistance andsupport for the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry to implement theprogramme in accordance with the European Commission's objectives andprocedures.The contracting authority for all these components of the programme is:PHARE PMU in Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry55 Christo Botov Blv.BG-1000 Sofia,BulgariaTel: (+359) 2/981 61 63Fax: (+359) 2/54 32 62.Further information about the programme can also be obtained from theEuropean Commission, DG IA - PHARE,Fax: (+32) 2/299 17 77or from the PHARE Internet service at:http://europa.eu.int/en/comm/dgla/phare.htmL(this service will update information on the programme regularly);directly from the implementing authorities or, for non-Internet users, onrequest from the DGIA Information Unit - Phare, which can be reached byfacsimile onNo expression of interest should be prepared at this stage. Advancewarnings of tenders will be published in the Phare Internet service at:http://europa.eu.int/en/comm/dg1a/phare.htmlCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COSMETICS: EU COMMISSION GUARANTEES SAFETY OF RAW MATERIALS USEDfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The safety of cosmetics and their ingredients in the European Union issubject to strict regulation. The conditions in which cosmetic productscan be marketed without posing any risk for consumers are lid down by EUCouncil Directive 76/768/EEC - the so-called Cosmetics Directive - whichhas been amended on several occasions, pointed out EU Consumer PolicyCommissioner Emma Bonino in response to a written question from GermanGreen Member of the European Parliament Hiltrud Breyer. Worried about the"mad cow disease" scare in the United Kingdom, the MEP was asking ifcosmetics users ran any risk of infection through broken skin, and, moreparticularly, if the UK still used beef derivatives as raw materials incosmetic and was taking the same safety precautions as in Germany andother EU Member States.Permanently reinforced safety standards.In reply to the German MEP's first query, Mrs Bonino simply said that theCommission's services had no knowledge of any study that had assessed therisk of infection through the use of cosmetics on a cut or broken skinsurface.As for any risks related to bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), theCommissioner recalled that Council Directive 93/35/EEC amending theCosmetics Directive for the sixth time, had tightened up safety standardsfor cosmetic products. This Directive requires cosmetics manufacturers orimporters in the European Union to provide the national authorities, ormonitoring purposes, with an information file, giving data notably on thequalitative and quantitative aspects of the product, as well as thephysical, chemical and microbiological specifications of both the rawmaterials used and the finished product, purity criteria and conditionsfor microbiological control of cosmetic products, the method ofproduction, and an evaluation of the safety of the end product from thehuman health point of view.As for the risks posed by BSE, the Commissioner recalled that, at thebeginning of the 1990s, the World Health Organisation and various nationaland EU scientific and veterinary committees concerned by the mad cowscare, including the EU Scientific Committee for Cosmetics, recommendedthat manufacturers used only beef derivatives from countries free frombovine spongiform encephalopathy. The European cosmetic toiletry andperfumery association (Colipa) has made quite clear that it hasscrupulously followed the experts' recommendations.Thus specified beef offal supplied to cosmetics producers must beaccompanied by a certificate of origin. Colipa also confirmed earlier thisyear that beef cattle offal most likely to pose a risk of contamination,such as brain, spinal cord and eyes were "not used in the manufacture ofcosmetic products in the Community".At the EU level, legislation adopted since the early days of the BSEepidemic has been largely of a veterinary nature. After the BritishGovernment admitted there was a potential risk of BSE transmission tohumans last Spring, the European Commission imposed a blanket ban on UKexports of beef, beef products and derivatives. Directive 96/239/EC ofMarch 27, 1996 prohibited British exports of any products originating fromcattle slaughtered in the UK intended for medical, cosmetic orpharmaceutical use. Decision 96/362/EC of June 11, 1996 stipulates thatthe UK may only allow production of such products in plants under officialveterinary control which have proved that they respect the necessaryconditions. This measure states that rules governing products from the UKalso apply to production of medicines, cosmetics etc. for the domesticmarket. But with this piece of legislation, the Commission also gave thego-ahead for a partial lifting of the embargo on gelatine and tallow. Theembargo is being relaxed gradually, insofar as strict conditions laid downby law are respected. For its part, the United Kingdom has taken a wholehost of measures since 1988, including steps to keep specified beef offaloff the market.Tallow is mainly used for making soaps. Among the other beef extracts thatcan be used in the manufacture of cosmetic products, some, such asgelatine, are taken from various cattle tissue (bones, skin etc.) and areused in different types of products (shampoo, soap, hair care products).Other derivatives are extracted from specific organs such as the placentaor the thymus and are only used for making a very limited range ofcosmetic products. The Commission nonetheless recalled that:- beef derivatives are not used in cosmetics in their natural state, butfirst have to undergo various chemical treatments;- in most cases, raw materials of animal origin only account for a verysmall percentage of the make-up of the end cosmetic product.Under the sixth amendment to Directive 93/35/EEC, the list of ingredientsthat may be incorporated into cosmetics has to be given on the label ofthe product. In the case of beef derivatives, listed in arecently-published inventory of ingredients used in the manufacture ofcosmetics, the organ from which they are obtained will also be mentionedif it is a clearly-defined organ such as the placenta or spleen.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BIOMEDECINE: YEW TREE YIELDS CANCER-FIGHTING PRODUCTfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29An Italian company based in Milan, Indena, has developed a new medicinethat can used to treat cancer - taxol - which is made from raw materialsderived from the yew tree. The raw materials are supplied by Bioagrico, acompany based in Beert-Pepingen in Belgium, which prunes and trims yewtrees (Taxus baccata) free of charge, recovers the leaves and branches andpacks them up for delivery to Italy where they are processed.The yew tree, a conifer that is easily pruned, is well known in theEuropean countryside. It can also be deadly if just a few score or hundredgrammes are ingested. Horses and sheep are particularly at risk (they candie only a few hours after eating just 200 grammes of yew tree leaves).The yew tree's pine needles and berries are also highly toxic.The basic substance used for making taxol is baccatin, a substanceextracted from yew tree pine needles and which can be used in treatmentsagainst several different types of cancer. Some twenty years ago, it wasextracted from the bark, but this endangered the survival of the treesthemselves. The substance can also be extracted from pruning or clippingwaste. In Belgium, Bioagrico has been awarded a contract to supply yewtree clippings up to the year 2007, unless in the meantime another, moreeffective substance is found to combat cancer. Currently, Bioagrico prunesyew trees owned by 4,200 private citizens, with each cropping bringing inabout 50 kilogrammes. In season, several teams are busy working at thesame time on private yew trees, while gardeners may also send theircuttings to Bioagrico. The "harvest" is then dried before being dispatchedto Italy. The Belgium-based company prunes yew trees in all regions of thecountry and is seeking to expand its expertise to other Member States ofthe European Union.For further information, contact:Indena99 via Ripamonti20141 MilanItalyTel: (+39) 2- 574961 / fax: (+39) 2 - 574046orBioagricoBeert-PepingenBelgiumTel: (+32) 2/361.03.66Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996PYRETHRINS: EU PROJECT SEEKS TO RE-CONQUER NATURAL INSECTICIDE MARKETfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29A non-food research project seeking to improve and develop cultivation ofpyrethrins (natural insecticides) in Mediterranean Europe has justreceived the backing of the European Commission. Bringing togetheragronomists, chemists and biologists from various Member States of theEuropean Union, this project is being coordinated by the French firmSanofi Chimie and will benefit from EU financial assistance to the tune ofECU 1.231 million for three years. Known in Europe since antiquity, butabandoned for the last few decades, pyrethrin growing could allow thecultivation of up to 5,000 hectares of poor and arid soil in southernEurope, thanks to this research project.Australian offensive.Natural pyrethrins were the first insecticides used by man. Known fromtime immemorial, cultivation of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefoium, from whichthey are extracted developed in Europe from the Middle Ages onwards andwere widely used until the appearance of the first synthetic insecticidesin the middle of the 20th century. Today, because of their totalharmlessness to man and domestic animals as well as their excellentbiodegradability, they remain the reference point as active materials inthe field of domestic use, body hygiene (anti-lice products), animalhealth (for keeping insects out of livestock farm buildings) andbiological agriculture, etc... All these are fields where the consumer andEU regulations encourage the use of "clean", rather than synthetic,insecticides, preferably of "natural" origin.Although use of natural pyrethrins is still significant and evenexpanding, cultivation of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium historicallydeserted Europe after the Second World War, shifting to Africa on a widescale (notably Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania). Today, these Africancultivations are threatened either because of the political instability ofthe region, or because of inadequate productivity. An important market isthus up for grabs. Europe, for its part, although a high user of thesenatural insecticides (with 20% of the world market) is at the momentlagging behind, for it is the Australians who are taking over from theAfricans and developing vast areas of mechanised cultivation in Tasmania.If improved varieties similar to or better than those being grown inAustralia - and adapted, as in Tasmania to intensive, mechanisedcultivation - can be developed, a whole new market could no doubt bere-conquered by European farmers, by growing a high added value crop thatis perfectly suited to fallow land and poor and arid land too.The research project that has just got off the ground has the followingmain aims:- to study the action of natural pyrethrins, an especially the comparativeactivity of the various active principles identified in the plant, as wellas the possibilities of biological synergies;- to implement a genetic selection process designed to obtain varietieswith maximum active principle content- to develop an optimised cultivation technique which is economicallyadapted to European farms, notably through mechanisation.More specifically, the project involves crop improvement work (evaluationof germ plasma in the field, study of yield factors of the leaves,isolation of different isomers, modes and sites of action of the differentisomers among insects), techniques such as interpolating cultivation andhybridation, diseases, crop maintenance, climatisation and fieldtransfers, harvesting etc. and studies into the extraction/purificationprocess.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996FARM PRODUCT PROMOTION: COMMISSION PLEASED WITH COMPANY POLICYfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Food product promotion campaigns sponsored or run by the European Unionhave taken on much greater importance in recent years and have evenqualified to have their own unit within the European Commission inBrussels Unveiling at the Paris food show in early October the promotioncampaign for grape juice contracted out to Sopexa (a French company forpromoting sales of farm and food products), Sergio Ventura, who runs theAgricultural Product Promotion Unit of the Commission'sDirectorate-General for Agriculture (DG VI), recalled that there hadoriginally been no general legal base for promotional measures financed bythe EU. However, some specific sectors had their own legal base allowingEU-sponsored promotion campaigns for a few products like milk, textilefibres, olive oil, etc.). Later on, the necessary legal foundations weregradually laid to enable the use of Community funds for promoting otherproducts. And, from 1991 onwards, a specific division was created tomanage all the product promotion schemes. With the recent reorganisationof DG VI's structure, the existence of the Promotion Unit has injected abit more coherence into this field of marketing.Grape juice consumption boosted by 70%.His trip to Paris gave Mr Ventura the chance to explain to Sopexa'smanagers that there is still a wide variety of promotional actions,ranging from direct actions 100% managed by the European Commission, whichputs out calls for tender via specialised public relations agencies, toactions delegated to the Member States themselves. Even in this lattercase, the Commission is still responsible for ensuring the follow-up fromthe conception stage to follow-on operations, including the choice ofagencies proposing to organise the promotional measures. And some are 100%financed by the European Union, while other actions involve jointparticipation in the costs by associations or producer groups benefitingfrom the promotion campaigns.Mr Ventura illustrated his explanation with the long-running grape juicepromotion campaign as an example. Launched in 1986 at a meagre cost ofonly ECU 4.6 million to the farm budget of the European AgriculturalGuidance and Guarantee Fun (EAGGF), the campaign has helped boost sales ofgrape juice in France, Germany and Spain (Belgium and Italy had originallytaken part, but have since dropped out). In the case of France (whichaccounts for 50% of EU production of grape juice), for example, the EUfunds are channelled through the national interprofessional wine officeOnivins, which in turn gives Sopexa a budget of eleven million FrenchFrancs. The advantages of promoting consumption of grape juice are ofcourse linked to the high costs of intervention and distillation in thetable wine sector. Grape juice is also sold on a highly competitivemarket, dominated traditionally by citrus fruit juices, but it hasbenefited from the strong growth of the fruit juice market worldwide.In terms of product image, the overall impact of the advertising andpromotional actions carried out in France over the last ten years has beenquite clear: grape juice has come to be seen in the eyes of consumers as amore modern, more original and party-type drink, according to a marketresearch study undertaken last year. Moreover, grape juice could count onthe support of nutritionists, just as wine could draw on the support ofthe medical world for the famous "French paradox" (namely that regular,but moderate, consumption of wine can help avoid cardio-vascularillnesses).The numbers show very positive results too, points out the Commission. Forinstance, consumption of grape juice in France has risen by nearly 70% inthe space of ten years, with household purchases rising from 220,000hectolitres to 374,000 hl in 1995. On a fruit juice market which, lastyear, began to see a slow-down in its growth rate (+11%), sales of grapejuice continued to expand strongly, both in volume terms (+16%) and invalue (+15%). This expansion was evident in all the main regions ofFrance: sales progressed in the West, the South East and the Paris region,which all had previously recorded below-average consumption of grapejuice, while the North remained well above average. And two and a halfmillion more homes have been converted to grape juice since 1987 - anincrease of 60% in ten years (+12% for 1995 alone).Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996BEER: GREEN PAPER ON EXCLUSIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS IMMINENTfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29Already a year late, the European Commission is expected to publish aGreen Paper on selective distribution and exclusive purchasing agreementsin the beer sector - authorised since 1967 under an exemption to Communitycompetition rules - but probably not until the end of this year or thebeginning of next. EU Competition Commissioner Karel Van Miert isconsidering extending until 1999 block exemption Regulations based onArticle 85.3 of the EU Treaty for beer sector agreements. The Commissionsaid on October 16 that the proposal was to avoid a "legal vacuum" thatmay occur if the block exemptions from EU competition rules were to expirebefore the consultations on the Commission's Green Paper for theirreplacement had been concluded. Requested by Member of the EuropeanParliament David Thomas (PES, UK) to comment on consultations with beerproducers and distributors, the Commission indicated that no formalmeetings had as yet taken place.The first derogation to the general ban on agreements laid down by theTreaty of Rome dates back to 1967 (Regulation 1967/67). This regime wasextended for 15 years in 1983 by virtue of two separate block exemptionRegulations, one covering selective distributions (1983/83), the otherexclusive purchasing (1984/83). The latter text, general in scope,required more specific provisions for particular sectors, includingbrewing, and notably the British beer industry, where the breweries holdbeer-supply contacts with pubs owned by them. The Regulations now covertens of thousands of agreements by which a supplier, on the one hand,appoints a reseller as his exclusive distributor in a given area(Regulation 1983/83), and on the other hand, a reseller agrees to buy allhis products from one supplier only (Regulation 1984/83).At the time of their adoption, the Commission was acting on the assumptionthat exclusive purchasing contracts in this sector required a majorinvestment by the supplier and a long-term commitment by the seller andtherefore justified exclusive contracts. The Commission therefore decidedto make special allowances for beer-sector agreements. The maximum lengthof an exclusive contract was set at five years for beer and other drinksand from five to ten years for beer exclusively. Specific clauses coveredsituations where the supplier and seller had also signed a lease forpoints of sale. It was agreed that the length of the purchasing contractcould correspond to that of the lease, even if the latter was for a periodof more than ten years.The British way of life.Under pressure from the breweries, British MEPs have visited Brussels toask Mr Van Miert for an extension of the exemptions for a minimum of 15years. An EU source said the Commissioner was not unsympathetic to thelegal uncertainty for breweries caused by the possible review of theexemptions, and that he had also understood the "tied tenancy" pub-supplyagreements were "part of the British way of life". The Commissioner hasalso been lobbied hard by British all-party MEPs who are strongly insupport of an extension to the exemptions. One solution which may be putforward in the Green Paper would be to carry on with sectorial blockexemptions. Another would be to base exemptions on the market share of thecompany operating the restrictive agreements. In the meantime, when Mr VanMiert makes a formal proposal for the extension of the rules, his decisionmust be approved by the full team of Commissioners.Threat to "real ale"?Meanwhile, a meeting in Brussels on October 11 between Commissionofficials and the European brewers' lobby group, the Confederation desBrasseurs du Marche Commun, failed to make much progress towards solving adispute over tied tenancy rules allowing pubs tied to national brewers tosell a beer from another, i.e. foreign, brewer only if it has beenproduced by traditional "real ale"-making methods. The Commission isworried that this discriminates against beer imported from other EUcountries, where beer is rarely cask-conditioned. But the UK is nowthreatening to drop the "guest beer" provision altogether if it is forcedunder Community law to include continental European lagers in thedefinition of a "guest beer".Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996SPIRITS: RUSSIAN AND CHILEAN "PROTECTIONISM" CRITICISEDfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29New Russian plans to limit vodka and ethyl alcohol imports from thebeginning of 1997 have sent a tremor through Brussels. The hangover fromthe measures announced by Moscow could mean a serious drop in EU sales in1997 - 50 million litres instead of the 200 million litres exported in1995. EU officials thought they were seeing double when they learnt ofthese new Russian plans, since negotiations were in theory still under wayon current limits on vodka imports following Commissioner van den Broek'strip to Russia in March. There is no justification for introducing newunilateral safeguard measures, the Commission said on October 9. Thethreat to outlets in Russia is not the only thing worrying EU spiritsproducers, who are still voicing loud complaints about discriminatorytaxes applied to alcoholic drinks in Chile.Russian unilateralism.Negotiations on a possible ceiling for EU (and Belgian, in particular)exports of vodka to Russia started back in March following a visit by EUExternal Relations Commissioner Hans van den Broek. Following the Russianannouncement of import restrictions, the Commission said that, until ithad received more information, consultations would continue between EU andRussian negotiators in the framework of the Interim trade Agreementbetween the two sides, which came into force on February 1, 1996. TheCommission reckons that imports of ethyl alcohol in 1995 and 1996 did notharm Russian domestic interests at all and thus there was no justificationfor the unilateral introduction of safeguard measures. Besides, protectivemeasures of this kind go against the letter and the spirit of the InterimAgreement. Brussels has now asked the Russian authorities to continueconsultations on the issue and - pending their outcome - to suspend thesafeguard measures.This is not the first time the EU has had to remind the Russians of theirobligations under the Interim Agreement. Under a unilateral trade ruleimposed by the Russian authorities on March 13, EU exporters of vodka wererequired to sell into Russia at a minimum price of USD8.2 per litre,putting them at an obvious competitive disadvantage to vodka exporters inthe Commonwealth of Independent States, who are subject to a minimum priceof USD3.8 per litre. The new rule not only hit EU vodka suppliers andtheir estimated ECU 200 million trade with Russia; it also dealt anotherblow to EU confidence in the reliability of the Russian signatures on thetrade pact with the EU.In 1994, the EU Member States exported ECU 266 million worth of alcoholicdrinks to Russia (including ECU 167 million worth of vodka). This figurewas almost reached in the first eight months of 1995, when EU sales ofalcohol to Russia were worth ECU 240 million (including 150 milliongenerated from vodka sales).Discriminatory Chilean taxes.Having seen their long-running campaign against Japan's alcohol taxesvindicated in the World Trade Organisation, European spirit producers arenow turning their attention to Chile's taxes which, they say, discriminateagainst foreign spirit imports. The Confederation of European SpiritsProducers (CEPS) welcomed the recent decision by the WTO's Appellate Bodyto uphold an earlier ruling by the Dispute Settlement Body, that Japan'stax regime discriminated against foreign imports. But CEPS PresidentChristian Delclaux warned on October 8 that similar rules were beingplanned in Chile. "Given the WTO ruling, we are amazed at reports that theChilean administration is now proposing to submit GATT-inconsistentlegislation to the Congress", he said.Mr Delclaux says although the new proposals address Chile's currentdiscrimination, they would still maintain differences in taxes."Maintaining such a wide variation in the levels of taxation isdiscriminatory - and the WTO has just affirmed this fact", he pointed out."If Chile believes this is an acceptable solution, it is sadly mistaken.Indeed, I am certain that if producers and exporters of Chilean wines weretreated in a similar discriminatory manner in, for example, the UnitedKingdom - their second largest export market - they would feel likewise."Chile - and, to a certain extent, South Korea - the alcohol tax regimebears remarkable similarities to that of Japan. Under current Chilean law,whisky is taxed at a rate of 70% ad valorem at wholesale. Other spiritsare taxed at 30%, while pisco, the country's top selling local brew, istaxed at 25%. Mr Delclaux says that the current differentials should beremoved by applying a uniform tax rate, based on alcohol content, for allspirits.EU producers set out trade objectivesEuropean spirits producers have meanwhile welcomed EU External RelationsCommissioner Sir Leon Brittan's support for their tariff and otherobjectives for the WTO Ministerial Conference in Singapore in December andthe subsequent work programme. Much of what the European spirits industryis seeking is very close to the Commissioner's own thinking for Singaporeand the WTO's work in coming years, according to the CEPS. Sir Leon hasalso said the Commission will continue to work closely with the industryto promote the shared objective of improving market access for Europeanexporters throughout the world. "Given that the value of EU spiritsexports to markets outside Europe totals nearly 4,000 million ECU, theCommissioner's personal endorsement of our WTO objectives, especiallyimproved market access for distilled spirits in world markets, is mostwelcome", said CEPS President Christian Delclaux on October 17.CEPS is urging the Commission to help secure at the Singapore Ministerial"substantial reductions" in the import tariffs applied to distilledspirits beyond those agreed in the Uruguay Round in 1994. This includesexpansion of the 'zero for zero' import tariff phasing-out arrangementsfor brown spirits, e.g. Cognac and Scotch Whisky (agreed by the EU,Canada, Japan and the United States) to encompass all spirits and liqueursand extension of the arrangements to other WTO signatories.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996COMMISSION FINANCES STUDY OF FOOD PRODUCT MARKET IN KOREAfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29The European Commission has signed a contract for a study of thefood-products market in Korea with a French company, Sofres S.A. and itssubsidiary in Seoul. Of the thirteen firms that offered their services inreply to the Commission's call for tenders, the Directorate-General forExternal Relations (Commercial Policy and Relations with North America,the Far East, Australia and New Zealand, Unit China, Korea, Hong Kong,Macau, Taiwan) selected the French firm on the basis of a number ofcriteria such as the fee proposed for the study, professionalqualifications and experience of the personnel, the number of peopleworking on the market study etc. Sofres S.A. will receive ECU 125,345(excluding travel and subsistence expenses) for carrying out the marketstudy covering a number of sectors of the food products market in theRepublic of Korea.For further information, please contact:European Commission,Directorate-General for External Relations B-28, 6/191,rue de la Loi 200,B-1049 Brussels,BelgiumorSofres SA,16, rue Barbs,F-91129 Montrouge Cedex,France,and its subsidiary Frank Small & Associates,Samwhan Comus Building,Yoido-dong Youngdeungpo-ku,KR-Seoul 150-010KoreaCopyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996EXTRACTION SOLVENTS: COMMISSION PROPOSED TO UPDATE 1988 DIRECTIVEfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29To take account of scientific and technical progress, the EuropeanCommission is proposing to amend for the third time Directive 88/344/EECon the approximation of the laws of the Member States on extractionsolvents used in the production of foodstuffs and food ingredients. Theproposed changes concern mainly the use of certain solvents, theirconditions of use and maximum residue limits in food. The EuropeanParliament has just given its stamp of approval to the proposal during itsOctober 23 plenary session in Strasbourg.According to the draft Directive, the Annex to Directive 88/344/EEC wouldbe amended as follows:In Part I, the substance butyl acetate is deleted (as it is no longer usedin agri-industry).In Part II:The entry for hexane is modified.In Part III, the substance methyl-propanol-1 is deleted and in its place1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane is added with a maximum residue limit of 0.02mg/kg in the foodstuff due to the use of extraction solvents in thepreparation of flavourings from natural flavouring materials.The Member States must amend their laws, regulations and administrativeprovisions so as to authorise trade in products complying with thisDirective by July 1, 1997 at the latest, and must ban trade in productsnot complying with this Directive from January 1, 1998 onwards.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE via NewsNetOctober 25, 1996INWARD PROCESSING: COOPERATIVES OPPOSE EU COMMISSION PROPOSALfrom AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPE, 25 October 1996, No. 29French agricultural cooperatives - whether involved in upstream farmproduction or downstream in the agri-food processing industry - are up inarms about a draft proposal from the European Commission that seeks toamend arrangements for access to international trade. The cooperatives areparticularly critical of the proposed changes to the inward processingregime which attracts a wide range of agricultural products. The draft hasalso been given a cautious welcome by European agri-food industryspecialists. But there may be room for improvement as, according to somesources, it appears that the future rules for the system of inwardprocessing traffic have not yet been finalised within the Commission'sDirectorate-General XXI (Customs and Indirect Taxation).The inward processing regime is a system that enables goods to be importedinto EU customs territory for processing - without having to pay customsduties. The only condition required of these goods is that they areimmediately re-exported outside the EU after processing, other wise theywill be liable for normal customs duties. In their position paper, theFrench farm cooperatives, who are supported in their quest by cooperativesin other EU Member States, reckon that this system cannot provide anadequate response to the new, liberal regime ushered in by the GATTUruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture and can only be regarded as anexceptional regime.Widening its scope, say the cooperatives, would "not be compatible withglobal respect for  Community preference". Not can it provide analternative to the traditional, unsatisfactory, policy of exportrestitutions.They also feel the Commission's draft proposal will risk encouragingproduction of agricultural raw materials to move elsewhere: since the"substitutability" of foodstuffs cannot rely solely on volume and priceequivalents. The farmers say what is needed is a "material yield"equivalent, enabling a qualitative differentiation to be made on the basisof raw material accounting. The processing stage between import and exportof a food product must be visible through the use of two different customstariffs, one on the way in and one on the way out. The French cooperativesreckon that the proposed reform goes against the policy guidelinesrequested by the farming industry itself.The European Commission's draft proposal assumes that the GATT Agreementon Agriculture has restored world market prices for agricultural productsto normal. But this hypothesis, according to the cooperatives, needs to begiven more in-depth consideration because there is still considerablespeculation son markets that are supposed to be better governed nowadays.To sum up, the French farm cooperatives really want to see a simpler,clearer and less expensive system. Above all, they cite the principle ofacceleration and greater transparency of the system, the need for fasterclearance of the backlog of requests for licences and recourse tocomputerised means of transmission.Copyright 1996 AGRI-INDUSTRY EUROPEBack to Headline List WT03-B40-2IA060-000326-B017-137http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb21.html 205.156.212.5 19970115014833 text/html 81103HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:45:33 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:54:53 GMTContent-length: 80913Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb21.html Sample Issue Copyright AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet October 31, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES RURAL DEVELOPMENT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT CALLS FOR RURAL CHARTER (1456 words) COMMISSION PROPOSES TO ALLOW MORE WAXES FOR USE ON FRUIT (223 words) EU MAKES NEW ATTEMPT TO LEGISLATE ON FOOD IRRADIATION (325 words) DAIRY POLICY: MEMBER STATES' "INCOMPATIBLE OBJECTIVES" FOR MILK SECTOR (1338 words) UK MEAT PLANT THROUGHPUT DIPS 7% IN FIRST 8 MONTHS OF 1996 (235 words) SAUDI ARABIA RE-OPENS FOR IRISH BEEF (154 words) MAD COW DISEASE: MIXED SIGNALS FROM COMMISSION ON "PROVEN" BSE/CJD LINK (1178 words) BEEF CRISIS: MINISTERS URGED TO SWALLOW THE MEDICINE (1740 words) POTATOES: EU MARKET REGIME PROPOSALS SOON TO BE BURIED AGAIN (909 words) PROGRESS ON FRENCH APPLE EXPORTS TO JAPAN (313 words) DURUM WHEAT: COMMISSION SECTOR REFORM PROPOSALS BOGGED DOWN (658 words) TUNISIA ANTICIPATES ABUNDANT OLIVE HARVEST (314 words) WHEAT PRICES RISE AS MAIZE AND SOYA FALL (243 words) CEREALS: INTERNATIONAL GRAINS COUNCIL RAISES 1996/97 CROP FORECASTS (381 words) NETHERLANDS JOINS INTERNATIONAL PLANT VARIETY CONVENTION (318 words) VIETNAM JOINS INTERNATIONAL COFFEE ORGANISATION (492 words) CGIAR: PLANET HAS THE RESOURCES TO FEED 8 BILLION IN 2025 (473 words) OECD: EXPORT FRUIT BOOM FROM THE SOUTH A THREAT FOR THE North? (477 words) BANANA PRODUCERS' FORUM OPENS IN SANTO DOMINGO (180 words) MAJOR AGRICULTURAL EVENTS IN NOVEMBER 1996 (418 words) CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996RURAL DEVELOPMENT: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT CALLS FOR RURAL CHARTERfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The EU's Common Agricultural Policy should be subsumed under a widerEuropean rural policy which will include objectives such as help to ruralcommunities and other measures which are complementary to agriculturalpolicy goals. This idea is part of a report from Irish MEP Liam Hylandofficially adopted by a plenary session of the European Parliament inStrasbourg on October 25. Mr Hyland's report argues that sensible use ofthe rural environment is the basis for all good spatial and resourceplanning and calls for an EU "Rural Charter" to be drawn up forthwith.Enlargement of EU "rural" areas.Mr Hyland points out that following the accession of Sweden, Finland andAustria approximately one quarter of the Union's population now live inrural communities, and that rural areas account for almost 85% of thesurface area of the European Union. As the European Union expands over thenext decade to take in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, whosefarming conditions are very different, it "makes sense to review thepresent arrangements, and to adapt and amplify them where necessary with aview to achieving a strengthened and mutually consistent body of measureswhich allows the mobilisation of a maximum of synergies and leadsprogressively to an integrated rural policy," says the EuropeanCommission's November 1995 White Paper on "Future Strategies for the CAP".However, Mr Hyland points out that there is not even a definition of theword "rural" on which all Member States agree. A number of Member Statesuse a population threshold (France, Spain, Italy, Ireland, Germany)although the population threshold used differs. Other countries use aplanning-based approach (Netherlands, Denmark, Belgium, Luxembourg and theUnited Kingdom). The OECD uses a definition based on a population of lessthan 150 per km2; Eurostat uses 100 inhabitants per km2. The proposedCouncil of Europe Charter avoids using a precise figure, defining an areaof the countryside as rural when the "main part" is used for agriculture,forestry, aquaculture and fisheries, for the economic and culturalactivities of country-dwellers, for non-urban recreation and leisure andfor other purposes such as housing. Mr Hyland wants a single cleardefinition agreed that can be used in all discussions on rural affairs.The problems of rural areas.In the Commission paper on "The Future of Rural Society", problems ofrural areas are analysed under three categories:- areas "suffering from the pressures of modern life", near towns andcities in areas of heavy population, particularly in the centre-north ofthe Community and in many coastal regions.- areas suffering from "rural decline", such as several regions in Greece,the Mezzogiorno, inland Spain and Portugal, and the island of Ireland.Here agriculture is still important but farms are often so small that theycan barely provide a living for one person and the absence of alternativeemployment lead to a drift from the land, especially among the young.-"remote areas", e.g. mountain regionsMr Hyland identifies two common misconceptions. Although there are someparts of the EU where rural areas have been abandoned and depopulated,this is not universal. The decline in numbers of farmers during the 1970sand 1980s is often cited as an important effect on rural areas, but thisdecline has been replaced in very many parts of the Community with aninflow of population from elsewhere. Nevertheless, the "drift from theland" persists in Greece, Ireland, some parts of Italy, Spain and Portugaland in some areas of France, the Scottish Highlands, many islands, higherparts of the Alps and Pyrenees, the Massif Central, the West of Ireland,and some mountain areas in Greece, Italy, Spain and Portugal. Therapporteur also sees the need for a fourth category since the accession ofthe Member States having Nordic regions, which are characterised by a verylow population density.Secondly, contrary to general belief, overall unemployment in the ruralareas of the Community is not greater than in urban areas, andunemployment for males is generally lower in rural areas. Within thisoverall picture, however, there are sharp differences. Rural unemploymentis largely a matter of agricultural under-employment: the Commissionestimates that almost one third of all farmers in the Community areunderemployed - i.e. they work less than 50% of a normal working year ontheir farm and have no other gainful employment. However, the problem offemale unemployment in rural areas is one which warrants specialattention. Precise EU data on this is not currently available, a pointwhich the Commission ought to remedy soon, reckons Liam Hyland.The Community role.The share of the Structural Fund budget for 1989-1993 devoted to ruraldevelopment will double from the present approximately 15 billion ECU toapproximately 30 billion ECU in 1994-1999.The rapporteur believes we cannot simply establish a rural policy in theway we have established agricultural policy - dealing with specificmarket, with specific mechanisms, and finance. This is true partly due tothe the principle of subsidiarity - it is the Member States who currentlypropose programmes to the Commission, which are then negotiated inpartnership to establish broad framework policies and objectives, andwhich the Community co-finances (50% in most cases, 65% in Objective 1cases). National and regional authorities have primary responsibility fordealing with rural affairs through their policies on land, taxation,development, training, administration etc. "Community action can only bepart of the total, and, being realistic, only a small part", says LiamHyland. However, the rapporteur believes the development of an integratedrural policy, based on the principles of a European Rural Charter, willenable the "rural dimension" to be taken into consideration in theelaboration of these various policies, both nationally and at EU level,which is not the case at the moment.Principles of Rural Development.Rural development must enshrine the right of all sectors of rural societyto participate in economic activity, stresses the report, setting out fivecentral areas of policy concern which have to be addressed; it is thecombination of these actions that will lead toward the principal objectiveof maintaining viable rural communities, which in turn depends on tacklingthe most fundamental problem of rural areas, which is unemployment, saysLiam Hyland. The five areas are:Agricultural adjustment to new world trends - increasing world competitionand increasing mobility of capital and labour- by continuing to adaptagriculture to the needs of the market place, while investing in newdevelopments such as planned forestry, organic production and the creationof non-food energy sources. Farmers should also be encouraged to maintainan attractive, diverse and ecologically rich rural environment, whichincludes organic production. Such support should facilitate land mobilitythrough schemes for young farmers.Industry and enterprise. Growth in rural employment will not come fromagriculture alone, or from forestry, but will be replaced by the growth ofalternative economic sectors such as tourism or development based on newtechnologies and telecommunication, in which the rural areas will provideadvantages over urban areas for the development of service industries.Environmental sustainability and cultural preservation. Farmers have animportant role as guardians of the countryside, and that as such theyought to be paid for that role. We have to secure and sustain acountryside which is clean, attractive and rich in wildlife, historicalfeatures, preserving the rich traditions of culture built up overthousands of years, while developing recreational opportunities, says thereport.Rural communities. One of the most important issues for rural communitiesis the shortage of rural housing. One of the problems in this respect hasbeen the environment: any approach to develop new land for building isoften resisted on environmental grounds. Local authorities must have apositive housing programme for rural areas, which should include theupgrading and preservation of existing housing stock.Planning and land use. It is important to overcome the popular belief thatthe countryside is under constant threat, because this leads to the '`nodevelopment" ethic that is damaging to rural economies and ruralsocieties, says Liam Hyland. What is needed is a land use policy which istailored to specific areas and needs, and which allows for the properintegrated use of land for agriculture, forestry, leisure, tourism,industrial development and housing. It is better to consider the use ofgood quality land for development where it might have greater economic oramenity use than as setaside land on which nothing is done, environmentaldegradation takes place, and costs increase yearly, stresses therapporteur.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996COMMISSION PROPOSES TO ALLOW MORE WAXES FOR USE ON FRUITfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Under pressure from the fruit trade, represented by the European Union ofthe Fruit and Vegetable Wholesale, Import and Export Trade (EUCOFEL), theEuropean Commission has proposed to allow three more waxes to be used onfruit in the EU. The proposal to extend the list of waxes allowed for useon fruit forms part of a proposal for a European Parliament and CouncilDirective to amend the basic Directive on food additives other thancolours and sweeteners that the Commission tabled earlier this Autumn.According to the new proposal, the following waxes will be allowed forsurface treatment only on fresh avocados, mangoes, papayas and melons:E905 Microcrystalline wax (maximum level permitted: 140 mg/kg)E912 Montanic acid esters: (quantum satis*)E914 O oxidized polyethylene wax: (quantum satis)The proposal has been sent to the European Parliament and the Council ofMinisters for approval, but the legislative process may take months, ifnot years.* The quantum satis principle means that no maximum level is specified,but additives, such as waxes, may be used in accordance with goodmanufacturing practice, at a level not higher than is necessary to achievethe intended purpose and provided that the consumer is not misled.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996EU MAKES NEW ATTEMPT TO LEGISLATE ON FOOD IRRADIATIONfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450After the failed attempts by successive Council Presidencies in the late1980s, early 1990s to get a Community Directive on irradiation offoodstuffs adopted, mainly because of strong opposition from Germany andLuxembourg to the very principle, the European Commission is havinganother go now. It recently sent the Council of Ministers two draftDirectives which it hopes the Irish Presidency can steer through thelegislative process.The first proposal is for a general framework Directive laying downgeneral rules on the conditions applicable to food irradiation, and thesecond is an implementing Directive, establishing a positive list offoodstuffs for which irradiation would be authorised throughout the EU.If the Council adopts the proposals, Member States would no longer be ableto ban the marketing of irradiated foodstuffs, if these meet therequirements laid down in the framework Directive. So far, the proposalonly allows irradiation for herbs, spices and vegetable seasonings. Onthis point, the Commission is treading cautiously after its earlierproposals for a much wider range of food products were watered down tocover only herbs and spices. International organisations like the UN Foodand Agriculture Organisation, the International Atomic Energy Agency andthe World Health Organisation have issued a number of studies andstatements showing no risk to human health from correct use of irradiationtechniques.On the whole, Member States seem to accept this new approach, according totrade sources, but differences of opinion remain as regards the need forlabelling of irradiated foodstuffs, and the need to continue nationalauthorisations to irradiate certain types of food.The draft framework Directive says that irradiation may only be authorisedwhen there is a clear benefit for the consumer. Moreover, it stresses thatlabelling to inform the customer that irradiation treatment has been usedis necessary in almost all cases.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996DAIRY POLICY: MEMBER STATES' "INCOMPATIBLE OBJECTIVES" FOR MILK SECTORfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Some EU Member States want to cut back dairy quotas in order to maintainprices, some would be happy to see Community prices fall to world levels,accompanied by an across-the-board increase in production quotas tomaintain income, others are clamouring for milk production rights to be"more fairly" redistributed, a few countries place the emphasis onexpanding exports to the world market, while others again are moreinterested in social protection for their dairy farmers. This is thesituation facing European Commission sector experts as they wrestle withdraft proposals designed to take the Community milk industry into the nextcentury. The proposals, which will seek to define options for an EUstrategy towards the world trade talks at the turn of the century tocontinue the reforms agreed under the GATT Uruguay Round, is due to betabled by EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler in the early part of 1997.Recent discussions within the Council's Special Committee on Agricultureindicate however that progress on the dossier may not be swift.Trade liberalism and East Europe.EU dairy production is destined to be one of the next farm sectors toundergo upheavals as part of the continuing reform of the CommonAgricultural Policy (CAP). The Netherlands, which takes over the rotatingEU Council Presidency on January 1, has announced its intention ofaddressing the subject at the informal Farm Council in May 1997. The nextround of multilateral trade negotiations under the auspices of the WorldTrade Organisation (WTO) are likely to have a more radical impact on farmtrade liberalisation than the ones concluded under the GATT Uruguay Roundin 1994 and not just because they are largely intended to continue thereform process begun with the GATT Agreement on Agriculture. Not only isthe free market philosophy gaining strength around the world, but radicalsolutions may have to be found if the emerging economies of the Centraland East European countries (CEECs) are to be incorporated into theEuropean Union and the international trade scene in general.EU the world's N #  1.The European Union currently has around 21 million head of dairy cattle,producing some 110 million tonnes of milk annually, out of a world totalfluctuating around 520 million tonnes. EU exporters hold more than 40% ofthe world market, way ahead of nearest rivals New Zealand (16%) andAustralia (9%). The Community sets an annual intervention price at whichpublic authorities are obliged to buy in milk and butter of the requiredquality, and also pays export refunds to bridge the gap between EU andworld prices.Prices set to fall.Under the GATT Agreement on Agriculture, which brought the farm sectorinto the international trade framework for the first time, the initialtariff levels designed to replace trade barriers were set so high that themandatory phased reductions are currently having little effect on themarket. However, further tariff cuts would almost certainly force producerprices down. A report drawn up by Professor S.J Sheehy of UniversityCollege Dublin* sees prices falling by as much as 5% per year towards2010, whether or not the EU decides to maintain its production quotasystem. The report assumes the EU will make arrangements to compensatefarmers for the drop in income they will suffer in the early part of the21st century, as was the case following the "MacSharry" reform of the CAPin 1992. Under the GATT Agreement, direct income payments to farmers areexempt from the obligation to reduce aggregate levels of support, and theCommunity will come under increasing pressure from the US and othertrading partners to further decouple aid payments from prices.The main options.Professor Sheehy argues it will be impossible to maintain both the presentquota system, whereby each Member State is allocated a maximum quantity ofmilk it may produce, alongside the high prices the EU has been at pains tomaintain through its aid and intervention scheme. If tariffs are cutfurther, prices are certain to fall. A "fortress Europe" approach,rejecting international calls for reduced tariffs but agreeing to trimexport subsidies instead, would imply buying back some 10% of farmers'production rights to bring supply and demand into balance, says the report.CEEC accession.However, this approach would pose serious questions for the integration ofthe CEEC candidates into the European Union. Maintaining quotas whileallowing prices to gravitate downwards towards international market levelsmight solve this problem, provided a long-enough transition period forCEEC accession is agreed, reckons the Irish Professor. A more radicaloption would be to abolish quotas altogether ahead of, or just after, thenext WTO accord. In the short term, this would place an enormous burden onthe EU farm budget, as dairy producers would have to be compensated forsharply-falling prices, but it would quickly align Community productionwith the world market, and have the advantage that the thorny question ofquota allocation and compensation payments to the new CEEC Member Stateswould not arise.The Sheehy report has brought plaudits from free-trade supporters Denmark,Sweden and the UK, who welcome the chance to view the EU dairy regime inthe wider context of world trade. However, a majority of the Member Statesfeel that the quota system should be determined in the light of theCommunity's internal policy aims, rather than merely commercial aspects.The French in particular have described the document as "too biasedtowards trade liberalisation". France is the EU's second largest dairyproducer, with a guaranteed quantity around 24 million tonnes of milk ayear.Quotas needed to preserve farming?Germany, the EU's leading dairy producer, Austria, Portugal andLuxembourg, believe the quota system is the only sensible way of limitingproduction and stabilising the market, and should be extended beyond thedeadline of 2001. Bonn would like to see a 5% cut in quotas to firm upprices, while Vienna argues that farming would die out in some mountainousand other less-favoured regions without a structured system of dairyproduction. Portugal would reluctantly accept quota cuts as a necessaryevil to maintain prices.Dual pricing system.Belgium, Ireland, and the Netherlands are unconvinced of the need to acturgently. They believe gradual price cuts towards world levels in themedium term will obviate any potential problems with CEEC accession, andthat there is no need to abolish quotas. Meanwhile the French are pressingthe case for a dual pricing system to balance the internal and externalneeds of the Community, and the Danes, who reluctantly admit thatabolishing quotas may be politically unfeasible, have suggested theintroduction of "A" and "B" quotas along the lines of the sugar regime(see separate article on sugar). "B" quota milk could be exported withoutrefunds, they argue, without the risk of forcing down world prices.Export vocation vital.In spite of their conflicting views on practical strategies, France,Ireland, the Netherlands and Denmark all agree on one basic point: it isvital that EU dairymen are able to go on exporting to the worldmarketplace. The Irish and Dutch also back the UK view that compensationpaid to farmers should be granted on the basis of uniform economiccriteria. They argue that other Community objectives such as help forsmall farmers, young farmers, less-favoured areas, etc ought to be dealtwith through separate instruments. Member States opposed to this hardstance reckon that some modulation should be envisaged in order to targetsupport where it is most needed. A senior Commission official tasked withthe dossier lamented recently that so far the debate had done no more thanreveal the Member States' "incompatible objectives".* Milk Quotas to be Abolished in 2001?", available in English only fromthe European Commission Secretariat-General, rue de la Loi 200, Brussels,Belgium.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996UK MEAT PLANT THROUGHPUT DIPS 7% IN FIRST 8 MONTHS OF 1996from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450During the first eight months of 1996, meat plant throughput in the UnitedKingdom declined by 7% on corresponding 1995 levels to just under 22million head, according to the Irish Food Board's Market Monitor bulletin.Cattle throughput was 32% lower than last year at 1.5 million head. Sheepsupplies at 11.2 million head were 6% lower while pig throughput declinedby 3% to 9.3 million head.Steer throughput up to the end of August was 28% lower than last year at569,000 head. Heifer supplies declined by 25% while cow throughput was 64%lower at 186,000 head. The reason for this decline is that since April anaverage of 30,000 cattle per week have been removed from the food chainthrough the over-30-month culling programme to help combat "mad cowdisease" (BSE). Young bull throughput over the period increased by 3% on1995 levels to 269,000 head.Lamb throughput up to the end of August at 9.7 million head was 6% belowcorresponding 1995 levels. Cull ewe supplies declined by 5% to 1.5 millionhead, according to the Irish Food Board, An Bord Bia.Supplies of fattening pigs were 3% lower during the first eight months of1996 at 9.1 million head. Sow throughput over the period fell by 11% tototal 216,000 head.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996SAUDI ARABIA RE-OPENS FOR IRISH BEEFfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The Saudi Arabian Ministry for Foreign Affairs has announced that it islifting its temporary ban on imports from Ireland of frozen and chilledbeef and veal, milk and milk products from cattle, beef gelatine, foodproducts containing milk and gelatine products derived from cattle andbovine products used in veterinary and medical preparations, cosmetics anddrugs. All these products neverthelss have to be accompanied by acertificate stating they are BSE free.These products are allowed entry to Saudi Arabia through the ports of theNetherlands and Belgium, on condition that they stay on the same vesselfor the duration of the journey and are not unloaded in other ports whichthey may pass through.The Saudis have also agreed to lift the ban on imports from Switzerlandand France for the same products.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996MAD COW DISEASE: MIXED SIGNALS FROM COMMISSION ON "PROVEN" BSE/CJD LINKfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The European Commission sent out mixed signals on October 24 to news thatUK scientists may have proved a direct link between bovine spongiformencephalopathy (BSE) and a new variant of the human brain conditionCreutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (dubbed by experts "vCJD"). Speaking at a pressconference in Paris, EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler said he thoughtin the light of the new findings, the European Union ought to bring instricter legislation on consumption of animal offal, and stressed that theUK authorities should now proceed with the planned targeted cull of some150,000 cattle, suspended by the Major Government in mid-September.Meanwhile back in Brussels, a Fischler aide spoke of both positive andnegative aspects of the scientific discovery. The negative side, he said,was the obvious public health risk, now shown to be very real, that eatersof infected beef tissue may have contracted brain disease. The positiveelement consisted in the fact that the new discovery would make it easierto trace animals incubating the disease, he stressed.BSE and vCJD prions "match".The British scientific journal Nature carried a report on October 23 of anew technique developed by Dr John Collinge and his colleagues in thePrion disease Group at Imperial College School of Medicine, London, fortracing the "molecular marker" of the prion protein which causes the braintissue of sufferers to degenerate into a spongy mass. "The biochemicalsignature of prions in patients who died from new variant CJD matches thatof prions in mice and macaque monkeys experimentally infected with BSE,but differs from that of prions in human patients with acquired orsporadic CJD", says the Nature report. This finding "greatly strengthensthe conclusion that vCJD is a consequence of the BSE epidemic in Britishcattle", it goes on. The new technique is likely to form the basis of arapid diagnostic test for spongiform encephalopathies, say the experts.Further safety precautions?Reacting to the news, a European Commission spokesman stressed that the EUexecutive had been proceeding on the assumption of a BSE/CJD link for sometime and that all necessary measures to protect the public were already inplace. The new study would go to the EU scientific committees forexamination, and any necessary new proposals would be made on the basis oftheir recommendations, the spokesman explained. However, from Paris, FranzFischler indicated to the press that he would be re-tabling to the FarmCouncil on October 28 proposals to completely exclude from the food chainthose cattle and sheep tissues found most likely to transmit the BSE agent.Harmonisation needed.The legal situation regarding use of brain, eyes, spinal cord, nervoustissues, spleen and lymph glands (shown to be capable of transmitting thefatal prions) from cattle and sheep varies across the European Union. Theonly EU-wide statute on the subject relates to UK bovine tissues, whichare banned from export. Also, ruminant waste may not be fed to cattle andsheep, but does constitute an important ingredient in the meat and bonemeal still fed to pigs, chickens and other farm animals. The Frenchauthorities paved the way towards tighter rules in June, when they bannedfrom both human foodstuffs and all animal feeds the tissues in question,from cattle aged over 6 months and sheep and goats aged over one year.Ireland and the UK have brought in similar regulations. Mr Fischlerbelieves Member States' rules should now be harmonised on the Frenchmodel. However, a proposal to that effect he tabled to the Council in Julymet with little enthusiasm from the EU Standing Veterinary Committee.The French Agriculture Ministry gave a favourable reaction on October 25to an announcement by the Bonn authorities of a new national legislativeBill that would, in line with French law, ban all imports from France ofthe sensitive tissues. The Ministry welcomed the move, as likely to fosterEU-wide harmonisation of measures. The German Government has since Julymaintained a unilateral ban on all products containing beef tissues fromthe UK and Switzerland, the two main centres of the BSE epidemic in Europe.Confusion over "regional approach".Meanwhile confusing messages emerged from Luxembourg on October 28regarding the UK's strategy for eradicating BSE and ending the embargo onBritish beef products. UK Agriculture Minister Douglas Hogg, in town forthe EU Farm Council, told the press corps he was not pressing for aregional approach to lifting the ban, but would be trying to make progresstowards resumption of beef exports "from certified herds". These would bepedigree grass-fed herds whose owners can prove they have never used thesuspect mammalian meat and bone meal (MBM) blamed for spreading thedisease to feed their livestock.However, the presence of Scottish Secretary Michael Forsyth in the UKdelegation sent out a different signal. Both Scotland and the UK provinceof Northern Ireland have a large number of such herds. Earlier, the FarmCouncil President-in-Office Ivan Yates told the press corps that aregional proposal "could be considered", provided the agreed targeted cullof cattle most at risk from BSE were implemented in that region. "Aspecial case can be made for Northen Ireland because of their animalidentification system and that they are surrounded by water", said theIrish Agriculture Minister. However, Douglas Hogg rejected the idea ofdestroying cattle from herds already certified free of mad cow disease as"irrelevant".The implicit rejection of Mr Yates' support may be for UK domesticconsumption rather than for Mr Hogg's EU partners. Indeed the UKauthorities now appear to have given up hope of having the export embargo- imposed on March 27 after the risk of human beings contractingspongiform brain disease from BSE-infected cattle tissues came to light -lifted for the whole of the country in the near future. The MajorGovernment decided in mid-September to suspend the selective cattle cull,agreed as part of the "Florence framework" for gradually ending the ban,and has now changed strategy in favour of the "certified herds" approach.French MBM figures "correct".However, the Irish Farm Minister was able to offer some relief toPierre-Mathieu Duhamel, the beleaguered Director of the French CustomsService. Mr Duhamel's team has been widely accused in the French press oflaxity in tracing potentially infected MBM imported from the UK between1993 and 1995 and fraudulently labelled as of Irish origin. Ivan Yatesconfirmed on October 21 that the French figure of 59,873 tonnes for IrishMBM exports to France during the period in question now appeared to be"accurate". Dublin had originally declared a figure of just 25,815 tonnes,leading to French fears that large quantities of suspect MBM had enteredthe country illegally. The discrepancy appears to have arisen becauseUK-based brokers continued to ship to France consignments of MBM whichthey had purchased in Ireland, Mr Yates explained.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996BEEF CRISIS: MINISTERS URGED TO SWALLOW THE MEDICINEfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450As Agri-Service International went to press in the afternoon of October30, EU Farm Ministers meeting in Council in Luxembourg were well intotheir third day of talks on proposed support and restructuring measuresfor the beleaguered beef sector. A second compromise paper tabled by theIrish Presidency to take account of the more strident objections from theMember States delegations had secured the backing of EU AgricultureCommissioner Franz Fischler, and Ministers were being urged by bothPresidency and Commission to swallow unpalatable measures in order tofinalise a deal. Among the most significant changes being proposed to theoriginal Commission document, the new draft includes a commitment to findECU 500 million for short-term support for farmers, an option for MemberStates to encourage early marketing of both male and female beef cattleinstead of destroying them at birth, and a call for restrictions on importof calves from Eastern Europe. However deciding on the ratio fordistribution of aid top-ups among the Member States remained the biggeststumbling block to agreement.The Fischler beef package.A package of three linked proposals tabled by Farm Commissioner FranzFischler on July 30 calls for reductions in arable aid payments and cutsin investment support to pay for higher beef intervention buying and othershort-term measures designed to absorb surplus EU beef production,estimated at 1.2 million tonnes per year since consumption has fallen inthe wake of the "mad cow" crisis. Parliament used its urgency procedure tovote an Opinion on the first part of the package - the purely beef sectormeasures - on September 20, but refused to do the same for thecontroversial arable aid cuts. The Commissioner has always expressedreluctance to see the three elements split up. If measures costing overECU1 billion are to be agreed, then the Ministers should decide at thesame time where the money is coming from, insisted a Fischler aide.However, a majority of Member States are in any case against the proposedarable cuts.Emergency measures already taken.In fact, going into Council, Franz Fischler had already given away animportant bargaining chip in agreeing to raise the Community beefintervention ceiling from 400,000 to 460,000 tonnes for 1996, and endorsepublic buying-in of lighter cattle ("weanlings") under 300 kilogrammes inweight. These decisions, voted through on a Commission proposal byMinisters at the Fisheries Council on October 14, took some of the urgencyout of the issue, and the Member States' delegations were more inclined tohold out for better terms for their farmers in the overall package. Themore intensive farming countries such as Germany, the Netherlands andBelgium are opposed to moves to lower the regional stocking ceilings usedfor calculating eligibility for special beef premium payments to farmersand reduce the stocking levels for eligibility to the "extensificationpremium". The Netherlands and Italy are unwilling to introduce thenew-born calf slaughter option, which they feel will outrage publicopinion, France wants to see premiums payable on suckler cows raised,while Portugal is still fighting to maintain the second premium payable onits older, extensively-raised, bulls.Immediate cash commitment.The most significant addition to the Fischler beef package is thecommitment to find ECU 500 million somewhere in the 1997 EU AgricultureBudget to top up cattle farmers incomes for the second time since the BSEcrisis hit demand in April. In June, the Ministers agreed to provide ECU850 million, with an added provision for Member States to match thisfigure out of national funds. Earlier, the Farm Commissioner had suggestedthere was no justification for further short-term support of this kind. Areport from the Commission Directorate-General for Agriculture (DGVI),whose publication was temporarily blocked by French Commissioner EdithCresson on October 23, estimates beef producers' aggregate losses due tothe BSE crisis at ECU 1.277 billion (calculated per animal at ECU 65 formales and ECU 45/ head for suckler cows) or at ECU 1.02 billion on aproduction basis. Nevertheless, French calf producers are said to belosing up to ECU 100 per head in the current depressed market for beefanimals.Exports booming.On October 25 the EU Beef and Veal Management Committee accepted a further31,000 tonnes of prime beef, plus 180 tonnes of weanlings, intointervention, bringing to 396,000 tonnes the total amount of beef carcasesnow in public storage. The Commission spokesman stressed that 1996intervention would not now approach the 720,000 tonnes foreseen in earlypessimistic scenarios at the height of the crisis. Exports from the Unionare now running well over 22,000 tonnes per week and some 100,000 tonnesahead of schedule for the year 1996/97, as foreign demand has picked upagain. However, the GATT Agreement on Agriculture limit on export ofsubsidised EU beef is likely to be reached before June 1997, when theproblem will flare up again, he warned.Finding the ECU 500 million.All sides now agree that the manoeuvre of postponing until after October15, 1997 part of the oilseeds advance payments for next year is the rightway of freeing up the necessary ECU 1.2 billion or so for intervention andproduction-curtailment measures for 1997. However, uncertainty stillsurrounds the question of just where the ECU 500 million extra top-up isto be found. Following an agreement struck in Killarney in September,Member States have made early disbursements totalling some ECU 230 millionon suckler cow premium payments and the EU Budget Authority will now beasked to authorise the use of an equivalent amount from the 1997 budget.That would leave ECU 270 million to be financed over the next twelvemonths from savings on other expenditure items within the Farm Budget.A further bone of contention is just which farmers will receive the agreedaid top-up. Germany, alongside France one of the two major cattlecountries in the Community, received only 14% of the June package, whilethe French producers carried off some 30% of the cash, stressedAgriculture Minister Jochen Borchert. Hence Mr Borchert, backed by theIrish delegation, wants a new "distribution key" to be worked out.Compromise details.Based on the July 30 proposals from EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler,the Presidency compromise makes the following adjustments:-the calf-processing premium ("Herod premium") designed to encouragefarmers to reduce future beef supplies by slaughtering new-born calveswould be compulsorily offered for dairy herds only; an early marketingpremium suggested by the German delegation would be available for bothmale and female calves up to average slaughter weight less 20%. The EUManagement Committee would set the premium and the implementation rulesbut the objective is to remove 1 million calves from production next year.-intervention buying of weanlings, introduced on October 14 for 1996, tobe maintained only as an emergency measure for Autumn 1997-the regional ceilings for the special beef premiums for both 1997 and1998 to be cut back to current levels for Greece (to 140,130 head),Austria (423,400), Portugal (154,897) and the UK (1,419,811). Spain to beallowed a higher ceiling than under present arrangements- a single premium to be set for bull headage payments at ECU130, whichrepresents a 19.6% increase on the present level of ECU 108.68 as againstthe Commission proposal for a 14% increase to ECU 123.90- the 1996 intervention ceiling to be raised to just 550,000, instead ofthe 720,000 originally proposed, which would leave a capacity of a further90,000 tonnes for this year- an additional ECU 36/head for farmers who bring their cattle stockinglevel under 1.4 livestock units per hectare and ECU 52 per head for levelsless than 1LU/ha.Link with dairy reform?In addition the Commission is asked to draft a proposal to changelegislation so that the East German Lander derogation on the 90-head herdlimit continues to apply until end 1998 and to draw up proposals for longterm measures by June 30, which would link beef sector structural measureswith plans for dairy reform. A number of delegations are unhappy howeverto link these two distinct sectors.CEEC imports attacked.Following strong calls from a number of delegations to renegotiatepreferential cattle import arrangements with Central and East Europeancountries (CEEC), the compromise text calls on the Foreign Affairs Councilto take action along these lines. The Commission warns however that theCEEC will justifiably demand compensation in other trade areas.Beef for food aid?Mr Yates also revealed on October 21 his ideas for shipping unmarketableEU beef as food aid to the Third World. The Irish Agriculture Ministersaid he would be making a proposal to this effect at the World FoodSummit, scheduled to take place in Rome from November 13 to 17. Since theBSE crisis arose in March, public intervention stocks of Community beefhave risen from almost zero to just under 400,000 tonnes. This figurecould rise to 700,000 tonnes when pre-Winter selling gets under way,reckons the European Commission. These quantities of meat are unlikely tofind a market abroad, given the continuous flow of new supplies, say theexperts. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation estimatesthat some 800 million people in the world currently suffer fromunder-nutrition.Identification and labelling.The Council also took its first look at Commission proposals for cattleidentification and beef labelling rules. The idea is that all EU cattleshould be identified by means of an eartag and personal passport. Asregards labelling, individual producers and organisations would beauthorised to put in place voluntary schemes for providing the customerwith detailed information on their beef products. The draft Regulationlays down what information may appear on a label (for details see lastissue of Agri-Service International ), and lays down rules for verifyingthe truth of any claims made. The Commission hopes this scheme will be upand running by January 1997, but the European Parliament will need toregister its Opinion before the Council can go ahead and adopt thelegislation. Meanwhile Ministers have sent the dossier to the Committee ofMember States' Permanent Representatives to the EU (COREPER) for furtherwork.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996POTATOES: EU MARKET REGIME PROPOSALS SOON TO BE BURIED AGAINfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Despite renewed pressure from farmers' organisations, MEPs and theauthorities of a number of EU Member States for a formal Community marketregime to be established for potatoes, it now appears unlikely that thiswill be achieved in the foreseeable future. The Irish Presidency of the EUCouncil of Ministers has so far been unable to secure sufficient consensuson the existing Commission proposals to justify bringing them back to theCouncil table, while the Dutch, due to take over the Council chair onJanuary 1, are not convinced of the need to institute a Common MarketOrganisation (CMO) in this sector. Meanwhile, the absence of any formalCommunity-wide structure for potatoes leaves the market subject to sharpfluctuations, allows individual Member States a free hand on allocatingnational aid, and renders EU farmers vulnerable to low-priced imports fromthird countries.New calls for a CMO.As hopes rose recently that the potato dossier might make progress underthe Irish Presidency of the EU, Spanish Socialist Members of the EuropeanParliament Jesus Cabezon Alonso and Juan Colino Salamanca raised aparliamentary question with the Council of Ministers, the basic thrust ofwhich is to press for detailed regulation of the market "in order toachieve better market balance, guarantee producers' incomes and preventdistortions of competition (...)". Meanwhile COPA and COGECA, the EUfarmers' and farm cooperatives organisations, have issued a 6-point planfor an EU potato regime. The plan, which insists on the need for an EUAdvisory Committee on Potatoes to assist the European Commission, callsfor:- a common methodology to determine potato quality and to establish aminimum quality standard to protect consumers from sub-standard ordiseased potatoes;- a common methodology for the collection, analysis and distribution ofstatistics;- a modest fund for the setting-up of potato groups and industryorganisations in those Member States where such structures are weak;- an occasional fund for the generic promotion of potatoes in high yieldyears;- funding for research and development into the safe use of moderntechnology for growing, storing and presenting potatoes;- potatoes to be brought within the general safeguard measures applicableto all other crops to protect EU markets from subsidised or state-aidedimports from third countries."Light" regime proposed.Proposals drafted by the European Commission as long ago as 1992 call forthe establishment of a "light" Community potato marketing regimerecognising and providing aid for setting up producer organisations whichwould take responsibility for selling all the produce of their members.The producer groups would also organise research and development of betterstrains and run generic promotion campaigns for potatoes. Qualitystandards would also be established under Management Committee procedures,and the Commission empowered to take action against excessive imports, byrequiring import licences.No consensus.Consensus within the Council's Special Committee on Agriculture has provedhard to achieve, however. Southern Member States such as Italy, Spain andPortugal are in favour of formal regulation of the market, but wouldprefer to see potatoes included in the fruit and vegetables CMO, whichalso provides for aided withdrawal of surpluses and other marketinterventions of a "heavier" nature. France and the UK have been urgingIvan Yates, the President-in-Office of the Farm Council, to push thedossier forward, but London is categorically opposed to aided withdrawalsof surplus produce from the market, and wants potatoes kept strictlyseparate from other, more perishable, fruit and vegetables.Like the UK, the Netherlands, Germany and Belgium have their own nationalpotato marketing bodies, and are thus allied with the Swedes and Danes,who are basically against instituting new sector regimes. Under EUlegislation, the state aid rules laid down in Articles 92-94 of the Treatydo not apply to farm sectors not governed by a CMO."Illogical" absence of regulation.A sector expert from the COPA/COGECA tandem described the situation as an"illogical" gap in the completion of the Single Market. Potatoes are oneof the most important farm products for which no market organisation hasso far been established. With a total cultivated area of 1,334,000hectares, potatoes constitute a substantial crop in the European Union.They are grown in all the Member States, although because of climatic andsoil conditions, they are more widely grown in Northern regions. The Unionis in fact self-sufficient in potatoes, with the exception of earlyvarieties, which are imported in Winter and early Spring fromMediterranean countries when limited Community production is available.The main suppliers are Egypt, Morocco and Cyprus. During the past fewyears an annual average of some 400,000 tonnes of early potatoes have beenimported from third countries.However, the potato market is highly weather-dependent and is notoriouslycharacterised by wide fluctuations in crop yields from year to year.Growers' incomes are highly uncertain. Farmers react quickly to risingprices during shortages by planting extra acreage for the followingharvest, which in turn drives the price sharply down again. In 1994 forexample, when drought affected both quantity and quality, prices rosesteeply, only to fall back again during 1995, when the harvest was muchbetter. The sector is also vulnerable to speculation, as potatoes can bestored for a much longer period than many other vegetables.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996PROGRESS ON FRENCH APPLE EXPORTS TO JAPANfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Great strides have been made in the long-running negotiations on Frenchapple exports to Japan, to the extent that a date for the start of Frenchshipments can now be envisaged. French diplomatic sources have revealedthat considerable progress has been made over the last year on thetechnical level, with only a few details blocking a final agreement. Parisis anxious to tie up the ends of the technical dossier and agree a "startdate" to be announced during President Jacques Chirac's state visit toJapan beginning on November 17.Japan recently appointed experts in France to examine how French farmersare combating insect parasites which are endemic to apples in Europe butunknown in Japan. Concerns over plant health are generally regarded as theprincipal obstacle to the sale of foreign apples in the archipelago.Quoting unidentified Japanese Government sources, the English-languagedaily the Japan Times has suggested the ban on the import of French applesmay be lifted by next Summer, provided no serious problems come to lightduring testing in Japan.French sources have been reluctant to confirm the Summer of 1997 as astarting date for apple exports to Japan, pointing out that a date canonly be set following the results of public inquiry that has still to becarried out. If all goes well, France, the world's leading exporter ofapples, will become the fourth country authorised to sell its fruit toJapan after New Zealand, the United States and South Korea. However, itremains to be seen whether French Golden Delicious apples will sell inJapan, where consumers are partial to very large and attractive fruit. In1995, imported apples accounted for less than 1% of the Japanese marketdespite costing infinitely less than domestic apples.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996DURUM WHEAT: COMMISSION SECTOR REFORM PROPOSALS BOGGED DOWNfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450European Commission plans to reform the management of the EU durum wheatsector have run into opposition from Member States' negotiators in theCouncil's Special Committee on Agriculture (SCA), and the new regime isnow unlikely to take effect in the coming marketing year. Although thebasic proposal to institute a Maximum Guaranteed Area for durum wheatproduction and promote supplies of quality grains to the market wouldrally a qualified majority in Council, the main producer Member States arestill squabbling over allocation of the 3-4 million hectares traditionallysown to this crop in the Community, while some of the other countries wantofficial recognition of the "non-traditional" acreage on which theirfarmers grow up to 400,000 hectares of hard wheat per year. If allrequests were to be granted, an extra million hectares of Community-aideddurum wheat would be added to the Commission draft, costing the CAP budgeta further ECU 280 million a year.Injecting more flexibility into the durum sector.The Commission's July 30 proposals are designed to loosen up what hasbecome a highly rigidified system and bring the sector into line with bothmarket disciplines and current farming structures. Younger farmers arehaving particular difficulty in obtaining growing rights, which are tiedto the land, and the practice of "producing for aid" rather than for themarket, has become rife among some farmers, the Commission points out.Meanwhile the EU processing industry has been importing heavily to ensuresupplies.Under the present regime, aid is paid on an individual basis to producersin the "traditional" growing areas whose acreage, calculated as thehighest area for which production aid was paid in one of the referenceyears from 1988 to 1991, is listed in a register. This aid currentlyamounts to ECU 358.6/tonne, based on the production aid paid before the1992 CAP reform, plus the difference between the current interventionprice (aligned on that of other cereals) and the higher pre-reformintervention price.A 3 million hectare ceiling.The Commission's solution to the imbalance which has developed, while atthe same time keeping a grip on budgetary expenditure, is to abolishproduction registers and establish a Maximum Guaranteed Area (MGA) fordurum wheat, distributed according to traditional production totals.However, the EU executive is proposing to base the MGA on aid applicationspaid since the 1992 reform, for a total of 3 million ha, ranging from1,610,000 ha for Italy to 35,000 for Portugal (see Agri-ServiceInternational N 446 for full details), while registered acreages actuallyamount to over 4 million ha.Widening the scope.Most delegations to the SCA support the Commission's general aim ofpromoting adequate supply of quality durum wheat to the processingindustry by abolishing traditional monopolies on production rights andgranting aid only to those farmers who sow specified seed-types and growtheir crop through to maturity. However, producers have been lobbyingtheir governments to ensure they do not lose out proportionally to rivalsin other EU countries. Thus arguments within the SCA have aligned theMember States into three groups: those with allocated MGAs are demandinglarger areas; those countries, including Austria, who have hithertobenefited from "non-traditional" aid payments (amounting to someECU138.9/ha - i.e. half that payable on "traditional" areas) want theirproduction to be included in the scope of the new regime; some countrieswho have never drawn aid in either category, such as Germany and the UK,are insisting they too should be allocated a small "non-traditional" durumacreage.Faced with these extra demands, the major producers have countered bydemanding an allocation of non-traditional acreage on top of theirtraditional area. The aggregate of all these requests would bring an added550,000 ha of traditional and 400,000 ha of non-traditional durumproduction within the aided regime.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996TUNISIA ANTICIPATES ABUNDANT OLIVE HARVESTfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Official estimates suggest olive oil production in Tunisia will exceed200,000 tonnes in 1996/97, drawing a line under two years of poorharvests. With crops ravaged by drought in 1994/95 and 1995/96, olive oilproduction plummeted to 70,000 and 60,000 tonnes. Agriculture MinisterMohamed Ben Rejeb has indicated that abundant production over theforthcoming season, beginning in November, should result in a substantialincrease in olive oil exports and a resumption of normal supplies to localmarkets that have been faced with shortages for more than a year.Sales abroad were restricted last year to 26,000 tonnes, a little lessthan half of the authorised quota for exports to the European Union,Tunisia's principal customer. Under the terms of the Association Agreementwith the European Union signed in July 1995, Tunisia will enjoypreferential conditions on the sale of 46,000 tonnes of olive oil per yearon the European market, up to the year 2000. According to the Assabahdaily, Mr Ben Rejeb is currently negotiating an increase in the Europeanquota to 60,000 tones per year.The Minister is also reported to have warned exporters of a possible slumpin prices, particularly over the next three months. A floor price forexports has been set at 2,900 Dinars per tonne, and storage capacity hasbeen raised this year to 250,000 tonnes. Olive oil is also expected toreturn to the menu in Tunisian households, with the Minister forecasting afall in prices on the domestic market. The Tunisians, who traditionallyconsume about 50,000 tonnes of olive oil per year, have been forced oflate to turn to cheaper imported and state subsidised vegetable oils.Tunisia's leading agricultural export, olive oil earned the country anaverage of USD200 million a year between 1991 and 1994.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996WHEAT PRICES RISE AS MAIZE AND SOYA FALLfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The price of wheat on the Chicago futures market is rising as rates formaize and soya fall, although gains will be limited by the favourablerains that have watered freshly-planted crops of Winter wheat in theUnited States. Pressure on maize and soya prices was already building upbefore the rains that have hampered harvesting in the Midwest. JasonRoose, an analyst with US Commodities, has blamed the fall on hedging byproducers and storage companies.Soya prices in particular have declined two weeks before the publicationof new production estimates by the United States Department of Agriculture(USDA) which may raise forecasts, according to Mr Roose. With pricessliding to USD6.97 per bushel at the end of morning trading on October 29,speculation on whether soya should be trading above USD8 per bushel hasbeen replaced by conjecture as to whether prices should have fallen belowUSD7.In a separate development, analysts have yet to react to the decision bythe American tax authorities to ban farmers from deferring tax payments bycollecting revenue on current sales in January. American producers havepreviously able to sell harvests at this stage of the year but deferpayment until January, so as to withhold payment of tax on these salesuntil the following year. Under the new regulation, these sales will bedirectly taxable.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996CEREALS: INTERNATIONAL GRAINS COUNCIL RAISES 1996/97 CROP FORECASTSfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The world cereals harvest for 1996/97 (July to June) should prove moreabundant that previously forecast, reckons the International GrainsCouncil (IGC), whose monthly report, out on October 24, raises productionestimates to 573 million tonnes for wheat and 875 million tonnes forcoarse grains (corn, barley, rye, sorghum, oats). The London-basedinter-governmental organisation has raised forecasts sharply to takeaccount of bumper harvests in the European Union, China and Australia.Likewise, the United States maize harvest has exceeded expectations. Theincrease in production in some regions has more than compensated for thedisappointing wheat harvests in Kazakhstan, Russia and the United States.Last month, the IGC forecast harvests of 571 million tonnes for wheat and869 million tonnes for coarse grains.Stocks set to rise.Following the mediocre crops of recent years, these plentiful wheat andcorn harvests should be reflected in an increase in world grain reserves.World stocks of wheat are expected to rise to 104 million tonnes(unchanged on the September estimate, see Table 17 below), an increase of10 million tonnes in a single year. The estimate for reserves of coarsegrains has been raised from 100 to 105 million tonnes, 21 million tonnesmore than last year. The IGC has also increased its estimate for globalwheat consumption, which totalled 558 million tonnes in 1995/96, from 561to 563 million tonnes.Grain trade volume shrinks.World trade in wheat is now put at 89 million tonnes, compared with aSeptember estimate of 88 million, still slightly less than the 90 milliontonnes bought and sold internationally in the 1995/96 marketing year. Asregards coarse grains, the IGC has reduced its September consumptionestimate of 856 million tonnes to 854 million, still a considerableincrease on the 831 million tonnes consumed in 1995/96. World trade inthese cereals, which amounted to 93 million tonnes in 1995/96, is expectedto fall back to 89 million tonnes. A fall in imports to South Korea has,according to the IGC, been largely offset by rising sales to Saudi Arabia.National grain policy.Meanwhile a number of countries have announced changes in their nationalcereals trade policies.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996NETHERLANDS JOINS INTERNATIONAL PLANT VARIETY CONVENTIONfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The Dutch Government deposited its instrument of acceptance of the 1991Act of the International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties ofPlants on October 14. The Geneva-based UPOV is an inter-governmentalorganisation which cooperates in administrative matters with the WorldIntellectual Property Organisation (WIPO). It runs the InternationalConvention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants with a view torecognising and ensuring intellectual property rights to breeders of newplant varieties. The member states of UPOV grant such a right inaccordance with the provisions of the Convention, under their nationallegislation.The Netherlands, which is already a member state of UPOV, is the thirdcountry to ratify the 1991 Act of the UPOV Convention. From the point ofview of international treaty law, the 1991 Act will not enter into forcefor the Netherlands until one month after two additional states havedeposited instruments of adherence to the 1991 Act. But from the point ofview of national law, the Netherlands has now effectively adapted itslegislation to the 1991 Act. A number of other states also have laws whichconform with the 1991 Act and can be expected to sign up in the comingmonths, UPOV said in a statement.The 1991 Act of the Convention makes the protection of all species ofplants mandatory for member states after the expiration of a transitionalperiod and strengthens the protection afforded to plant breeders. It does,however, leave protected varieties available, as at present, for use as asource of variation for the development of other varieties. "Thestrengthened protection for plant breeders will increase the incentiveprovided by the Convention for plant breeding and will lessen the threatto breeders from piracy of protected plant varieties and plagiaristicbreeding activities", according to UPOV.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996VIETNAM JOINS INTERNATIONAL COFFEE ORGANISATIONfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The Executive Director of the International Coffee Organisation (ICO),Celsius A. Lodder, said on October 15 that the London-based Organisationhad just received notification from the United Nations that Vietnam haddeposited its instrument of accession to the 1994 International CoffeeAgreement the day before. Vietnam exported some 3.5 million 60-kg bags ofcoffee in 1996, making it the world's sixth biggest coffee exporter byvolume. Vietnam's arrival brings the ICO's membership up to 60, comprising42 exporting and 18 importing member countries. Exporting members accountfor nearly 95% of world coffee exports. Eight of these also belong to theAfrican coffee producers' organisation, OAMCAF (Cameroon, Central AfricanRepublic, Congo, the Ivory Coast, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Madagascar andTogo).ICO member countries as at October 16, 1996:Exporting members: Angola, Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon, CentralAfrican Republic, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba,Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia,Gabon, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Jamaica,Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,Rwanda, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Venezuela,Vietnam, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe.Importing members: Austria, Belgium/Luxembourg, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland,France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway,Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, as well asthe European Union.3rd Asia International Coffee Conference.One of Vietnam's first major functions as a new ICO member will be to hostthe Third Asia International Coffee Conference (AICC '97), to be held inHo Chi Minh City from January 14 to 18, 1997. The ICO Executive Directivewill be among the key speakers, along with Vietnam's Vice-Ministers fromthe Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and the Ministry ofTrade. Organised under the auspices of the Vietnam National CoffeeCorporation (VINACAFE) and the Vietnam Coffee and Cocoa Association(VICOFA) and sponsored by the ICO and Coffee Board of India, theconference will put Vietnam's coffee industry in the spotlight andconsider whether the country will "maintain and grow in status as a majorplayer in the world coffee arena". In the last ten years, Vietnam has seenphenomenal success in producing coffee, with output rising from just467,000 bags in 1985/86 to close to 3 million bags in 1995/96. This rapidgrowth, together with market expectations of a further rise in capacityand the fact that Vietnam exports more than 80% of its production, has theworld coffee industry monitoring closely developments in the country.Other key issues to be addressed at the conference include internationalprice and cost competitiveness; quality concerns and issues; internationalmarketing and access into the international coffee world; Arabicaproduction prospects for Vietnam.For further information, contact: V. Subramanian, AICC '97 ConferenceManager at IBC Asia Limited, 268 Orchard Road, Appt 18-02, Singapore238856. Tel: (+65) 732 1970 - Fax: (+65) 733 5087Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996CGIAR: PLANET HAS THE RESOURCES TO FEED 8 BILLION IN 2025from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450Our planet has the necessary resources to feed a world population of 8billion in 2025, provided agricultural research is pursued and Governmentsadopt appropriate policies, according to the Consultative Group onInternational Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Celebrating its 25thanniversary, CGIAR published a statement on October 27, highlighting howan additional billion individuals have been fed since 1971 as a directresults of its research, and underlining the need to continue funding suchresearch.Established in 1971, and made up of representatives of 52 governments andinternational organisations, CGIAR endeavours through agriculturalresearch, to contribute to guaranteeing adequate food supplies to thepopulations of developing countries. The Group is financed by the WorldBank, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), and theUnited Nations Development and Environment Programmes (UNDP & UNEP).Agricultural production in 10 large developing countries has risen by 74%since the beginning of the seventies, with the increase in yields achievedthrough the introduction of new technologies accounting for 70% of thisimprovement, according to CGIAR. However, official government aid toagriculture has fallen from 2O% of total aid in 1980 to 14% in 1990.Support programmes for international agricultural research now account forless that 0.05% of this aid. CGIAR has an annual research budget of 300million dollars.CGIAR Chairman Ismail Seragedin claims "a mere increase in yields will notbe sufficient to feed the whole world in 30 years". He emphasises theimportance of "increasing the revenue of the poor, adopting appropriatepolicies, and above all, ensuring that research responds to real needs".To this end, the Group has developed specially adapted farm machinery forsmall holdings which can help farmers without replacing them. Scientistslinked to CGIAR, have for example developed a mini-machine for removingrice husks, carrying out a tedious task previously done by hand. Otherscientists have launched the micro-nutrients project, developing newvarieties of mineral-enriched cereals that may hit the markets within 6 to10 years. CGIAR claims the diet of more than two billion people isdeficient in iron and other minerals such as zinc, with 1.2 billionsuffering from anaemia caused by these deficiencies. About 225 millionchildren suffer from a serious lack of vitamin A which proves fatal in 28%of cases.The international centre for the improvement of wheat and corn, alsolinked to CGIAR, has developed six varieties of corn that prosper on acidsoil previously regarded as unfit for agriculture. Varieties of parasiteresistant crops have also been developed to reduce the use of pesticides.Finally, CGIAR scientists have focused considerable attention on waterconservation techniques and irrigation, developing methods of collectingwater from torrential downpours and "tapping" water that condenses duringthe night.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996OECD: EXPORT FRUIT BOOM FROM THE SOUTH A THREAT FOR THE North?from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450There has been strong growth in global trade of temperate-climate fruit inthe past decade. Progress in preserving and transporting fresh fruit hasenabled the Southern Hemisphere countries - especially Chile, Argentina,New Zealand and South Africa - to rapidly expand their fruit exports,driving up world trade in apples, pears, peaches, plums, apricots, grapesand kiwis by some 30%. Although this export boom from the South is a majortrade development of the decade, a new study from the Organisation forEconomic Cooperation and Development, entitled "Export Fruit Boom From theSouth: A Threat for the North?" foresees global trade in fresh fruitdeveloping differently in the years ahead:Rising demand will stimulate an even larger volume of trade intemperate-climate fruit, but the major source of demand growth will shiftfrom the OECD to the non-OECD region, predicts the report. Trade flows areexpected to shift significantly: there will be greaterinternationalisation of trade, with larger numbers of exporting countriesand more varied destinations; the Northern Hemisphere will import morefrom the Asian region and export less in favour of Southern Hemisphereexporters; intra-hemisphere trade flows will also change, with intra-Asiantrade of apples increasing in the Northern Hemisphere, intra-Europeantrade in apples, pears, table grapes and kiwifruit expanding, andintra-Central and South American trade also growing.Export competition will increase for virtually all markets, meaning thatcountries must hone their international competitiveness if they are tocontinue to successfully market their exports: they will have to developastute international market strategies, improve their market research anddevelopment, and achieve greater marketing efficiencies. At the nationallevel, policies that ensure safe reliable supplies and an environmentallysound production of fresh temperate-climate fruit will become increasinglyimportant.The OECD study explains this medium-term evolution of the internationalmarket, and the likely increase in trade volumes, by:- the general increase in consumer disposable income, especially in theAsian region;- shifts in consumer preferences toward a reliable year-round supply ofgood quality, fresh temperate-climate fruit;- improved marketing efficiencies and market development in exportingcountries that take advantage of non-seasonal demand;- technical progress in sea-borne shipping and storage;- technical progress in plant breeding and biotechnology, with shortergrowth periods, better-tasting fruit, and more varieties available toconsumers;- greater market access, smaller volumes of subsidised exports, and moreefficient phytosanitary rules thanks to the Uruguay Round Agreement onAgriculture;- greater bilateral and plurilateral cooperation between countries throughregional trading arrangements and customs-free zones."Export Fruit Boom from the South. A Threat for the North", 96 pages,OECD, Paris 1996, ISBN 92-64-14898-1 (51 96 05 1). Price: France only:FF100, all other countries: FF130; USUSD26; DM38Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996BANANA PRODUCERS' FORUM OPENS IN SANTO DOMINGOfrom AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 450The 12th Forum of Latin American banana producers opened in Santo Domingo,capital of the Dominican Republic, on October 28, in the presence of 800public and private sector delegates from around the world. The Forum isintended to promote the regular development of the international bananaeconomy. Expobanana 96, a specialised fair for the promotion of theproduct, its derivatives and associated services, was running in parallelto the Forum.The gathering has given Latin American and Caribbean banana growers anopportunity to keep abreast of the latest technical progress andplant-health developments, as well as market organisation policiesworldwide, through a programme of eight conferences and round tablesaddressing specific sectors and issues. Banana-producing countries in theregion are still demanding better conditions of access to the EuropeanUnion market, regulated for the last three years by quotas and dutieswhich vary for Dollar zone producers (the Latin Americans) and forAfrican, Caribbean and Pacific signatories of the Lome Convention.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List CopyrightAGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 31, 1996MAJOR AGRICULTURAL EVENTS IN NOVEMBER 1996from AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONAL, 31 October 1996, No. 4502-4 OTTAWA (Canada) International Festival of wine and foods4-5 NOORDWIJKERKOUT (Netherlands) European Conference on the environmentalimpact of biomass for energy, organised by the Centre for Agriculture &Environment with the support of the European Commission.5-9 BEIJING (China) China brew and beverage 96, 2nd international brewingand beverage fair5-9 COLOGNE (Germany) ANUGA-FOODTEC International food technology fair6-10 AALSMEER (Netherlands) International floriculture trade fair6-17 GENEVA (Switzerland) International flower show7 PARIS (France) "Community financed research networks", conferenceorganised by the Association nationale de la recherche technique (ANRT)7-10 BARCELONA (Spain) International poultry farming techniques andlivestock show8 BRUSSELS (Belgium) COPA (Committee of Agricultural Organisations in theEuropean Community) : presidium8-12 MILAN (Italy) EXPO FOOD International food and drinks fair9-12 DON BENITO (Spain) International fair9-13 BOLOGNA (Italy) EIMA International exhibition of farm machinery andequipment9- 13 SALZBURG (Austria) International hostelry and gastronomy fair11-15 NIJNI NOVGOROD (Russia) Agriculture and agri-foods fair12-14 PARIS (France) Food Ingredient Europe12-15 HANOVER (Germany) International intensive livestock rearing show12-16 PARIS-NORD (France) International packaging fair VILLEPINTE13 REIMS (France) SAF (Societe des Agriculteurs de France) Conference :"The Euro, a currency for Europe"13-15 NUREMBERG (Germany) BRAU 96 Beer and drinks industry fair13-17 ROME (Italy World Food Summit - renewing the global commitmentagainst famine - FAO Colloquium 13-14 Nov)14-18 VALENCIA (Spain) International timber industry products fair16-17 SAN REMO (Italy) FLORITEC New plants fair, floriculture equipment18 BRUSSELS (Belgium) Council of European Union Agriculture Ministers18-20 HOUSTON (USA) INTERBEV 96 1st international beverage fair18-20 AMSTERDAM (Netherlands) CFCE (Centre Francais du Commerce exterieur): Fresh fruit and vegetables seminar Brussels (Belgium)19-23 NICE (France) French Society for plant pathology: 4th congress20-23 BUDAPEST (Hungary) Agri-foods fair21-22 DIJON (France) International Congress Timber and forests21-23 CAVAILLON (France) Mediterranean fruit, flowers and vegetables tradefair22 BRUSSELS (Belgium) Council of European Union Fisheries Ministers23-28 LONGARONA (Italy) International ice-cream fair26 LYONS (France) "Choice of food products: evolution of consumerbehaviour", organised by the Pole europeen agro-alimentaire and the centrefrancais de diffusion des resultats de la recherche communautaire28 Brussels (Belgium) COPA (Committee of Agricultural Organisations in theEuropean Union): general experts' meeting.Copyright 1996 AGRI SERVICE INTERNATIONALBack to Headline List WT03-B40-3IA060-000326-B017-174http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb11.html 205.156.212.5 19970115014909 text/html 41243HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:47:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:40 GMTContent-length: 41054Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb11.html Sample Issue Copyright AGWEEK via NewsNet January 02, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDIBLE BEAN MARKET COLUMN (203 words) BEAN PRODUCTION UP, BUT SUNFLOWER CROP DIPS FOR YEAR (596 words) DAKOTA FARMER'S AGRIDATA INC. CREATES FIELD INFORMATION SYSTEM (584 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDITORIAL: OPENING THE DOORS (657 words) MEAT PRODUCTION SWELLED IN 1995 (600 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE JUAN MIGUEL PEDRAZA COLUMN (628 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE PEOPLE COLUMN (572 words) PORK PRODUCERS HAVE RECORD YEAR IN '95 (542 words) SOYBEAN PRICES STAGE YEAR-END RALLY (424 words) AGWEEK MAGAZINE COWBOY LOGIC COLUMN (564 words) USDA CONSERVATION ALLOCATIONS DISAPPOINT NORTHERN PLAINS FARMERS (318 words) WEATHER HAMPERED FALL POTATO HARVEST IN PARTS OF MINNESOTA, NORTH DAKOTA (418 words) CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDIBLE BEAN MARKET COLUMNBy Ann Bailey, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--HIGHLIGHTS: The edible bean market remained in the holiday doldrumslast week, with Minnesota and North Dakota dealers quoting pinto prices of $14per cwt. and navy prices of $15 per cwt. Looking ahead to the new crop, there were contracts of $18 per cwt. for naviesand $16 per cwt. for pintos available. DEMAND: On the demand side, the devalued peso continues to make it tough tosell pinto beans to Mexico. In February, the country will issue permits to companies to buy pintos. Under NAFTA, Mexican buyers can purchase up to 1.2 million cwt. of beans, duty-free. If Mexico's economic situation improves and the country is able to purchasethe beans, it would help clean up the supply of U.S. pintos on hand, says Tim Courneya, executive vice president of the Northarvest Bean Growers Association. With pinto and navy beans at inexpensive levels, the United States should alsocontinue to move out beans through the U.S. government's Food for Peace Program, Courneya says. However, there may be competition with green peas and lentils for exports because those legumes are even cheaper than navies and pintos. END          Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996BEAN PRODUCTION UP, BUT SUNFLOWER CROP DIPS FOR YEARBy Ann Bailey, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--One thing edible bean growers can pretty much count on is that themarket is cyclical: If prices are high one year, farmers are likely to plantmore beans the next year, and prices will drop. The cycle continued this year when U.S. farmers increased their navy bean production by 2.1 million cwt. to 7.3 million. Prices in the region dropped from $26-$27 per cwt. a year ago to $14 per cwt. this year. North Dakota farmers harvested 149,000 navy acres this year, up 129,000 acresfrom last year when flooding and frost destroyed some acres, according toUSDA. Harvested acreage in Minnesota increased by 20,000 acres to 61,200, the agency says. N.D. navy production was 2 million cwt. this year, up from 1.5 million from ayear ago. Minnesota farmers produced 845,000 cwt. of navies, up from 678,000last year. U.S. pinto bean acreage, meanwhile, dropped from last year. Farmers harvested760,000 acres of pintos nationwide, about 70,000 fewer than last year. But inNorth Dakota and Minnesota, acreage was higher than last year. Farmersharvested 362,000 acres, a 35,000 acre increase over last year. Minnesotafarmers harvested 35,000 acres, 10,400 more than last year. Nationwide, U.S. pinto bean production was 11 million cwt. this year, down 1.6million cwt. from last year. North Dakota farmers produced 4.7 million cwt. ofpintos, 424,000 cwt. more than last year, USDA says. Minnesota pintoproduction increased 138,000 cwt. to 433,000. Pinto bean prices in the region, at about $15 per cwt. are similar to lastyear. Adverse weather conditions hurt Northern Plains sunflower production this year.USDA projects that North Dakota's average yields of both oil and nonoil sunflowers will be 1,360 pounds per acre, down 75 pounds per acre from last year. Total North Dakota "all sunflower" production is pegged at 2 million pounds, down from 2.2 million last year. Final figures for the year aren't available yet, but the National SunflowerAssociation anticipates that North Dakota's oil yields will be lower thanUSDA's projections, says Jay Hesley, marketing director of the NationalSunflower Association. Late planting, a shorter growing season and poor harvest conditions contributed to lower yields, he says. Some of this year's crop was planted a week to 10 days later than normal. In Minnesota, a wet growing sseason that spawned crop diseases reduced yields.Hesley expects yields will be lower than the five-year average of 1,480 poundsper acre. USDA projects average yields of both non-oil and oil sunflowers inMinnesota to be 1,250 pounds per acre this year, down 13 pounds per acre fromlast year. Total production in Minnesota is pegged at 558,750 pounds, down41,250 pounds from last year. In South Dakota, USDA projects average yields of 1,380 per acre for both non-oil and oil sunflowers. That's a decline of 171 pounds per acre from last year. USDA projects total South Dakota production at 1.3 million pounds, down from 1.4 million last year. Total U.S. production of non-oil and oil sunflowers will be 4.6 million pounds,down from 4.8 million last year, USDA projects. While yields are lower than last year, prices are higher. Prices are near 11cents a pound, nearly 2 cents higher than last year. Hesley says the reason istwofold: Farmers are reluctant sellers and buyers are trying to give farmersan incentive to plant sunflowers this spring. Sunflowers will have to competewith other commodities for acreage, Hesley says. END            Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996DAKOTA FARMER'S AGRIDATA INC. CREATES FIELD INFORMATION SYSTEMBy Jayson Menke, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--David Hagert wanted to find an easier way to keep field information.So he designed a management information system. Hagert, who farms 2,700 acresof wheat, barley, soybeans and edible beans with his brother, Curtis Jr., nearEmerado, N.D., started working on a model in his basement in the winter of1991, and moved to his current location at 2600 Demers Ave. in Grand Forks,N.D, in May. Since going into business, AgriData Inc., has branched out into more than justfield records, it now focusus on all areas of precision farming. The business assists farmers with precision farming techniques by utiliziationof an improved field recordkeeping system that integrates computer analysis,automated data entry, mapping, field monitoring and Differential GlobalPositioning Satellite technology. "By broadening our horizons we are able to provide customers with the lastestequipment, software and information in one convenient location," Hagert says. Hagert has incorporated tillage, fertilizer, pesticide, planting, conservationdetermination, weather, harvest, irrigation and soil nutrient data and mapsinto two pages of information for one field for one year. "In the past you would have about eight pages of printed out data per field.What we're doing is simplifying and tying everything together," Hagert says. Hagert's goal was to develop an easy-to-use computer system that would serviceall aspects of farming. In the early stages of development he used speadsheets to post his farm records. His new software program, Field Facts, will be available in the mid- January. Farmers can purchase Field Facts from AgriData and receive training on thesoftware or they can gather the data and AgriData will process the informationand print it out for the farmer. Hagert says that precision farming endorses site specific application of cropinputs. According to Hagert the goal of precision farming is to improve profits byputting money spent on crop inputs exactly where it will do the most good. "The main focus is establishing patterns that are determined by yield monitoring equipment, satellite imagery and soil types," Hagert says. Hagert says the premise is that fields have varying patterns of soil types,nutrient levels, and ultimately, varying yield levels through out a givenfield. By recording and analyzing this data, crop inputs can be adjustedthrough out a field to maximize yeilds and reduce total cost of inputs. That is, a constant rate of application over an entire field results in overapplication in some spots and under application in others. By varying theappliation rate of applications, costs can be reduced and yeilds increased. Hagert started keeping track of records on ACSC maps and began charting moreintensely in 1988 and designed the first prototype in 1991. "The main emphasis is on collecting data," Hagert says. He and his brotherused a yield monitor in 1994 and last year added a correctional signal whichenables the farmer to pinpoint spots in field through differential globalpositioning system. "Now we can produce yield maps and look at it with satellite imagery and lookfor patterns." AgriData will offer record keeping support, mapping, satellite imagery, software sales and support and consultation on hardware. AGRIDATA INC. Owner: David Hagert Address: 2600 Demers Ave., Grand Forks, N.D.Year started: 1991. Employees: 4. Main line of work: Precision farmingmanagement system. Motto: Bringing precision farming down to earth. Information: (701) 746-8580. END         Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE EDITORIAL: OPENING THE DOORSAgweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News A WORLD OF OPPORTUNITY AWAITS PRAIRIE AGRICULTURE Jan. 1--Whirlpool, aleading maker of home appliances based in Benton Harbor, Mich., is one of anumber of Midwest manufacturers that has set its sights on the global marketeveryone in agriculture is talking about. As Prairie farmers grapple with the challenges of more economically liberalfarm policy, and tackle the business world through processing and marketingventures, a look at Whirlpool's global adventure suggests that strategicplanning and focused energy can be bountifully rewarded. In its transformation from a domestic supplier into a world-class competitor,Whirlpool evolved from a $4 billion company into an $8 billion company. In arecent interview with Suzanne Cosgrove at Knight-Ridder Financial News,Whirlpool CEO David Whitwam recalled that the company was devoted almostexclusively to the U.S. marketplace in 1987 when he took his current position. While solidly successful, Whirlpool faced a mature environment, with only slownatural growth -- based on population growth -- seen for the coming decade.Whitwam concluded that the only reason it was a slow-growth industry was thatit was limited to domestic markets. It was time to go global. Whirlpool recognized that, while a fridge is a fridge is a fridge, you don't just export American-style appliances to Brazil and expect to reap a fortune. Today, Whirlpool is the No. 3 appliance supplier in Europe, and the No. 1 supplier in both North and Latin America. Now it's on to Asia. Whitwam figures the Asian market will be twice the sizeof U.S. market within 10 years -- as big as Europe and the United States combined. When asked what new language he would learn if he had time, Whitwam was quick to answer: "Mandarin." There are ample lessons for Prairie farmers in this stellar example. Stovesaren't soybeans, but the principles of marketing and competing in new marketsare. The most important factor is focus, or "stick to your knitting." In other words, if you're selling processed flour products into the Chinese market, don't spin you wheels trying to sell tractor tires. Unlike appliances, foodstuffs are a much more fractured and diverse market. Somarket research is essential. That includes building relationships thateventually turn into deals. But where some folks look at market research asdaunting, successful ventures don't go adrift into the information sea withouta plan. First, know your own products, your own production potential and your own reserves of creativity. Second, have your money lined up -- nothing quite limits business opportunities as failing to meet contracted output quotas because you run out of cash. Third, have fun. The world market is exciting, interesting and challenging.Prairie farmers have an unbeatable combination of a highly productive resourcebase, a solid experience pool from which to draw, a lively economicdevelopment sector, and the drive to create new business models for the nextcentury. There are those individuals who would have looked at the refrigerator marketand said, "I guess we'll have to make do with what we've got." But innovatorslike Whitwam looked farther afield and saw a chance to build on their base. The world market wants good food. China is hungry, Russia is hungry, all ofAsia is hungry. And they're all building to a standard of living that we inthe United States saw before World War II. That means opportunity. This is theyear for Prairie farmers to look beyond their borders, to scan the global horizon for opportunities and to build relationships that will guarantee our future prosperity. It's time, in Whitwam's words, to learn Mandarin. EDITOR'S NOTE: Agweekeditorials are developed by an editorial board consisting of Mike Jacobs,editor of the Grand Forks Herald (Agweek's parent publication), Agweek editorJulie Copeland and senior correspondent Juan Miguel Pedraza. Pedraza wrotethis week's editorial. END            Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996MEAT PRODUCTION SWELLED IN 1995By Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--Livestock producers know only too well what this year's hot grain markets mean: fatter feed and forage costs, leaner margins. The rise in corn prices, which has encouraged increased oilseed meal production, has not triggered a major selloff. Instead, meat production swelled in 1995. There's not shortage of meat these days. In fact, from the cattleman's standpoint, notes a Market Watch For Beef from the National Cattlemen's Assocation, supplies are burdensome. Increased beef production has led to record U.S. per capita meat consumption,but it hasn't been enough to turn the cattle market around from its yearlongslump. NCA economists say lower retail prices continue to encourage consumption, but the bad news is a cyclical increase in cattle and beef production will keep pressure on prices. However, though prices on the hoof are still $10 to $20 per cwt. below levels seen in 1993 and 1994, the market this fall has started to rebound. "Fed cattle supplies tightened considerably during early fall and pushed fedcattle prices into the upper $60 per cwt. by late November," notes James Mintert, a livestock economist at Kansas State University-Manhattan. Although cattle slaughter is expected to remain above last year's level through the endof the year, it looks like slaughter supplies will remain tight enough throughthe end of 1995 to support fed cattle prices in the mid- to upper- $60s. Mintert notes that breakeven prices for the last quarter of 1995 for 750- pound steers and 650-pound heifers are projected at $68.50 to $69.50, $2 to $4per cwt. more than live cattle are fetching at key terminal markets such asthe Texas Panhandle. The rise in average breakeven is due almost exclusivelyto this year's rapid runup in grain, oilseed meal and hay prices. Each $10 perton change in hay prices, Mintert says, changes feeding cost of gain by 55cents per cwt. As of Nov. 30, there were 8.7 million cattle on feed in the top seven producing states, up from the year-ago level of 8.63 million head, and still ahead of the five-year Nov. 30 average of 8.64 million head. On-feed inventories peaked in April at 8.99 million head, according to USDA. The government notes its quarterly view that the number of cattle on feed inthe top 13 states as of Oct. 31 was up 2 percent from a year earlier and isthe second largest for that date since 1975. Feedlot placement in Septemberrose sharply before declining slightly in October, but are likely to remainabove year-ago levels. Marketings are expected to continue to remain aboveyear-ago levels into 1996. USDA estimates 1995 total U.S. beef production at 25.124 billion pounds, upfrom 24.358 billion last year. A surge in beef exports will continue, which is a major positive influence onU.S. beef prices. U.S. beef exports this year hit a record 1.88 billion pounds,17 percent more than last year. More beef entering the domestic market would keep pushing prices down. Averageretail beef prices dropped 2 percent in 1995, according to USDA, and coulddrop another 2 percent in 1996. The average retail beef price in 1995 checkedin at $2.60 per pound, with sale prices averaging $2.40 per pound. Most cow-calf producers this year experienced their first sizable losses since1986, according to the National Cattlemen's Association. Most operators willbe unprofitable for another two or three years, and some will leave the business, the group says. END       Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE JUAN MIGUEL PEDRAZA COLUMNBy Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News RURAL STATES MUST INVEST IN AG RESEARCH, MARKETING Jan. 1--When she takesover as head of the Northern Crops Institute Jan. 15, Patricia Berglund has agood dea what she's getting into. The North Dakota State University scientistsees big times ahead for NCI and other research and marketing organizations ina post-farm bill world. There's no doubt about it -- as governments worldwide ratchet back farm spending, farm income will increasingly depend on the markets. What does that mean exactly and where do NCI and similar organizations fit in? Eventually every penny you earn from every bushel you grow will come from theprice you get at the elevator. Two things come to mind: One, the elevator cannot be your sole source of income. Two, to make more money on what you grow,you'll have to add value to it. On a community level, that means capturingmore of the market's dollars and retaining them at home, rather than exportingthat value to someone who'll cash it all in down the line in Minneapolis orChicago. NEW STATE OF MIND: As we shift our thinking from farm policy debates into thereal world of business and finance, the ag community must refocus its effortsat home. That means substantially more local support for organizations likeNCI, Minnesota's Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute and KansasState University's international grains institute. Here's where the going might get rough. Though we appreciate the efforts ofpolicy research groups like congressionally funded Food and Agriculture PolicyResearch Institute, in the real world where every dollar of profit must besweated from the market, their work will be increasingly marginalized. In other words, we're looking for real-world products and marketing ideas, notlong-range forecasts. The tough decision will come in apportioning a shrinkingpot of dollars among policy-oriented and market-oriented research facilities.As we look to our bottom lines, the market-oriented organizations shouldlikely win the lion's share of that money. BREAD AND BUTTER PRACTICALITY: We need economists to give us some sense aboutwhat we're doing, but the fact is over the past 50 years -- since economicforecasting first became popular in the post-Keynesian world -- economistshave racked up a dismal record for accuracy. When you're looking to butteryour bread, you need less think-tanking about policy and a lot more practicalideas about where the bread and butter are. That's great news for Berglund and NCI, and their colleagues at other market-oriented research and promotion organizations. But they won't get theirmeal tickets without a fight. Whatever else she's got on her plate, Berglund and other NCI-type leaders will have to set aside a significant chunkof time and energy to lobby local legislatures, farm groups and developmentauthorities to make sure that they can continue their vital work. After all, in a free market, everyone has to compete. And unless you can proveyou've got what it takes to make money, you're not likely to get much money. From our vantage point here, we see tremendous potential for NCI, for Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute, for the land grant colleges in our area, to materially contribute to the future success of the many agribusiness ventures that have yet to sprout. Whatever else we do with our money, we need to assure that Berglund and her colleagues nationwide get what they need to help us succeed. EDITOR'S NOTE: The opinions expressed in this column are those of the writer.They are not necessarily the views of Agweek, the Grand Forks Herald orKnight-Ridder. We welcome responses, comments, suggestions and letters to theeditor regarding Agweek columns. END           Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE PEOPLE COLUMNAgweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News FARGO, N.D.--Jan. 1--Nick Sinner, Fargo, N.D., was elected as the new president of the Red River Valley Sugarbeet Growers Association at their annual meeting in Fargo, N.D. Sinner farms in a family partnership near Casselton, N.D., and has served onthe board of directors since 1990. He succeeds Buzz Baldwin of St. Thomas, N.D., who served the maximum four years. Craig Halfmann, Stephen, Minn., was elected vice president. In addition tofarming, he owns a machinery manufacturing business and has served on the board of directors since 1990. Bruce Newhouse, Fisher, Minn., was elected secretary and Paul Mathiason, GrandForks, N.D., was elected treasurer. Mark Weber, Casselton, N.D., was re-elected executive director. Jamestown, N.D.John Broste and Karl Limvere were recently honored at the North Dakota Farmers Union convention. Broste is retiring from the Cenex board of directors, while Limvere is closingout his career as a longtime member of the NDFU staff. Limvere has worked for NDFU since 1968. He has served as senior policy analyst,radio director "The Family Farmer" radio show, as editor of the "Union Farmer"newspaper, legislative director and state secretary. Broste, a Wilton, N.D., farmer, was first elected to the NDFU board in 1966.Broste farms 960 acres on his farm north of Bismarck. FARGO, N.D. -- David Hilde, a longtime general agronomist at American CrystalSugar Co., has received the 1995 Distinguished Service Award from the RedRiver Valley Sugarbeet Growers, Minn-Dak Farmers Cooperative and Southern Minnesota Beet Sugar Cooperative's Research and Education Committee. The annual award goes to those persons who have made an outstanding life- longcontribution in agricultural research or general education on behalf of thesugar beet industry in the Red River Valley. Hilde has been an employee of American Crystal Sugar Co. for more than 30 years. Hilde's work in nitrogen management has increased sugar beet yields and improved quality. PROSEED HIRES ASSISTANT MANAGER: Stephen Keller, Harvey, N.D., will be representing Proseed of Harvey as an assistant district manager. Keller will team up with the Harvey Farmers Elevator to sell sunflowers and canola in the Harvey Farmers trade area and will assist the district sales manager for northwest North Dakota. AGRI-BUSINESS AWARD WINNERS: Honeymead Corp., Mankato, Minn., and the Minnesota affiliate of the American Heart Association were presented agribusiness awards at the Minnesota Soybean EXPO in Willmar. Honeymead has provided support and assistance, hosted visiting trade teams, helped develop new industrial uses and conducted soybean research and the American Heart Association of Minnesota affiliate has promoted the health benefits of soybeans. FCS ANNOUNCES PROMOTION: Randy Skjerven has been promoted to regional managerof the southern region of Farm Credit Services of Grand Forks, N.D. Asregional manager, he supervises the extension of agricultural financing andfinancial services in Grand Forks, Nelson, Trail, Steel, and Griggs countiesin North Dakota and Polk County in Minnesota, through offices in Grand Forks,Cooperstown, N.D., and Crookston, Minn. RAPESEED/CANOLA PRESIDENT ELECTED: Steve Keil, Conrad, Mont., was elected to aone-year term as president of the Pacific Northwest Rapeseed/Canola Association. Paul Tyler, Moore, Mont., was elected vice president. Re-elected to the board and representing Montana growers were: Jim Habernicht, Seedtec International Inc. in Bozeman, Mont.; and Steve Chambers of Montana Vegetable Oil and Feed in Great Falls, Mont. -- Agweek Staff and Wire Reports END          Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996PORK PRODUCERS HAVE RECORD YEAR IN '95By Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--America's pork producers cranked out a record 17.86 billion poundsthis year, a bit more than last year's 17.7, but well below the 18.5 billionpounds projected earlier this year. The numbers reflect lower market hog inventories this year, connected in partto the rapid inflation in feed costs. Cash break-even prices are projected toaverage in the low $40s per cwt. and are likely to continue rising this winter,according to USDA economist Steve Reed. But despite rising grain prices, Reed says, producers are on gradually expanding their herds again. The number sows farrowing from September through next February is projected to be about the same as a year earlier. However, a larger pig crop is likely during this period since more pigs are being saved per litter. The good news for pork, like in beef, is exports. Record pork exports lastyear had a significant impact on the industry's bottom line. Export sales of U.S. pork and pork variety meats in 1994 accounted foir about6 percent of the wholesale value of total U.S. pork production, up from 5.3percent in the early 1990s and six times what exports meant to pork industry'sbottom line a decade ago, according to the U.S. Meat Export Federation. A USMEF-sponsored study shows that hog prices in the United States benefitsubstantially from increased overseas demand for U.S. pork. Total export salesof pork last year added $3.32 per cwt. to the value of slaughter hogs, up froma 79-cent contribution 10 years ago. U.S. pork exports last year totaled a record 284,000 metric tons, or 626 million pounds, and are expected to stay on track this year. The industry's growth in foreign markets is just beginning, says USMEF's Philip Seng. "We see potential for U.S. pork export sales of more than $1.2 billion in theyear 2001, and that's just around the corner," he says. That foreign demand for pork has kept hog prices steady through the traditional early winter market decline, according to the S.D. Pork Producers Council. Top market hogs sold for up to $46.75 a cwt. in Sioux Falls last week,the highest price since October. It was more than $18 higher than the late-November drop in 1994 when top hogs in Sioux Falls sold for $28.50. "Historically, right after Thanksgiving is pretty much the seasonal low in ourmarkets," says Hurley farmer Steve Schmeichel, president of the South DakotaPork Producers Council. "The good news is that's been here and past." Schmeichel says an active export market and increased slaughter capacity atpacking houses helped keep pork moving at good prices. For the first time inmore than 40 years, the United States was a net exporter of pork this year. And pork exports should continue to increase along with the world population,said Tom Farnsworth of Madison, executive secretary of the pork producers. "When you look outside the United States, pork is the meat of choice," Farnsworth says. "We expect our pork exports to triple in the next three to four years." Editor's note: This story contains material from Agweek wire services. END!A$5?AW-PORK Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996SOYBEAN PRICES STAGE YEAR-END RALLYBy Juan Miguel Pedraza, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--The soybean market is traditionally the most volatile of all the agcommodities except maybe pork bellies. This year, beans were the laggards, with production numbers limiting the rally. Eventually, though, the market caught up with the reality in field: U.S. output was shortened by moisture, though not as badly as other crops. USDA hasestimated the U.S. 1995 soybean harvest at 2.183 billion bushels, down 13 percent from 2.731 billion the previous year. That redution, not as dramatic as the plunge in corn output, set the stage fora big year-end rally linked to drought in Brazil, the world's No. 2 soybeanexporter. The result is that farmers are feeling bullish, holding onto whatthey've got and forcing the market to push bids up to pry loose availablesupplies. Some merchants believe farmers have set a near-term goal of $7.50 a bushel forsoybeans, with handful of diehard bulls calling for double-digit dollarfigures for soybeans by spring. Soybeans have traded above $10 a bushel onlyonce this century, following the discovery in the 1972 to '73 season of thePacific Ocean current warming system known as El Nino. USDA economists aren't that optimistic, but they do argue that strong domesticdemand and energetic overseas buying are supporting U.S. soybean prices.USDA's November supply-demand report pushed the average farmgate price ofsoybeans for 1995 to '96 at $6.30 to $7.30 per bushel, up from $5.45 perbushel last season and an average of $6.40 in 1993. The action in soybeans has pushed up prices all across the oilseed front, with sunflowers, safflower and canola all enjoying rallies this year. World vegetable oil prices continued relatively strong this year, though thecrush for meal following sharply increased feed grain prices has caused a short-term glut of vegoil in many markets. USDA says soymeal prices will average $197.50 to $222.50 per short ton (10cents to 11 cents per pound), well ahead of year-ago levels. Still, becausethe soymeal-to-corn price ratio remains favorable, and because livestock(especially pork and poultry) output is rising, the government sees modestgrowth in demand for meal. On the oil side, the equation is not as good largely because China, the bigbuyer in 1995, has sharply curtailed purchases this year. The Chinese haveplanted and harvested high-oil content crops, including soybeans, peanuts andsunflowers and they still have stocks left over from last year's vegoil importbinge, USDA says. END         Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996AGWEEK MAGAZINE COWBOY LOGIC COLUMNBy Ryan M. Taylor, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News NEW YEAR'S FORTUNE: SAVINGS AND SATISFACTION AHEAD TOWNER, N.D.--Jan. 1--Iwas a little worried about my financial future after tallying up my year endpluses and minuses. The bottom of my tally sheet had a pretty sizable numberinside a pair of brackets -- brackets mean a big fat minus and denote red inkfor those of us without a color printer. But then I got a letter in the mail and all my financial fretting flew rightout the window. The folks at Fortune magazine were ready to lend me a hand andextend to me the tools necessary to make 1996 a banner year for both me and mybanker. I had no fear that this might be a letter they'd send to just any over- extended rancher in Smokey Lake (N.D.) Township. The letter said, "We're conducting a nationwide search to attract leading business professionals and key decision-makers, and your name was referred to us from the Towner City (N.D.) area." Wow! All those leading business professional to choose from in the entire U.S.of A. and little ol' me was referred by the Towner (population 669) City area!It's not often that us Towner suburbanites in Smokey Lake Township get referrals from the big wigs in the Towner City area. Not for everybody This offer definitely wasn't for just any Jack out in the countryside. Theenvelope said, "The enclosed Professional Discount Voucher is for the expressuse of the person named herein and is nontransferable." The publisher had authorized Brian Wolfe, consumer marketing director, to giveme 74 percent off the newsstand price, send me a free guide full of breakthrough ideas and unconventional tactics, and guarantee my satisfaction because of my "status as a business professional" (in the Towner City area). I could see that making that kind of offer to the general public would probably lose fortune's for Fortune magazine. But cutting someone like myself in on the deal made a lot of sense. I'm sure their advertisers would be phoning in almost immediately and increasing their promotional budget with them once the big orders started rolling in from the Taylor Ranch. Brian said Fortune would help me grow my business (heavier calves and tallergrass), motivate my staff (optimistic cows and horses chomping at the bit,ready to work), and maintain my edge (not settling to be just another brokecattleman, but be the best damn broke cattleman there is). What the heck Even with the professional rate, I had second thoughts about spending any money on anything, what with the cattle market down in the basement and all. You can't fall for every smooth talking salesman whose snake oil, or magazine subscription, will cure all ills. But, then again, like Oscar Wilde said, a cynic is someone who knows the priceof everything and the value of nothing. So, without cynicism, the new year brings new optimism, new hope and, mostimportantly, a new operating loan. A professionally discounted Fortune magazine subscription could be the first chip off the old 1996 borrowed capital block. Besides, I spotted the little box to check that said "Bill me later." It's apopular option for us leading business professionals in the Towner City area. END!A$5?AW-TAYLOR-COL Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996USDA CONSERVATION ALLOCATIONS DISAPPOINT NORTHERN PLAINS FARMERSBy Ann Bailey, Agweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--As expected, northern Plains farmers weren't allocated as many acresas they applied for in the 13th Conservation Reserve Program signup. In NorthDakota, there were 395 contracts awarded, 115 fewer than than for which theyhad applied. North Dakota farmers contracted 35,266 acres, about 7,000 fewer than for which they had applied. The average cash rental rate of the North Dakota contracts was $26.43 per acre, $12.07 less than the previous average cash rental rate per acre. Total annual cash rental payments in North Dakota for the 13th signup is $932,080. Minnesota farmers contracted 18,097 acres in the latest signup, 15,000 fewerthan for which they had applied. There were 874 contracts awarded in Minnesota,509 fewer than for which farmers had bid. The average rental rate in Minnesotawas $68.64 per acre, $13.20 higher than the previous average cash rental rateper acre. The total annual rental payment for the latest signup is $1.2million. In South Dakota, 214 contracts were awarded, 262 fewer than for which farmershad bid. South Dakota farmers contracted 16,539 acres in CRP, about 14,000fewer than for which they had applied. The average rental rate per acre is$31.96, $9.52 less than the previous average rental rate. Total annual rentalpayment for the latest signup is $528,590. Montana farmers were awarded 446 contracts, 228 fewer than for which they hadbid. Total acreage contracted was 75,148. Montana farmers had bids for 106,040acres. The avearge rental rate was $30.52, $6.72 per acre less than theprevious average rental rate. The total annual rental payment for the signupis $2.3 million. Nationwide, 683,390 acres were contracted in the latest signup, about 500,000fewer than for which farmers had bid. The total number of contracts awardedwas 13,855, 10,586 fewer than for which they had bid. END            Back to Headline List CopyrightAGWEEK via NewsNetJanuary 02, 1996WEATHER HAMPERED FALL POTATO HARVEST IN PARTS OF MINNESOTA, NORTH DAKOTAAgweek Magazine Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 1--Weather conditions varied in North Dakota and Minnesota producing record crops in some areas and below average crops in other areas. The 1995 fall potato harvest was hampered, especially in northwestern Minnesota and parts of North Dakota by rain and sloppy fields. The weather kept some growers harvesting late into the fall, while others had to abandon fields. Storage has also been a problem for growers who may have harvested late blightinfected potatoes. Those potatoes are more susceptible to diseases like softrot that can cause potatoes to breakdown in storage. Late blight was especially prevalent in irrigated potatoes. Growers willcontinue to closely monitor storage bins to try to head off any problems. Growing conditions in North Dakota throughout the year weren't good enough tomatch the record breaking yields harvested in 1994. Some growers blamed hot temperatures in June and too much rain in July for thesmaller yields. Yields averaged 210 hundredweight per acre in 1995, down from the record 235cwt. per acre harvested in 1994. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, North Dakota production totaled 25.4 million hundred pound bags of potatoes in 1995, compared to 28.2 million cwt. the previous year. North Dakota growers harvested 121,000 acres in 1995, compared to 120,000 acres the previous year. Record breaking year But the reverse occured in Minnesota where growers harvested record yields ontheir summer and fall crops in 1995. Minnesota growers dug up record yields in 1995 averaging 270 cwt. per acre,which was slightly higher than the previous record of 269 cwt. per acre set in1994, according to USDA. Minnesota growers produced 20.8 million cwt. in 1995,compared to 20 million cwt. the previous year. Harvested acreage in Minnesotawas pegged at 77,000 acres, up from 74,600 acres in 1994. Total U.S. fall and summer potato production was down in 1995 at 402 millioncwt., compared to 426 million cwt. produced in 1994. Yields averaged 334 cwt.per acre, down from 352 cwt. per acre the previous year. The smaller U.S. crop has kept Red River Valley prices higher in 1995 than theprevious year. According to USDA's Market News, prices for No. 1 size A washed round red potatoes are at $8.50 to $9 per cwt., compared to $7 to $7.50 per cwt. for thesame time period time in 1994. -- Agweek Staff and Wire Reports END        Back to Headline List WT03-B40-4IA060-000326-B017-237http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb07.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015035 text/html 163222HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:47:40 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:38 GMTContent-length: 163032Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb07.html Sample Issue Copyright FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 'SIGNIFICANT ENFORCEMENT HAMMER' IS NEEDED TO BACK UP HOUSE COMMITTEE FOOD ADDITIVE REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS: McINTOSH AND SOUDER (516 words) WEBB TECHNICAL GROUP TAKES FSIS CONTRACT DISPUTE TO SEN. HELMS (347 words) USDA 'WHOLESOMENESS' SEAL SHOULD BE DROPPED, WARNING LABEL ADDED TO CURED MEATS, GROUPS SAY IN PETITION TO FSIS (789 words) MOLD CONTENT OF SEVERAL TYPES OF COMMERCIAL POPCORN DETERMINED (706 words) FDA PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION DESCRIBED IN POLICY STATEMENT (322 words) NCTR SCIENCE BOARD TO MEET FOR SITE VISIT REPORT, RESOURCE DISCUSSIONS (163 words) HEN STRAIN AFFECTS HOW DIET CHANGES LIPIDS IN POULTRY PRODUCTS (551 words) ACSH WANTS DELANEY REPLACED WITH FLEXIBL NEW REGULATORY PROCESS (439 words) CSPI RAISES NEW ISSUES WITH OLESTRA FOOD ADDITIVE PETITION (1327 words) CONSUMER COMMENTS OPPOSING APPROVAL FLOOD OLESTRA FILE (1720 words) PETITION NEEDED TO EXPAND ENERGY SOURCES IN POULTRY FEED IRRADIATION RULE: FDA (557 words) AFDO FLOATS PROPOSED FOOD CODE CHANGES TO MEMBERS (1337 words) FSIS IDENTIFIES REFORMS NEEDED BEFORE HACCP IMPLEMENTATION (769 words) IBP COMPLAINS OF RED MEAT, POULTRY EQUITY ISSUES AT HACCP MEETINGS (579 words) L. MONOCYTOGENES, B. CEREUS CONTAMINATION PROMPT WARNINGS TO WHITEFISH, PEDIATRIC MEDICAL FOOD MANUFACTURERS (2853 words) SINGLE PETITION PROCESS FOR ADDITIVES TO BE USED ON MEAT OR POULTRY PROPOSED BY FSIS, FDA (2183 words) NU-TECH POULTRY SYSTEM RESULTS IN LESS VISIBLE CONTAMINATION BUT SIMILAR MICRO COUNTS, FSIS SAYS (1013 words) DRAFT NUTRITION ACTION PLAN URGES HACCP, FOOD CODE ADOPTION (1025 words) CALIFORNIA MARKET OWNERS FINED FOR SELLING, MISBRANDING MEAT ADULTERATED WITH SODIUM SULFITE (322 words) FDA CLEARS MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITE FOR USE IN CHICKEN, TURKEY FEED (200 words) POLYMALEIC ACID AND ITS SODIUM SALT CLEARED FOR USE IN PRODUCTION OF BEET AND CANE SUGAR JUICE, LIQUOR (182 words) CDC FOODBORNE DISEASE INVESTIGATION EFFORTS CRIPPLED BY BUDGET STALEMATE (510 words) DIETARY GUIDELINES VIRTUALLY UNCHANGED FROM ADVISORY PANEL'S RECOMMENDATIONS (2395 words) FUTURE FSIS INSPECTION SYSTEM TO BE DEVELOPED BEGINNING WITH FEDERAL REGISTER NOTICE, PUBLIC MEETING: TAYLOR (1492 words) BRIEF NOTES (1356 words) CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996'SIGNIFICANT ENFORCEMENT HAMMER' IS NEEDED TO BACK UP HOUSE COMMITTEE FOOD ADDITIVE REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS:  McINTOSH AND SOUDERThe enforcement mechanisms for the recommendations in "The FDA Food Additive Review Process:  Backlog and Failure to Observe Statutory Deadline," the Government Reform and Oversight Committee's recent report, are inadequate, committee members Rep. David McIntosh (R-Ind.) and Rep. Mark Souder (R-Ind.) said in "additional views" printed with the report  (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 41).Both McIntosh and Souder are freshman legislators; McIntosh has been active in the House efforts to enact regulatory reform legislation and repeal the Delaney clause (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Nov. 20, Page 16)."Currently, the Food and Drug Administration's delay in approving food additives is caused by inertia within the agency," McIntosh and Souder noted, adding:  "While that inertia can be somewhat alleviated through instructions to do better, I am convinced that it cannot be eliminated without a significant enforcement hammer.   I am particularly concerned that the recommendations include a relaxation of the statutory deadline for a decision on a food additive from 180 to 360 days.  While relaxing the statutory deadline makes some sense, it also makes sense to transform it into a meaningful one."If the time frames in the report were expected to be 360 days, then after a brief period -- 90 days perhaps  -- the statute should provide FDA with three options, the Indiana representatives said.  Those options are:  (1)  issue a regulation approving the use of the additive; (2) disapprove the use of the additive, but only if FDA can demonstrate that an additive has not been found to be safe; or (3) if FDA fails to do either, the additive is deemed to be approved."In this way, FDA is provided with an incentive to engage in a real cost/benefit analysis in the allocation of its resources," they added, noting:  "... unless hammers such as this one are incorporated into the regulatory schemes we have developed, we are destined to see agencies fail to meet statutory deadlines and justify their failures with claims of too much work and too few resources."Six Report Recommendations Include Elimination of Pending Petitions' Backlog within One YearThe report's six recommendations were:  -- Congress should amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act review period for food additive petitions from 180 to 360 days for the most scientifically complex reviews, and the deadline should be strictly observed by FDA;  FDA should recognize that the approval of useful and safe new products can be as important to the public health as preventing the marketing of harmful or ineffective products; FDA should eliminate the backlog of pending food additive petitions within one year by reallocating the necessary agency resources; FDA should utilize outside expertise in its evaluation of food additive petitions but retain authority for petition approval; the relevance of the Delaney clause should be studied in view of modern scientific standards so that better distinctions can be made between nominal hazards and actual risks, and FDA should amend the review process to prohibit anonymous submission of data or comments.  ((6FCN 4602, 14 pages, $8)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996WEBB TECHNICAL GROUP TAKES FSIS CONTRACT DISPUTE TO SEN. HELMS Raleigh-based Webb Technical Group, Inc. urged North Carolina Sen. Jesse Helms (R) to step in and prevent the Food Safety and Inspection Service from cancelling a meat and poultry analysis contract (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Aug. 28, Page 26).  The firm alleges that FSIS made the decision without conducting the necessary cost-benefit analysis.Webb said the contract cancellation would result in the loss of 17 jobs, waste hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars, and threaten meat and poultry safety.  "It has been suggested that the real savings planned by FSIS is to eliminate this work, which would further violate the intent of Congress to assure a safe and wholesome food supply for U.S. consumers," Board Chairman Neil Webb said in a recent letter to Helms."Either FSIS has a hidden agenda, or they just don't know what they are doing," Webb stated.  "Either way, we would appreciate some help in getting to the bottom of this."According to the firm, Webb has conducted residue and compositional testing for FSIS for the past 13 years -- specifically, monitoring the meat supply for economic fraud and verifying the safety of domestic and imported meat products.  On July 25, 1995, Webb was advised that FSIS would not renew the contract "due to change in the program requirements."  Webb said it found out that FSIS had planned to analyze all meat and poultry food chemistry samples in its Technical Services laboratories beginning next fiscal year.Webb said the government never proved that such a decision would be fiscally sound.  In October, FSIS responded that it had not violated procurement regulations when it dropped the contract, and that FSIS would be using new technology and upgrading equipment at its own laboratories to increase efficiency.  Webb argued that USDA guidelines barred the North Carolina firm from using new alternate technologies. Webb asked for a meeting with Helms' staff on the issue, and asked the senator to contact USDA Secretary Dan Glickman "to get to the bottom of the situation."  ((6FCN 4604, 19 pages, $9)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996USDA 'WHOLESOMENESS' SEAL SHOULD BE DROPPED, WARNING LABEL ADDED TO CURED MEATS, GROUPS SAY IN PETITION TO FSISJeremy Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends and the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine have filed a petition with USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service seeking removal of the "wholesomeness" seal, stronger language on safe handling labels and a warning label on cured meat products.USDA received the petition Oct. 26 but did not place it on file in the hearing clerk's office until recently.  The groups had been considering suing USDA to stop use of the "wholesomeness" seal; the petition cites legal precedents and the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) as the basis for the groups' claims (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, July 31, Page 2).The petition, written by FET's Theodore Waugh and the Physicians Committee's Andrew Nicholson, cites the risk to consumers from E. coli O157:H7 as the basis for the groups' requests.  "The risk of serious permanent physical injury and death, USDA's inability to safeguard the meat supply and the lack of medical preparedness indicate both the seriousness and extent of the E. coli problem," the petition said, adding, "Until effective control measures are developed to eliminate E. coli contamination, USDA needs to take further actions to protect consumers and conform with its statutory obligations."The petitioners misstated the scope of USDA's declaration that E. coli O157:H7 was an adulterant.  The USDA declaration applied only to raw ground beef; the petition said that "USDA has determined that E. coli-contaminated meats are 'adulterated.'"The petition quoted the FMIA as saying, "It is essential in the public interest that the health and welfare of consumers be protected by assuring that meat and meat food products distributed to them are wholesome, not adulterated ... Unwholesome, adulterated and/or misbranded meat and meat food products ... result in ... injury to consumers.""Thus, according to USDA's own regulations, only meats lacking E. coli contamination can be labeled 'Inspected and Passed,'" the petition said, adding, "Because the FMIA prohibits misleading and false labeling, the USDA must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from meat products until it can conclusively determine that the meat is uncontaminated with the adulterant E. coli."Nicholson and Waugh said that USDA's baseline survey of steers and heifers found that "approximately 15% of all raw beef samples contain one or more species of pathogens " (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Feb. 7, 1994, Page 60).  They also cited a Sept. 22 ABC News "20/20" show that quoted "USDA doctors" as saying that "probably one out of every thousand hamburgers contains E. coli bacteria."The petition also said that USDA has admitted its sampling program for E. coli O157:H7 in raw ground beef "cannot eliminate E. coli from the food supply."Safe Handling Labels Inadequate, Cured Meats Should Have Warning Labels, Groups Say"It is clear the number of outbreaks has remained high or continued to grow even with USDA's safe care and handling labels," the groups said, adding, "In light of the continuing number of E. coli outbreaks, it is necessary for USDA to improve the current safe handling labels."  The labels should state the consequences of undercooking, the petition said, explaining:"How can consumers adapt their behavior to meet the seriousness of the health risk when they are uninformed of the potential consequences?  For all a purchaser knows, the only illness resulting from contamination is an upset stomach.  If individuals knew that kidney failure and death were potential side effects, they would take the warnings with the degree of seriousness that the hazard requires."The petitioners recommended a new safe handling label that would begin:  "WARNING: This product may contain E. coli bacteria, which can cause serious illness, including:  death, strokes, seizures, bloody diarrhea, renal failure, red blood cell destruction."  Anyone suffering from abdominal cramps or diarrhea a few days after consumption should consult a physician immediately, the label would recommend, as well as stating that the product should be cooked until no red color remains, to a minimum temperature of 155 F.  The labels should be bigger and in larger type than the current ones, the petitioners said.They called for a similar warning for cured meat products, noting that "it has become clear that E. coli contamination can survive the curing process. ... In light of this potential danger, USDA should warn consumers of cured meat's potential dangers, and at the very least, the agency must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from cured meat products until it can be certain that the meat is not adulterated with E. coli.""If USDA ignores this request, the agency will have acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner in violation of the Administrative Procedures Act," the petitioners said.  ((6FCN 4605, 16 pages, $8)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MOLD CONTENT OF SEVERAL TYPES OF COMMERCIAL POPCORN DETERMINEDNoting a general lack of information on molds in popcorn, researchers undertook a study of the mold content of popcorn in commercial channels, reporting their findings in the September 1995 issue of the Journal of Food Protection.Sarath Katta and colleagues, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebr., determined the internal mold infection levels of various microwave and nonmicrowave popcorn by direct plating of kernels on Dichloran-rose bengal-chloramphenicol agar (DRBC), Dichloran-18% glycerol agar (DG-18), Aspergillus flavus/parasiciticus agar (AFPA) and Czapek's iprodione agar (CZID).The total percentage of mold-infected kernels was low in microwave yellow popcorn (5.9%) and nonmicrowave yellow popcorn (7.3%), but somewhat higher in specialty popcorn (13.6%) and nonmicrowave white popcorn (15.1%), according to the report.Of the molds found, Fusarium species predominated in the microwave yellow popcorn (54.2%) and nonmicrowave white popcorn (66.2%), whereas Aspergillus species predominated in the nonmicrowave yellow popcorn (43.8%) and specialty popcorn (52.9%).  Negligible amounts of Aspergillus flavus-parasiticus molds were found in the samples evaluated.No significant differences were found among media in enumerating total mold infection levels.  DG-18 was effective in enumerating Aspergillus species, but ineffective for Fusarium species, the researchers reported.  They recommended that either AFPA or CZID be used to determine the total percentage of mold infection levels in popcorn.Effects of Storage Conditions on Popcorn Mold Content AssessedAlso in the same issue, Katta and Lloyd Bullerman, also of the University of Nebraska, reported their findings on a study of the effects of high temperature and relative humidity, as well as packaging, on the mold content and quality of stored popcorn.White and yellow popcorn were stored in different containers at high temperature (35 C) and high relative humidity (85%) for three months.  Gradual decreases in popping volumes with the lengthening of storage time were observed in both white and yellow popcorn, the researchers reported.Few differences were found in total infection levels up to 60 days of storage, except that the Aspergillus glaucus group became established in place of field fungi.  A gradual increase in mold infection levels was then observed during the remaining 30 days of storage.  Visible mold growth was also observed on the tops of some kernels by the end of storage studies, according to the report.Internal mold infection in white popcorn stored in an open container was lower (18.3%) than in white popcorn stored in a closed plastic bag (75%) and closed plastic jar (85.3%), whereas the internal mold infection in yellow popcorn stored in an open container was higher (23.3%) than in yellow popcorn stored in a closed plastic bag (6.3%) and closed plastic jar (2.6%), the report stated.Mycoflora of Various Cereal Flakes DeterminedGerman researchers examined 12 brands of cereal flakes for their qualitative and quantitative mold contamination, reporting their findings in the July 1995 issue of the same journal.M. Weidenborner and B. Kunz, of the Universitat Bonn, in Bonn, Germany, reported higher fungal counts in two wheat and one oat flake samples, while the remaining brands showed minor contamination rates.The fungal flora consisted of 64 different species belonging to 23 fungal genera, with fungi of the Eurotium, Aspergillus and Penicillium predominant in most samples, according to the report.To obtain a comprehensive evaluation, the mycoflora of foodstuffs should be investigated on at least three different media, the researchers concluded.Simplified Method for Aflatoxin Extraction From Peanuts ReportedAlso in the same issue, researchers reported a simplified method for extraction of aflatoxin from peanut meal and kernels by CO2-methanol, using a highly pressurized fluid extraction process.Pei-Yin Wu, Da Yeh Institute of Technology, Changhwa, Taiwan, and Robin Chiou, National Chiayi Institute of Agriculture, Chiayi, Taiwan, used peanut kernels infected with Aspergillus parasiticus after milling into meals as a naturally contaminated material for investigating the efficacy of supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) as a technique for removing aflatoxin.  Methanol solutions (60% and 100%) were used to modify the properties of the extraction media, and extraction parameters such as pressure, methanol concentration, methanol/peanut meal ratio and holding time were extensively investigated.Results using this technique were comparable to those obtained using a commercialized immunochemical method, according to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FDA PROCEDURES FOR HANDLING OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION DESCRIBED IN POLICY STATEMENTIn response to inquiries concerning its use of confidential information in rulemaking, the Food and Drug Administration Dec. 27 published a "Statement of Procedures for Handling Confidential Information in Rulemaking."  The cigarette and smokeless tobacco companies questioned FDA policy following the agency's August 1995 publication of a proposed rule concerning regulation of nicotine-containing cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products.  Noting that the statement was developed to address this industry's specific concerns, the agency said the procedures described reflect docket management procedures "long used" by FDA in rulemaking.    According to the statement, FDA does not make available trade secret information, confidential commercial information or other information "whose disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy."  In addition, no information that would "reveal the identity of confidential sources" would be placed into a public docket, the agency noted.  While trying to assure that "clearly proprietary information" is not "unwittingly made available," FDA advised that information submitted to a public docket does not carry a "reasonable expectation of confidentiality."  The agency contends it is under "no legal obligation" to closely examine submitted documents to determine whether they "may contain proprietary information."  FDA is aware, however, of the "sensitivity and importance" of such information, and has "long followed" certain procedures to try to ensure that "clearly proprietary information" is not made available, the agency said, noting that it scans documents for "obvious trade secrets or personal privacy information."  According to the statement, information marked "confidential" is referred to the appropriate center's Freedom of Information Act officers, FDA added, for a determination as to whether it will be exempt under the act from public disclosure.  Before any documents containing such "confidential" information are placed on public record, the appropriate center consults with the person(s) who submitted the documents as to whether it was intended that the document be made available to the public, the agency said.    Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NCTR SCIENCE BOARD TO MEET  FOR SITE VISIT REPORT, RESOURCE DISCUSSIONS The Food and Drug Administration announced Dec. 29, 1995 that a meeting of the Science Advisory Board to the National Center for Toxicological Research will be held Jan. 29 and Jan. 30 at NCTR in Jefferson, Ark.  At the meeting, the board will be given a progress report on a recommendation resulting from its Site Visit Team Report on NCTR's Analytical Methods Development program.  In addition, a presentation will be made and the board will be asked to review the center's integration of the eight programs the board has visited.  According to the FDA notice, the presentation will include a discussion of the resources allocated to these programs, as well as their relation to NCTR's strategic vision and goals.  The closed portion of the board's meeting will focus on "personal information" concerning individuals involved with NCTR's research programs, disclosure of which would constitute a "clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy," FDA noted.  For additional information, contact Ronald Coene, NCTR, 301-443-3155.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996HEN STRAIN AFFECTS HOW DIET CHANGES LIPIDS IN POULTRY PRODUCTSFatty acid metabolism may vary between strains of laying hens, according to researchers, who observed differences in how several strains incorporated a specific polyunsaturated acid from their diets.  But the differences were relatively small, and in general, PUFA in the diet produced marked increases in PUFA in the eggs and meat of the birds, according to the researchers' report in the October 1995 issue of the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry.Geetha Cherian and colleagues, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, studied the effects of feeding diets high or low in alpha-linolenic acid on the lipid and fatty acid composition of the liver and subdermal fat or on products such as eggs, white meat and dark meat of six different strains of laying hens.The researchers noted that increasing the polyunsaturated to saturated fatty acid ratio of egg yolk or tissue lipids would make poultry products more acceptable to health-conscious consumers.Natural Antioxidants as Vegetable Oil Preservatives InvestigatedAlso in the same issue, Spanish researchers reported on their investigation into how some naturally formed oxidized lipid/amino acid reaction products are able to protect bulk vegetable oils against oxidation.Manuel Alaiz and colleagues, Instituto de la Grasa, CSIC, Seville, Spain, undertook a study to determine if the reaction products are able to stop or slow a peroxidative process initiated in a vegetable oil.Their findings suggest that some of the reaction products might be playing an antioxidative role in foods by delaying the peroxidative process at the same time that they are being produced, according to the report.  The researchers noted that special attention has been given to natural antioxidants in recent years because of the possible, but not yet proven, hazardous effects of synthetic antioxidants.Stability of Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in Egg Powder AssessedHigh spray-drying temperatures led to a higher loss of many polyunsaturated fatty acids in egg powder, according to a report in the August 1995 issue of the same journal.Francesc Guardiola and colleagues, University of Barcelona and CSIC, Barcelona, Spain, studied the influence of different factors, including spray-drying temperature, kind of antioxidant, antioxidant concentration and packing conditions on PUFA losses in egg powder stored for 10 months.Storage of egg powder under vacuum away from light effectively prevents the loss of many PUFA, according to the researchers, who also reported that antioxidants may be slightly effective in preventing PUFA losses under highly oxidative conditions.The researchers recommended that spray-dried egg yolk not be used as a long-chain PUFA source for enriching weaning foods, since oxidized fatty acids "lose their essentiality and present several harmful biological effects."Hydrolysis Seen as Major Cause of Deterioration in Frozen TroutAlso in the same issue, Swedish researchers reported that hydrolysis is the major cause of lipid deterioration in frozen farmed rainbow trout fillets.Torbjorn Ingemansson and colleagues, SIK-The Swedish Institute for Food Research, Goteborg, and Karlshamns LipidTeknik, Stockholm, Sweden, studied the extent of lipid hydrolysis and oxidation in the muscle tissue of frozen rainbow trout to elucidate the effects of acclimatization temperature and storage time on these mechanisms, using multivariate statistical methods.Lower water temperature during acclimatization (5 C rather than 12 C) resulted in reduced lipid stability during frozen storage, according to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ACSH WANTS DELANEY REPLACED WITH FLEXIBL  NEW REGULATORY PROCESSThe American Council on Science and Health called on Congress to repeal the Delaney clause, so that regulatory agencies would be free to balance risks against benefits and use a more appropriate weight of evidence test in regulating food additive risks.In a new booklet, "Modernize Our Food Safety Laws:  Delete the Delaney Clause," ACSH argued that the zero-risk standard has been a "scientifically indefensible double standard," and that public interest groups who support the measure would "lose power" if the measure were repealed."Strict enforcement will endanger the food supply, raising prices and making it even harder for Americans to consume the very fruits and vegetables that have been linked to reduced cancer rates and improved health," warned Elizabeth Whelan, president of ACSH.The New York City-based group said a replacement to the Delaney clause should provide a flexible regulatory process, not a specific standard.  As part of the new process, tumors or cancers should not be the sole or even primary regulatory concern, ACSH said, explaining:  "Regulators should consider a broad range of possible health risks, including cancer."It may be necessary to legislate that regulators cannot use worst-case assumptions in calculating risk except under extraordinary circumstances, the group said.  "By piling worst-case assumption upon worst-case assumption, regulators easily can overestimate risks by multiples of millions," the report said.Regulators should take into account negative and "no effect" test results as well as positive results, the report recommended, noting that current law only allows regulators to consider the positive development of tumors.Each substance should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and human exposure and epidemiology should be taken into account, it added.  "A substance that is toxic to some animals is not necessarily toxic to humans, and vice versa," the report said.Such an approach would be far from perfect, the group acknowledged, adding:  "But it would come much closer to scientific honesty and prioritization of risks than what we have now or would be likely to get from any bright-line approach."The report also reviews past applications of the Delaney clause, the Environmental Protection Agency's reform efforts, "mouse terrorism," and the politics of Delaney repeal.  The group rejected the latest attempt to override Delaney with an amendment by Sen. Charles Grassley (R-Iowa) to S 343, which was one of the regulatory reform measures.  "It leaves in place the Delaney clause and does not directly amend it, perhaps inviting litigation," ACSH said.  Also, the group said the amendment would have set a new standard for barring products on account of risk, regardless of its benefits.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CSPI RAISES NEW ISSUES WITH OLESTRA FOOD ADDITIVE PETITIONThe Center for Science in the Public Interest Jan. 2 alerted the Food and Drug Administration to new research showing beta-carotene's cancer-fighting ability and to the new Dietary Guidelines for Americans' recommendations as reasons to deny the olestra food additive petition.CSPI said the latest study by Harinder Garewal of the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Tucson involved giving 50 patients a daily dose of 60 mg of beta-carotene for six months.  Unpublished results found 26 (52%) patients responded to beta-carotene, with their oral leukoplakia diminishing, CSPI reported. "The result is similar to that found in an earlier study by Garewal that used half as much beta-carotene," CSPI Executive Director Michael Jacobson said.  Garewal said his subjects were not deficient in vitamin A.According to CSPI, intervention trials have demonstrated that beta-carotenoid causes regression of oral leukoplakia, which is believed to be a precursor of oral cancer.  FDA has stated that a critical issue regarding olestra is whether carotenoids, blood levels of which are depleted by olestra, serve any biological purpose in humans other than beta-carotene's role as a provitamin A.CSPI's Jacobson also took the opportunity to point to the newly released Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which emphasize the importance of carotenoids as cancer-fighters, as inconsistent with FDA's action in considering an additive that would reduce carotenoid absorption from foods.Dietary Guidelines Special Mention Of Beta-Carotene CitedA sister agency in the Department of Health and Human Services and the U.S. Department of Agriculture deemed carotenoids of such importance that a special box lists "Some Good Sources of Carotenoids," Jacobson said."With that level of recognition that carotenoids appear to offer health benefits, it would be extra ironic if the FDA approves carotenoid-depleting olestra just weeks after release of the new federal nutrition policy," Jacobson told FDA.  The agency is expected to issue a regulation on olestra in the next month  Meanwhile, CSPI submitted lengthy comments to the olestra petition Dec. 21 after the group convinced the agency to extend the comment deadline (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 13).  CSPI had asked for the deadline extension based on two new studies:  a study on water content of stools, and a large home-use study of olestra snacks.  CFSAN was aware of the home-use study but chose to ignore it, said FDA Deputy Commissioner for Policy William Schultz in a Dec. 8 letter.  But the agency agreed to permit CSPI to submit comments on the newly available stool water content data.  CSPI filed its comments focusing on olestra's depletion of carotenoids and gastrointestinal disturbances after reviewing the transcript of the November Food Advisory Committee meeting.Failure to Give Advisory Committee Full Review of Carotenoid Data HitCSPI argued that the views of Procter & Gamble and "its few hired experts on carotenoids" were not consistent with experts "who share our concerns about the likely adverse impact on health of depletion of carotenoids, and experts who have expressed their concern about the likely adverse impact on public health of allowing olestra onto the market."The advocacy group reiterated charges that CFSAN staff had failed to provide the working group and Food Advisory Committee with data needed for an informed decision on carotenoid's role in health protection."We disagree strongly with the CFSAN staff's decision not to provide committee members and the Commissioner with a full review of data on carotenoids, since several members of the working group and Food Advisory Committee stated that they found the question of carotenoids to be the most difficult one they faced, and all data bearing on the health effects of carotenoids should have been provided to the panels."  The group added, "We trust that the in vitro, animal, clinical, epidemiological, and intervention-trial data will be reviewed by the Commissioner when he is considering what action he will take regarding olestra." CSPI also suggested that CFSAN staff not carry out the review, "given that staff's inadequate treatment of those important research data."The group found CFSAN's report on olestra "completely ignored a large and growing body" of research on the role of carotenoids in protecting health.  Included was a study appearing in the Dec. 6, 1995, issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute on the link to consuming lycopene-rich tomato products and the reduced risk of prostate cancer (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 11, Page 10)."While that study did not prove that lycopene protects against prostate cancer, the findings are very important in evaluating olestra, because lycopene is the most lipophilic carotenoid and the carotenoid most severely depleted by olestra and by the sucrose polyester used in the recent Dutch study," CSPI commented, adding:  "Since lycopene is abundant in tomatoes, it is of obvious concern that savory snacks containing olestra may well be eaten with tomato-containing meals."CSPI reiterated charges that carotenoid levels are likely to be reduced significantly by olestra, despite claims by Procter & Gamble, and that between-meal consumption of olestra would have some impact on carotenoids.On the issue of gastrointestinal disturbances, CSPI charged members of a working group on olestra and the Food Advisory Committee with defining "out of existence the diarrhea caused by olestra."  The comments added, "There was very little discussion of the numerous other gastrointestinal disturbances associated with consumption of olestra, and, since diarrhea was likely the most serious of the symptoms, by concluding that olestra did not cause diarrhea, it then became fairly simple for the panels to reach a conclusion of 'no harm.'"The group concluded that FDA should deny the olestra petition because evidence suggests that "depletion of carotenoids presents a clear risk of harm to public health, and there is absolutely no way that a conclusion can be drawn that there would be a 'reasonable certainty of no harm' if carotenoid absorption was reduced by olestra."CSPI also took aim at the legal burden of proof that the group said has been inappropriately switched to government authorities who must prove olestra is harmful.  "Those people heard the evidence demonstrating that olestra reduces serum levels of carotenoids and the evidence that carotenoids reduce risks of cancer, heart disease and macular degeneration, yet because there was not proof that carotenoids are beneficial, many of them said that olestra is safe." According to the group, the lucky consumers will be those who experience gastrointestinal problems once olestra foods become available and stop eating such foods, so "their carotenoid intake would no longer be threatened."Procter & Gamble Questions APHA Olestra ReviewOn a related note, Procter & Gamble criticized the American Public Health Association's conclusions on the pending olestra petition (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 4, Page 19) in a Nov. 28 letter to APHA Executive Director Fernando Trevino.  "Quite frankly, the November 14 letter from APHA was a surprise to us, and it is unfortunate that APHA has taken a position on olestra's use in snack foods without a full appreciation of the data," the petitioner said.The company said APHA seemed to have little interest in olestra before P&G had an opportunity to provide a "cursory one-hour overview" of the olestra research program to an APHA health protection analyst.  "A one-hour overview is not a sufficient basis on which to judge the more than 150,000 pages of research data that comprise the olestra food additive petition," the firm said.  Comprehensive clinical testing answered key concerns about the long-term public health impact of olestra snack foods, said the firm, including confirmed safety in people who are more likely to eat lower fat foods than the average person and safety in people with gastrointestinal diseases.  Procter & Gamble responded to APHA's concerns in the 13-page letter.Procter & Gamble's Christopher Hassall offered to meet with APHA to review the research in detail. ((6FCN 4603, 103 pages, $30)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CONSUMER COMMENTS OPPOSING APPROVAL  FLOOD OLESTRA FILEMore than 700 comments have filled the olestra file at FDA's dockets management branch, the vast majority from consumers urging the agency not to approve the fat substitute.While many of the comments were form letters inspired by the Center for Science in the Public Interest's campaign to keep olestra out of the food supply (See preceding story), others were generated by press reports of the four-day FDA Food Advisory  Committee meeting in November held by FDA to consider the data on olestra (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS,  Nov. 20, Pages 17 and 31, and Nov. 27, Page 3).  The comment period on the petition ended Dec. 21.A letter from Terry and Joanie Davis of Eagan, Minn., for example, cited a wire service story of the meeting, asking FDA, "Why allow the sale of a food product that will increase the likelihood of sickness for some and increase health care costs for all?"They noted that a suggested warning label should be required to be printed "in no less than 10 point font for the sight impaired," but added, "Unfortunately, this won't help the unsuspecting guest eater at restaurants or picnics unless the server has a conscience and remembers to warn them."Phytochemical Investigator Urges Denial of PetitionA researcher investigating the anti-cancer potential of phytochemicals warned FDA not to approve the pending food additive petition for olestra, predicting that use of the product may have a negative health impact.Jed Fahey, faculty research associate with the Brassica Chemoprotection Laboratory at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said he was "distressed" by the data indicating that olestra may reduce absorption of many fat-soluble vitamins.  "There are a great number of other, fat-soluble phytochemicals, some of which we are investigating in my laboratory for their anti-cancer potential," Fahey said, adding, "Many of them have yet to even be isolated in pure form and are therefore unavailable for testing.""The inclusion of olestra in commonly consumed American foods has a high probability of effecting the wholesale reduction of a multiplicity of beneficial compounds from the diet of a great many Americans," the letter to FDA Commissioner Dr. David Kessler said, adding, "Based on overwhelming epidemiological evidence, there is a high probability that the use of this product would have a negative health impact."Comments from the American Diabetes Association and the American Heart Association took no specific stand on whether FDA should approve olestra.  ADA said it supports the development and introduction into the marketplace of food products that help people lose or maintain weight, but added that it "looks to and respects the FDA review process for assurance of product safety."  AHA encouraged FDA to continue the review of all fat replacers.  The group noted that many products on the market labeled as "reduced fat" have significant amounts of mono- and diglycerides, which are a source of calories and are metabolized as fat.Comments Commend Conduct of Advisory Committee MeetingThe comments of a variety of researchers supporting approval of the fat substitute -- some of which were sent in by Procter & Gamble, the petition's sponsor --  were also included in the FDA administrative file on olestra.  Many of these letters included positive comments about the conduct of the four-day Food Advisory Committee meeting.The American Dietetic Association said one of its representatives attended the advisory committee and working group meetings on olestra, adding, "We believe that the process allowed for a full airing of ADA's views on this matter.  We fully support the FAC review process, including its interpretation of the data and consideration of public comment."A co-discoverer of olestra, Dr. Fred Mattson, professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California in San Diego, noted that as early work on the compound progressed, "I came to the conclusion that olestra posed no hazard as a food ingredient.""Subsequent studies have served to strengthen this opinion," Mattson said.  He noted that olestra "is now supported by a much wider range of studies, and now many of these are on human subjects.  Moreover, the level of use is inherently limited by the nature of the food products in which it will be used."Nutritionist Johanna Dwyer of Tufts University said her interest in fat substitutes such as olestra led her to independently review some of the studies in the peer-reviewed literature.  Later, she was asked by P&G to review and edit two papers for publication on consumption models and use of the pig and other data for assessing human effects of consuming olestra.  Noting a specific interest in gastrointestinal effects, Dwyer said she requested and received additional information on GI effects, and devoted particular attention to what might be expected at very high levels of intake.At Dwyer's request, P&G sent her blinded samples of olestra-containing potato chips and regular potato chips in amounts that would constitute the 95th percentile of intake.  Dwyer said she ate these potato chips in a single bolus amount for a meal on two separate days and subsequently recorded her own views of signs and symptoms of GI distress.  "I felt more GI distress when eating the regular potato chips, and did not record any differences in stool consistency in this brief experiment," Dwyer wrote.  She noted that very high chronic use might produce changes in the consistency of the stool, but it is "inappropriate to describe these changes as diarrhea."Dwyer said she concluded that the product "is safe and may provide a benefit to some consumers who wish to eat low fat, low saturated fat salty snacks."  She added that the FDA evaluation process and the advisory committee deliberations "were reasonable, thorough and helpful."Dr. Harry Greene, clinical professor of pediatrics at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, said he attended the advisory committee meeting in November and was "extremely impressed with the presentations by the FDA scientists and the presentations by the expert consultants brought in by FDA in providing an unbiased and scientific approach to the relevant studies which have been performed with olestra."CSPI Took Data Out of Context, Researcher ChargesGreene criticized presentations by the Center for Science in the Public Interest, saying much of the data "was taken out of context" or "completely misinterpreted due to a lack of scientifically acceptable statistical evaluation, and in many instances was anecdotal."  In contrast, he said, "the data presented by Procter & Gamble scientists represented clear examples of well controlled, scientifically credible studies."Greene said the chairman of the advisory committee made sure that CSPI had an equal opportunity to present its objections.Also charging that CSPI took data out of context, Dr. Michael Davidson, medical director of the Chicago Center for Clinical Research at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, noted that the clinical studies by P&G "were purposely designed to assess the extreme intakes of olestra in subjects of various body sizes and dietary habits."  Davidson pointed out that olestra "was used to replace almost 50% of the daily fat intake for those in the 32-gram dose group," which he said "included petite young women who were unaccustomed to large intake of non-digestible food.""The vast majority of subjects with gastrointestinal events were women who would rarely consume 32 grams of olestra on a single day, yet were fed 32 grams daily for eight weeks," Davidson added.  He noted that approval of olestra "has significant health implications for the entire U.S. population," since high fat consumption is a leading cause of heart disease, diabetes, cancer and obesity.Researcher Reports Positive Response to Olestra in Nutrition Education StudyDr. John Foreyt of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston said he conducted a study on the use of olestra in a nutrition education program.  Female adults were randomly assigned to either an olestra or non-olestra group, and various food products containing olestra, including shortening, potato chips, oven-ready french fries, and a mayonnaise-type salad, were made available as part of an overall nutrition education program, Foreyt said.  "Response to the product was positive," he commented, noting that subjects in both groups reduced their dietary fat consumption to approximately 30% of total calories. "Responses to our questionnaire suggested that subjects with access to the olestra products experienced less deprivation while reducing dietary fat intake than the subjects without access to the olestra products," Foreyt said, adding that the study is currently in press. "Based on our study, and my reading of the olestra research, I believe that olestra can help consumers lower overall fat intake because it gives them a choice, without sacrificing taste," he said.Dr. Gail Harrison of the University of California School of Public Health in Los Angeles complimented the special consultants utilized by FDA as in-depth review experts on olestra, calling them "absolutely the best in the field."  Harrison added, "Their reports can be relied upon in terms of scientific validity and perspective."Recommending approval of the compound, Harrison said she is "quite thoroughly acquainted with the data base supporting the safety of olestra as it is proposed for use in savory snacks in the U.S. food supply, and am convinced on the basis of reasonable scientific judgment it is safe by the standard that FDA must apply."Other letters recommending approval came from Dr. Elijah Saunders of the University of Maryland's School of Medicine, Division of Hypertension, and Dr. George Bray, executive director of the Pennington Biomedical Research Center at the Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.A letter from Penny Kris-Etherton, professor of nutrition at Penn State University, reiterated conclusions she had presented for P&G at the advisory committee meeting -- that inclusion of olestra snacks would reduce dietary carotenoids over a period of seven days by approximately 10%.  The calculations assumed that all savory snacks included in dietary records randomly selected from study subjects in target groups of interest were olestra-containing snacks, she said. "Obviously, in a real world setting, not all savory snacks consumed will contain olestra.  Nonetheless, I believe that our estimates are reasonable as a means to gain a perspective about the average impact of olestra-containing snacks in different free-living population groups," Kris-Etherton added.  ((6FCN 4608, 26 pages, $11)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PETITION NEEDED TO EXPAND ENERGY SOURCES IN POULTRY FEED IRRADIATION RULE: FDAA food additive petition approved recently by the Food and Drug Administration sought approval only of the use of gamma radiation from cobalt 60 for Salmonella in poultry feed, so a separate or supplemental petition would have to be filed to expand the approval to include other sources of ionizing radiation, the agency said recently (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 2, Page 42, and Nov. 6, Page 17).The Center for Veterinary Medicine's George Graber, director of the division of animal feeds, discussed the petition in a Dec. 6 letter to Paisan Loaharanu, who is part of the Secretariat of the International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation, International Atomic Energy Agency, in Vienna, Austria.  Loaharanu had written to CVM in October, questioning why the final rule permitting the irradiation was limited to gamma rays from cobalt 60 and did not include gamma rays from cesium-137 and electrons and X-rays from machine sources.Loaharanu had asked if there were scientific reasons for this limitation, and questioned whether it would be possible to include other radiation sources in the regulation.Petition, Rule Refer Only to Cobalt 60Graber noted that when Nordion International Inc. filed the food additive petition, FDA sought comment only on the use of gamma radiation from cobalt 60, but said "no public comment was received," and pointed out that the scope of a proceeding for issuing a food additive regulation "is limited by the terms and conditions of use set out in the filed petition.""To the extent that a person seeks to extend the petitioned-for terms and conditions of use, the person must do so by separate or supplemental petition," Graber added.  He thanked Loaharanu for sending a copy of the ICGFI document entitled, "Code of Good Irradiation Practice for the Control of Pathogenic Microorganisms in Poultry Feed."Similar letters were sent to E-Beam Services, Cranbury, N.J., AECL Technologies, Hauppage, N.Y., and Dr. Elsa Murano of the Texas A&M University's Department of Animal Science.  In objections filed following publication of the rule, all had questioned why the regulation limited the source of ionizing radiation to gamma radiation from cobalt 60.In the letters to the companies, Graber noted that nothing in the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act or in FDA's regulations suggests or authorizes that "interested persons use the opportunity to object as an opportunity to expand the authorized use beyond those sought in the petition.""Indeed, the records of the rulemaking (the petition and comments, in this case, none) only contain information concerning the use of cobalt 60, and thus it appears that there would be no support in the record for your objections," he said.If FDA were to proceed to complete its evaluation of the objections and request for a hearing, "it is likely that the agency would deny the request on the basis that the request is beyond the scope of the petitioned action and is more appropriately resolved through the submission of a food additive petition," Graber said, adding that "the proper and more timely resolution is the withdrawal of the objection at this time and submission of a food additive petition."  He urged the companies to withdraw their objections, and offered to meet with them about pursuing a food additive petition.  ((6FCN 4607, 9 pages, $7 )Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996AFDO FLOATS PROPOSED FOOD CODE CHANGES TO MEMBERSProposed changes to the Food and Drug Administration's 1993 Food Code have been sent to members of the Association of Food and Drug Officials by AFDO's Food Committee, with instructions to respond by Jan. 16."The impetus for this action came as a result of a questionnaire sent by the AFDO Food Committee to state officials concerning the 1993 FDA Food Code and subsequent workshops during the [AFDO] Annual Conference," AFDO President Arthur Dell'Aria said in a Dec. 8 letter that accompanied the proposed changes.  In addition, "an Ad Hoc Committee was formed to address this task immediately after the annual conference.  The Ad Hoc Committee included state officials, USDA representation, FDA assistance and representatives from the affected industries" (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, July 3, Page 25).In November, FDA issued a 1995 Food Code, which made a number of minor changes and clarifications to the 1993 Code; an FDA-er referred to the 1995 revision as the "housekeeping edition," intended to clean up language, etc., prior to an anticipated major overhaul for the 1997 Code.  FDA wanted to wait and do the more extensive changes after input is received from AFDO and from the Conference for Food Protection, which meets in April of this year (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Nov. 6, Page 22).Potentially Hazardous Foods Subsection Would Be RemovedThe subsection in Chapter 1 dealing with potentially hazardous foods should be eliminated, AFDO members said, because such a variance is unnecessary.  The original language noted that  a food is not potentially hazardous if "laboratory evidence that is the basis of a variance granted by the regulatory authority demonstrates that rapid and progressive growth of infectious and toxigenic microorganisms or the slower growth of C. botulinum cannot occur." In Chapter 2, AFDO members suggested adding food manager certification "as a means test for demonstration of knowledge."  The additional wording would read:  "... the person in charge shall demonstrate his knowledge by compliance with this code, by being a certified food manager who has demonstrated knowledge of required information through an accredited test or by responding to the inspector's questions when applicable."The special handwash procedure outlined in Chapter 2, which dealt with the procedure food handlers would use after using bathroom facilities, should be eliminated, AFDO members concurred.  Instead, the section should be renamed "handwash procedures" and should be enforced throughout food operations.The variance for recreationally caught scombrotoxin-prone fish and all reference to recreationally caught fish in Chapter 3 should be eliminated, AFDO members said, with the section reading that only fish that are commercially and legally caught and harvested may be received for sale or service.  Also in that chapter, the variance requirement for using more than one tagged or labeled container or shellstock at a time should be eliminated.  The handler(s) would still be required not to commingle differently tagged or labeled groups before the fish is ordered by the consumer.The variance for cooking raw animal foods (such as raw shellfish, steak tartare, soft-cooked eggs, etc.) to required temperatures should be eliminated, AFDO members said, to remove language that grants a variance from the section if based on a HACCP plan.  Instead, consumers ordering such foods must be informed by food establishments of the possible dangers of eating such foods through labeling of menus, table tents, etc., AFDO noted, adding that consumer advisory requirements would be met by the statement:"Thoroughly cooking foods of animal origin such as beef, eggs, fish, lamb, milk, pork, poultry, or shellfish reduces the risk of foodborne illness.  Individuals with certain health conditions may be at higher risk if these foods are consumed raw or undercooked.  Consult your physician or public health official for further information."Two other suggested changes were to eliminate the requirement for a variance before brewing alcoholic beverages or using food additives as a method of flavor enhancement (Chapter 3) and to eliminate the variance requirement for utilizing a molluscan shellfish life-support system display tank for storage and display of shellfish (Chapter 4).  However, the tank system would remain part of a hazard analysis critical control point system that assures that safety and quality of the fish is not harmed through the use of such a tank, among other requirements, AFDO members noted.Ad Hoc Committee Specific Recommendations Cover Food Handling, Holding TemperaturesThe AFDO Ad Hoc Committee had a number of specific recommendations of its own, including rewording of a Chapter 2 section on the responsibilities of the "person in charge," to include food handling requirements, training and the explanation of responsibilities.  Suggested new wording included:  "Employees are preventing cross-contamination of ready-to-eat food with their bare hands by properly using suitable utensils such as deli tissue, spatulas, tongs or single-use gloves; employees are properly trained in food safety; and the responsibilities, rights and authorities assigned by this Code are explained to the:  1) food employee; 2) person in charge, and 3) regulatory authority."In Chapter 3, the committee suggested the addition of a cooking chart that includes minimum cooking times and temperatures for a variety of cooked meats, eggs and related products  -- "145 F (63 C) for 15 seconds for shell eggs for individual order, immediate service, fish, seafood, beef, veal, lamb, mutton, etc., not specified below; 155 F (68 C) at 15 seconds, or 150 F (68 FC) for 1 minute, or 145 F(63 C) for 3 minutes, for pork, game animals, ground chopped meat and fish, injected meats and eggs in multi-serving batches; and 165 F (74 C) for 15 seconds for field-dressed wild game, poultry, stuffed fish, meat pasta or poultry, or stuffing containing fish, meat or poultry."An exemption in the cooking time/temperature requirements should be made for whole muscle intact beef steaks prepared in response to a consumer's order, the committee noted, adding that reheating for hot holding requirements should be changed so that the two-hour rapid heating requirement would be applied to all reheating practices.While leaving intact the code's requirements that potentially hazardous foods should be stored for hot holding at 140 F (60 C) or above or at 41 F (5 C) or below, the AFDO committee suggested language be added to allow for 45 F refrigerated storage of potentially hazardous food "provided the mechanical refrigeration unit in which the food is held is incapable of meeting the [41 F or below] requirements; is currently in place and in use; and is replaced with a unit that can meet the [41 F or below] requirement when replacement is required."The section in Chapter 3 dealing with ready-to-eat, potentially hazardous food disposition would also be significantly changed by the ad hoc committee, the report explained:"An addition here would require an automatic cut-off control activated by temperatures above 45 F for vending machines that dispense ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food.  Disposition of temperature-abused foods from such systems would be consistent with the requirements for other potentially hazardous food (five days or 10 days).  The reference to manufacturers' 'sell by' or 'use by' date is removed, as they are not present on many potentially hazardous foods and are not enforced by most states."As for time as a public health control, the committee recommended a change in wording so that hot food would have to be served or discarded within two hours from the point in time when the food is removed from temperature control (the code's four-hour rule would remain in effect for cold foods). The committee said the exception for pyrethrin-based compounds should be removed from the Chapter 7 section on application of pesticides.  Also, pesticide treatment by uncertified persons under the direct supervision of a certified person would be allowed.  The change was suggested so that a broad interpretation of "applicable law" regarding application of pesticides would be allowed.In addition, AFDO is recommending a number of rewording, editing and reformatting changes for simplification or clarification.  ((6FCN 4601, 145 pages, $41).Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FSIS IDENTIFIES REFORMS NEEDED BEFORE HACCP IMPLEMENTATIONThe Food Safety and Inspection Service Dec. 29 identified several areas of reform it says are necessary, both as part of the Reinventing Government initiative and because the regulations in question need to be changed before the planned implementation of a hazard analysis critical control point system for meat and poultry inspection (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Sept. 11, Page 46, and related stories, Pages 25 and 41).The advance notice of proposed rulemaking lists a number of proposed areas ripe for modification or elimination because they are inconsistent with HACCP principles.  Such regulatory changes will be made before HACCP is implemented in plants, the ANPR added.Regulations mentioned in the ANPR fall into broad categories, such as:  definitions; inauguration, suspension and withdrawal of suspension; appeals procedures and related administrative procedures; reinspection of product entering establishments, and retention and disposition of product; restrictive, command-and-control type regulations that delimit processing and treatment methods intended to eliminate specific food safety hazards; and recordkeeping and access to records under the Freedom of Information Act.The ANPR invited comment on any of these areas, and added that "FSIS specifically requests comment on its efforts to transform regulations from heavy reliance on command-and-control approaches to greater reliance on performance standards, and solicits detailed suggestions concerning which existing regulations need to be changed to be consistent with HACCP, and how those regulations should be changed."Several specific candidates for revision or removal were presented in the ANPR.  Under "definition":Include general HACCP-related terms and redefine inspection organization and activity terms.Under "application for and grant or refusal of inspection":Revise prior approval procedures; shift to performance standards.Under "inauguration and withdrawal of inspection; inspection program employees":Clarify role of inspection program.  Integrate this with rules for suspending and withdrawing inspection.Assure that appeals procedures comport with enforcement under HACCP.Under "facilities for inspection":Clarify standards for essential facilities.Convert requirements for sanitation and facilities to performance standards or decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Simplify detailed requirements for equipment and cleanliness, for example; convert to performance standards and/or decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Convert equipment and cleaning requirements to performance standards and/or decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Remove obsolete provisions for slack barrels, similar containers and means of conveyance, and burlap wrapping.Clarify decision criteria concerning employment of diseased persons.Convert tagging insanitary equipment, utensils, rooms and compartments provisions to performance standards; clarify role of inspection program employees.Update rules for temperatures and chilling and freezing procedures for poultry and make changes to accommodate HACCP (i.e., changes in addition to pathogen reduction amendments proposed 2/3/95).Under "entry into official establishments, reinspection; reinspections, preparing and processing establishments":Convert rules for articles entering establishments and product disposal to performance standards and clarify role of inspection program employees.Eliminate prior approval procedures for total quality control systems.Convert requirements for processing procedures and articles used in preparing products to performance standards, and clarify role of inspection program employees.Eliminate command-and-control type requirements for the use of nitrite and sodium ascorbate or erythorbate in bacon; convert these requirements to performance standards and clarify role of inspection program employees.Convert requirements for the treatment of pork and pork products to destroy trichinae into performance standards; supplement with guidelines as needed.Convert requirements for preparing articles not for use as human food (e.g., dog food) to performance standards; clarify role of inspection program employees; eliminate command-and-control type requirements.Eliminate redundancy with other provisions (i.e., mixtures containing products that are not classed as meat food products).Convert procedure for handling product adulterated by polluted water to performance standards and decision criteria; supplement with guidelines as needed.Convert requirements for tagging chemicals, preservatives, cereals, spices, etc., to performance standards; clarify role of inspection program employees.Convert rules for substances such as pesticide chemical residues, food additives and color additives to performance standards and role of inspection program employees.Make requirements for handling of certain material for mechanical deboning consistent with any new time-temperature requirements.Convert compliance procedures for meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems to performance standards, and clarify role of inspection program employees.Convert requirements for canning and canned products to performance standards and clarify role of inspection program employees.Under "transportation":Eliminate obsolete provisions; focus on and clarify policies and performance standards.Comments are due Feb. 27.  For more information, contact Paula Cohen at 202-720-7164.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IBP COMPLAINS OF RED MEAT, POULTRY EQUITY ISSUES AT HACCP MEETINGSIBP, Inc. complained in a recent letter to the Food Safety and Inspection Service that recent meetings on the HACCP/Pathogen Reduction proposal should have focused on red meat versus poultry regulatory equity issues.In the letter to USDA Acting Undersecretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor, the Nebraska firm's James Lochner said he attended all six of the HACCP public meetings and the Food Safety Forum (See Food Chemical News, Nov. 13, Page 32), but that there was "insufficient focus on red meat versus poultry regulatory equity issues." "There is ample published research demonstrating increased food safety risks with poultry as a result of current processes allowed by FSIS poultry regulations," Lochner said, questioning "why these issues have not been addressed in more detail."  In the second round of comments to the proposal, IBP stressed the importance of microbiological testing in HACCP validation and ongoing HACCP verification.  The firm also stressed that insufficient data exist to use indicator organisms for a performance standard.  "IBP believes USDA has only one choice: microbiological guidelines as a HACCP verification component.  This is the only viable solution until data is generated on an ongoing basis and then related to an increased risk of human health."   Validation should be defined as documenting a critical control point that eliminates microbiological hazards, IBP said, and, "When possible, validation should demonstrate the elimination of pertinent pathogens, i.e., Salmonella and Escherichia coli O157:H7."  Validation, Lochner added, should be conducted either off-line in a research facility or with extensive on-line testing using indicator organisms, or with past reported research.Verification Testing Based on Volume for Large Plants, Time for Small Plants SuggestedVerification should be defined as an ongoing demonstration of control with microbiological testing to verify that the process is in control, according to Lochner IBP's senior vice president, technical services.  USDA should prescribe minimum frequencies for an acceptable HACCP program based on volume for large plants and time frame for small plants, IBP's Lochner told Taylor, recommending one microbiological verification test per species per 1,000 head increment per week for large meat and poultry plants and a minimum sample frequency of once a week for small plants.  For fresh meat and poultry plants that are not slaughter plants, microbiological testing as a HACCP verification should focus on relative change and operational sanitation, Lochner said.All plants should be required to submit their ongoing HACCP microbiological verification results to USDA, which will then generate averages and baselines over a two-year period.  USDA will need to develop details on where samples are taken, how they are handled, and laboratory methods for the information to be useful, IBP said. In other comments, the firm recommended that USDA develop criteria for a process step to be classified as an antimicrobial treatment, adding that a one log reduction was not an effective criterion.  Also, USDA should allow carcass cooling rates to be incorporated into HACCP programs with micro validation and verification to demonstrate that the chill rates control growth of indicator organisms or pathogens.  USDA must reconsider the use of immersion chilling in poultry "if it seriously wants to improve the protection of public health," IBP added.Finally, IBP urged USDA to move quickly in implementing the sweeping regulations and suggested that if certain industries or companies are unwilling to improve the process, then USDA may require mandatory controls.  "These cannot be political decisions," Lochner added.  ((6FCN 4606, 8 pages, $6)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996L. MONOCYTOGENES, B. CEREUS CONTAMINATION PROMPT WARNINGS TO WHITEFISH, PEDIATRIC MEDICAL FOOD MANUFACTURERSDetection of Listeria monocytogenes in processed whitefish roe prompted a warning letter from the Food and Drug Administration to a Wisconsin fish roe manufacturing operation.  The Dec. 11 letter from FDA's Minneapolis District to James Vander Mause, president, Atlas International, Inc., Jefferson, Wis., said the pathogen was detected in a sample collected during an inspection of the facility.FDA said that according to documents obtained during the inspection, Atlas does not sample and analyze incoming whitefish roe for microbiological pathogens, nor does the firm obtain "written assurance from suppliers that the roe is in compliance with federal laws and regulations."  The agency urged Vander Mause to incorporate a mechanism to "assure" that incoming fish roe will not be contaminated.  Failure to assure compliance with laws and regulations may result in regulatory action without further notice, FDA warned Vander Mause.  The agency said he should notify the agency of "specific steps" taken to correct these deficiencies. Contamination with diarrheal enterotoxin producing Bacillus cereus has caused a pediatric medical food to be deemed adulterated, according to a warning letter from FDA's Minneapolis District.  The Dec. 1 letter to David Pyott, president/CEO, Sandoz Nutrition, Inc., St. Louis Park, Minn., said samples of the firm's Vivonex Pediatric Medical Food were found to be contaminated.  While acknowledging that the contamination was "spotty," the agency said several portions contained >100 B. cereus and of the isolates tested for enterotoxin production, all were found to produce enterotoxin.  FDA noted that the Sandoz contention that there was no significance to the B. cereus findings was based on several assumptions:  the strain will not grow at a pH of 4.85; there is a four-hour growth lag period after hydration, and room temperature storage "significantly decreases" rate of growth.  The agency added, however, that while this may "normally be the case," it should not be assumed for this strain, "particularly in a food intended for individuals of compromised health."  Pyott was warned that failure to assure compliance with laws and regulations may result in regulatory action without further notice.  The agency said he should notify the agency of "specific steps" taken to achieve correction of these deficiencies.Insanitary Processing, Storage Conditions Lead to Warnings for Mushroom Processing PlantMichael Giorgio, owner, Prima Foods, Inc., Rehrersburg, Pa., received a warning from FDA's Philadelphia District concerning violations of acidified food manufacturing regulations.The Dec. 7 letter said an inspection of Giorgio's mushroom processing plant revealed the following deficiencies:water in washing tank was not changed during a full day's processing and became "increasingly dirty," resulting in mushrooms still bearing soil entering the blancher;blancher observed with discolored mushrooms and "grease-like" material adhering to it;equipment used to hold mushrooms before and after blanching was not "adequately cleaned";walk-in cooler has a drain pipe leading directly outside and the pipe was not screened to prevent pest entry;mushrooms packed in brine remained on packing floor for several hours before being refrigerated, with mushrooms labeled for refrigeration at 35 F stored in a cooler at 47 F;brine solution for coldpack mushrooms was stored in open vat and hand-dipped to fill mushroom container, with ascorbic acid used in brine preparation stored in uncovered container;pH meter was used without being standardized;blancher auger had flaked rust between blades and the rubber conveyor leading into blancher was frayed at edges, and a "large amount" of steam built up in the building.In addition, FDA noted that several mushroom samples were found to contain "very high levels" of bacteria, leading the agency to be concerned that this may be "indicative of poor processing or handling practices."FDA said that Giorgio acknowledged that Prima Foods should have "ceased production" of the mushrooms and that should the firm wish to make these foods in the future, registration as an acidified food manufacturer is required.'Serious Violations' Alleged at California Fish Processing OperationFDA's San Francisco District sent a warning letter to Robert Johnson, president, MFM, Inc., Berkeley, Calif., saying that an inspection of his shell fish and fin fish processing operations in San Francisco revealed "serious violations" of food manufacturing regulations.  According to the Dec. 1 letter:water lines serving processing operations lacked backflow prevention devices;raw shrimp were held in a metal, perforated container, placed directly on a wet floor and washed with a water spray from a hand-held hose;inspectors observed soap suds draining from drain board containing thawing shrimp, large drinking cup floating in sink, fork "nearly submerged" among shrimp and "personnel items" on drain board;chemical cleaners were stored on shelf directly above fish in open cardboard box;employees were seen handling hoses and other non-food items then resuming processing of seafood without washing or sanitizing hands, andan unprotected ice machine, with standing water in three-sided trough at its base, was located in an area allowing car and forklift traffic.FDA also said that L. monocytogenes, Type 1, was detected in a swab sample taken from the surface of a packaging table.  The swab was among several other environmental swabs found to be negative for Listeria and Salmonella microorganisms.  Johnson was told to take "appropriate steps" to correct these violations to prevent adulteration of foods processed by the facility.  Adulterated foods are subject to seizure, the agency added.  Insect, Rodent Findings at Bakery Draw Warning LetterAn FDA warning letter to Ralph Pacifico, president, Angelo Pacifico & Sons, Inc., Altoona, Pa., said insanitary conditions at the bakery resulted in bakery products being adulterated.  The Nov. 22 letter from the agency's Philadelphia District said beetle-like insects and one larval stage insect were found throughout the flour storage and conveyor system, one dead mouse was found on the production floor near mixes, and exposed bread products and "potential rodent entry points" were observed.FDA said its laboratory analysis of flour revealed insects in various stages of the beetle life cycle, indicating nesting.  Analysis of various finished bread products revealed rodent hair, insect fragments and cat or dog hair, the agency added.  During the inspection of the bakery, it was noted that the conveyor and access panels were welded or glued shut, making inspection and cleaning "more difficult," FDA noted.  The firm's response that it would initiate a program aimed at cleaning the whole flour system "until no further insect nesting activity is noticed" is not sufficient, the agency added, saying that the company needs an "effective, ongoing sanitation program" to eliminate the insanitary conditions.  Pacifico was told to take prompt action to correct these deficiencies.  Failure to do so, the agency added, may result in regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.    'Insanitary Conditions' Cause Stored Foods To Be Deemed AdulteratedFoods at an Alabama warehouse have been deemed adulterated due to "insanitary conditions," according to a warning letter from FDA's Nashville District.The Dec. 12 letter to J. Barton Greer, Jr., chairman of the board, Autry Greer & Sons, Prichard, said an inspection of the facility revealed a "widespread insect infestation" in the dry storage portion of the warehouse; spilled products at numerous locations within the warehouse; food products stored directly against the wall; insecticides and other hazardous chemicals stored directly adjacent to food items; poor handling of distressed food products, and damaged floors and walls in produce and meat coolers.  In addition, FDA said that 10 separate lots of food products, including flour, cornmeal, rice, beans and instant pudding, were found to be insect infested.Greer was told to take prompt action to correct these deficiencies or face possible regulatory action such as seizure and/or injunction.  Undeclared Colors Prompt Warning LettersFDA's Chicago District sent a warning letter to Rashid Sweiss, president, Eden International, Inc., Blue Island, Ill., concerning misbranding of two of the firm's products. The Aug. 30 letter said that "Eden's Red Chickpeas" contained undeclared FD&C Red #3 and "Eden's Gourmet Mix" contained undeclared FD&C Red #40.  FDA also advised Sweiss that net contents need to be declared in metric as well as in inch-pound units.  Sweiss was told to inform the agency of steps taken to correct the violations.  Airlines Warned About Insanitary Processing Facilities, Public Conveyance Violations Food processing and watering point violations involving the airline industry were subjects of warning letters from FDA's San Francisco District.Herbert Kelleher, president and CEO, Southwest Airlines, received a Nov. 21 letter pointing out several processing deficiencies as well as watering point violations.The insanitary conditions resulted in a classification of the facilities as "Not Approved."  A "Non-Approved" or "Use Prohibited" classification was awarded to a facility serving the airline industry, according to another warning letter from FDA's San Francisco District.The Dec. 1 letter to David Tam, president, Tam Fresh Cut-Pack, Inc., Sacramento, Calif., said an inspection of the facility revealed the following:  lack of chemical test kits for chlorine sanitizer; standing water on floor near vegetable sink and floor of walk-in refrigerator; vegetables in boxes stored directly on refrigerator floors; knives on soiled surfaces were not sanitized; lack of functional thermometers in walk-in refrigerators; accumulation of old, slimy vegetable debris on onion slicer; accumulation of old food debris on exterior of scales; waste water flows across driveway to sewer, with employees seen walking through this water while cleaning food containers; unshielded fluorescent lights over processing areas, and unsealed hole in double wall in production area providing possible hole in the wall for vermin. Both Kelleher and Tam were told to notify the agency of steps taken to correct the violations.  Manufacturing, Labeling Violations of Vet Products Disclosed in FDA WarningsFailure to follow good manufacturing practice regulations for finished pharmaceuticals resulted in FDA issuing a warning to a Missouri veterinary drug manufacturer.The Dec. 5 letter from FDA's Kansas City District to Henry Bobe, president/chief executive officer, Fermenta Animal Health Company, said an inspection of the firm's Elwood, Kan., facility revealed the following "significant deviations":failure to establish and follow an adequate process validation plan for all tablet, bolus and powder products to assure they have the identity, strength, quality and purity they purport or are represented to possess;failure to include directions in certain product Master Formula Records to recirculate product from the dead space at the base of the ribbon blender, and failure to have in place an adequate method validation for finished product analysis.  Noting that the inspection consisted in part of pre-approval review of manufacturing compliance, FDA said the deviations must be corrected before the district can concur with approval of the ANADAs and it has therefore recommended to the Center for Veterinary Medicine that approval of these ANADAs be withheld.  FDA said the inspection also revealed that a manufacturing change had been instituted for another product "without CVM approval."   Bobe was told to notify FDA of the specific steps taken to correct the noted violations.  FDA's Los Angeles District sent a warning letter to Louis Gottlieb, president, Very Healthy Enterprises, Inglewood, Calif., noting that several of the firms products are new animal drugs which are not the subject of approved NADAs.The April 3 letter said that a new animal drug may not be legally marketed unless it is the subject of an approved NADA.  FDA said the following products are not generally recognized as safe and effective for the indications for use in their labeling:Ear Relief Natural Medicine & Ear Cleanser for Dogs and Cats; Scratch Free Natural Medicine for Dogs and Cats; Eye-C Eye Medicine for Dogs and Cats with Vitamin C and Zinc (Zinc Plus C Ophthalmic Solution); Flea Relief Natural Medicine and Diar-relief Natural Medicine.Gottlieb was told to take prompt action to correct these violations or face possible regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.FDA's Buffalo District has warned a veterinary products company that it is manufacturing/repacking and distributing adulterated and misbranded new animal drugs.In a May 17 letter to Richard Sanzen, president, Equest Inc., Saratoga Veterinary Products Co., Saratoga Springs, N.Y., FDA said no NADAs are in effect for the firm's Equi-Spaz Paste, Re-Coup and Doloflex products.  The firm's failure to provide FDA with a  list all drugs manufactured/repacked results in the products being deemed misbranded, FDA said.  The agency said Sanzen should take action to ensure that the firm meets all federal law and regulation requirements.Violations of Medicated Feed Mill Regulations Described in FDA WarningsPhil Yoder, president, Yoder Feeds, Kalona, Iowa, received a warning letter from FDA's Kansas City District concerning violations of federal current good manufacturing regulations for medicated feeds.  The Oct. 18 letter said an inspection of the facility revealed a failure to perform assays at periodic intervals for all medicated feeds requiring approved applications, and the use of Type A articles in the manufacture of medicated feeds beyond their labeled expiration dates.  Failure to correct these deficiencies may result in regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice, FDA said.  The Kansas City District also sent a warning letter to Leland Smith, president, Custom Feed Services Corp., Norfolk, Nebr. concerning medicated feed manufacturing violations.In the June 30 letter, FDA said an inspection of Smith's facility revealed a failure to conduct the required number of assays of medicated feeds in a calendar year.Smith was informed by FDA that failure to correct these deficiencies may result in regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.FDA's Cincinnati District sent a similar letter to Leslie Gossett, terminal manager, PM AG Products, Inc., Owensboro, Ky.  In its Dec. 7 letter, the agency said deviations from medicated feed regulations included the failure to:  provide a drug scale suitable for the units or weights for which it is used; assure daily inventory records are accurate and adequate, and check batch records to determine that all required steps have been performed, as errors were found in drug receipt and production records.Gossett was urged by FDA to establish procedures whereby such violations do not recur.  Until the violations have been corrected and the corrections verified by FDA, CVM will not approved medicated feed applications from the facility, the agency added.FDA Notes Illegal Drug Residues in Animals Intended for Human FoodFDA's Seattle District warned two animal producers concerning the detection of illegal drug residues in animals intended for use as human food.In an April 13 letter to Cornelius Timmermans, Lynden, Wash., FDA said a USDA analysis of a calf revealed the presence of neomycin at 7.27 ppm and tetracycline at 0.96 ppm in the kidney.  Neomycin residues in the kidney of another calf were found at 41.54 ppm, the agency noted.Al and Anna Biemold, Cascade Farms, Everson, Wash., also received a warning letter from the Seattle District.  The April 3 letter said a USDA analysis of a bob veal calf detected residues of neomycin at 3.31 ppm and 8.80 ppm tetracycline in kidney tissue.Timmermans and the Biemolds were told to correct the violations and to establish procedures to prevent their recurrence.  Failure to do so, FDA added, may result in regulatory action without further notice.Two warning letters concerning detection of illegal drug residues were also sent by FDA's Cincinnati District.A Dec. 11 letter to Ray Geiser, Apple Creek, Ohio, said a USDA analysis of a bob veal calf revealed the presence of 0.48 ppm penicillin in the kidney and 0.43 ppm in the liver.  In a Dec. 4 letter, Roger Morlock, Valley City, Ohio, was told that a USDA analysis of a bob veal calf detected tetracycline in the liver at 1.3 ppm and in the kidney at 4.3 ppm.  FDA said Geiser and Morlock hold animals under conditions "so inadequate" that diseased animals and/or medicated animals bearing potentially harmful drug residues are likely to enter the food chain.  Both were urged to correct these violations and to establish procedures to prevent their recurrence.Louis Agueda, Merced, Calif., received a warning from FDA's San Francisco District.  The Nov. 15 letter said a USDA analysis of a cull dairy cow revealed the presence of oxytetracycline in the liver at 5.3 ppm and in the kidney at 0.26 ppm.  Noting that Agueda has "a history" of offering adulterated animals for sale for human food, FDA said other animals contained illegal antibiotic residues and one tested CAST positive.  FDA said Agueda lacks adequate systems for determining the medicated status of animals, for assuring that medicated animals are withheld from slaughter for appropriate periods of time and for assuring that drugs are used according to label directions.  The agency added that Agueda should correct these deficiencies or face regulatory action, such as seizure and/or injunction, without further notice.  ((6FCN 4610, 45 pages, $16)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SINGLE PETITION PROCESS FOR ADDITIVES TO BE USED ON MEAT OR POULTRY PROPOSED BY FSIS, FDAThe Food and Drug Administration and Agriculture Department's Food Safety and Inspection Service Dec. 29 proposed a simplification of the review process for food additive, color additive and generally recognized as safe affirmation petitions for substances that are to be used on meat or poultry products.  Currently, such products must go through separate FDA and FSIS reviews, the proposal suggests a single joint review instead. There were two notices published on the issue, one from FDA, one from FSIS, both in the Dec. 29 Federal Register.Under the proposal, a single petition would be submitted to FDA, which would pass on pertinent petitions or parts of petitions to FSIS.  Future FSIS listings for meat and poultry additives would be harmonized with those of FDA and incorporated into FDA's regulations, "providing a basis for the eventual elimination of FSIS' separate listing in Title 9 CFR," said the FDA notice.  An FSIS notice said that the Title 9 review will occur in three to five years, leading to the elimination of duplicative listings found in FDA's Title 21.  FSIS will continue to retain a small list of specific substance use prohibitions and will add new prohibitions as necessary, the FSIS notice said.FAPs, CAPs and GRAS affirmation petitions not involving use in meat, meat products or poultry would not be affected by this proposal, and would continue to be reviewed by FDA only.The two agencies developed a memorandum of understanding on how they will work together in reviewing such petitions.  Basically, according to the MOU published in the FSIS notice, FDA will share pertinent petitions with FSIS, and FSIS will provide advice to FDA on any criteria, restrictions, conditions of use or other prohibitions that may be necessitated by the Federal Meat Inspection Act or the Poultry Products Inspection Act.Some notable specifics of that MOU include:"In situations where FSIS' Title 9 and FDA's Title 21 do not specifically address the intended use of a particular substance for meat or poultry products, any interested party may request that FSIS evaluate the status of such use.  FSIS will conduct a review and determine whether the use is acceptable in meat and poultry products, including whether the use is approved under the FFDCA (Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act).  Under the terms of the MOU, FSIS would seek FDA's concurrence with FSIS' review and conclusions.  If FDA does not concur that the use is approved under the FFDCA, the petitioner would be required to submit a food additive or color additive petition to FDA requesting that FDA's regulations be amended to accommodate the requested use."In situations in which FDA receives a petition for the use of a substance or a use of a substance that is not approved under the FFDCA, a petitioner shall prepare and submit a food additive petition or a color additive petition only to FDA.  FDA will consult with FSIS regarding petitions for meat and poultry use, and, under the terms of the MOU, FSIS concurrence would be required for the approval of the use of substances intended for use in meat and poultry and that are codified in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations."FSIS will provide any advice to FDA, in writing, on any criteria, restrictions, conditions of use, or prohibitions FSIS believes necessary concerning use of the products subject to the FMIA and the PPIA."Requests for a determination (by FSIS) of the acceptability of substances may result in the need for rulemaking when (1) FSIS standards of identity and composition preclude the use of a substance; or (2) there is concern about the suitability of a substance for the intended use because the substance has never been used in meat and poultry before, or the applications of the substance are new, e.g., a new meat, meat food, or poultry product category."Requests for determination of acceptability of new substances and new uses of substances in meat and poultry products are currently submitted by the requester ... to FSIS.  FSIS will continue to require that a request for an acceptability determination for the use of a new substance in meat and poultry or for the new use of an approved substance be supported by information and technical data that establish that (1) the use of the substance will not render the product in which it is used adulterated or misbranded and (2) the proposed use of the substance is at the lowest level necessary to accomplish the intended technical effect(s) in each category of the product in which the substance is used."The evaluation by FSIS of the acceptable use of a new substance or new use of a substance in meat and poultry products subject to this MOU will be based on the following conditions that must be addressed by the requester.  The conditions set forth are in accordance with the provisions for use of substances in 9 CFR and 21 CFR:  (1) The substance has a documented history of use in foods; (2) The substance is derived from food or a food ingredient and is not considered to be a chemical or synthesized additive; (3) The process for manufacturing the substance does not result in a severe alteration of the molecular structure resulting in the formation of a chemical residue whose safety has not been shown; (4) The safety of the substance has been evaluated by an independent authority and adequate safety data have been presented; (5) The suitability and efficacy of the substance have been shown through adequate data submission.  The lowest level of the substance necessary to achieve the intended functional effect must be shown, and the use cannot render the products to which the substance is intended for use adulterated or misbranded; (6) The FDA has determined the common or usual name of the substance, and (7) FDA must concur with FSIS' determination of acceptability in order to allow use."Proposal Part of FSIS Reinventing Government ProcessSeveral regulatory reforms were published by FSIS Dec. 29 (See related stories, Pages 18 and 41).  "By adopting modern regulatory tools and streamlining or eliminating old rules and requirements, we will enhance the safety of meat and poultry products on the tables of America," said USDA Acting Under Secretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor in a Jan. 2 statement.  The proposals were all part of the agency's Reinventing Government initiative (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Sept. 11, 1995, Page 46).According to the Dec. 29 FDA Federal Register notice, the reason for the change was that:"Over the years, the two agencies have cooperated on food ingredient issues on an as-needed, substance-specific, and case-by-case basis.  Nonetheless, because of their different regulatory needs, the two agencies' regulations governing the use of these substances in foods are cast in formats and terms that are not fully consistent with one another.  This absence of consistency causes difficulty and inconvenience to persons who need to refer to both agencies' regulations on approved substances and uses."In addition, it is not clear where one agency's jurisdiction ends and another's begins, the notice said, and this has led to both agencies conducting separate, sequential review and rulemakings before a new meat or poultry use can be permitted.  "Many years can elapse between the time a manufacturer petitions FDA for the approval of a food additive or a color additive under the act and the appearance of FSIS regulations of approval for meat and poultry uses," the FDA notice said.The notice went on to say that under the proposal, such substances would be authorized for use in meat and poultry products under the jurisdiction of FSIS on the basis of FDA's regulations.  Future FDA food additive, color additive and GRAS substance affirmation listings would specify any approved meat or poultry product uses, and the conditions of such uses, in accordance with FSIS recommendations "to the extent those recommendations are consistent with" the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.In the future, FDA will include in its listings the amounts and uses of substances permitted for meat and poultry products, the FSIS notice proposed.Also, the administrator of FSIS would retain legal authority to prohibit or restrict the use of specific substance(s) in meat or poultry products by notice-and-comment rulemaking, "but is not expected to have to exercise that authority on a regular basis because FDA's statutory authority, exercised in accord with the MOU, would provide a basis for appropriate limitations on uses in meat and poultry products," it continued.Another proposed change in the regulations states that sorbic acid, calcium carbonate, and other salts of sorbic acid "shall not" (as opposed to the current "may not") "be used in cooked sausage or any other product; sulfurous acid and salts of sulfurous acid shall not be used in or on any product, and niacin or nicotinamide shall not be used in or on fresh product, except that potassium sorbate, propylparaben (propyl p- hydrobenzoate), calcium propionate, sodium propionate, benzoic acid, and sodium benzoate may be used in or on any product provided in 21 CFR or by a regulation in this subchapter" --         9 CFR 318.1(d)(2).GRAS Products Subject of Special Provision"Substances whose use is GRAS, however, are exempt from the premarket approval requirements of the act and need not be listed in FDA's regulations in 21 CFR.  For a substance that is not affirmed by FDA as GRAS or otherwise listed (in 21 CFR parts 182 or 184) of FDA's regulations, or for a GRAS substance listed by FDA for general food use, where meat and poultry uses are neither specified not prohibited, FSIS would continue to consider a manufacturer's basis for claiming GRAS status and suitability for use in meat or poultry products,"the notice said, adding that FSIS would make the determination in consultation with FDA as needed to ensure the appropriate advice is given and that FDA has notice of the determination.Substances currently listed as GRAS for food use generally (in accordance with good manufacturing practices) would be considered GRAS by USDA for use in meat, meat food products and poultry products, unless otherwise restricted by FSIS regulations such as standards of identity or composition, "or in specific cases where the inspection program determines that use may adulterate the product," FSIS added.Manufacturers also have the option of seeking advice from FSIS regarding the suitability of products currently listed in FDA regulations for general use in foods or for use in meat or poultry products.  "FSIS' responses and related correspondence could be available to the public, except that the formulation and process data for proprietary mixtures would be kept confidential," the FSIS proposal said, adding:  "Parties requesting such evaluations would be advised to petition FDA when the requested use is not permitted under FDA's regulations."The notice said that such inquiries should be addressed to Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service, Product Assessment Division, USDA, FSIS, RP, West End Court Building, Washington, DC 20250-3700.FSIS Will Maintain Listing of Authorized Substances for Interested Parties"FSIS' title 9 listing of authorized substances is incomplete, inconsistent with, and duplicative of FDA's listings," said the FSIS notice.  "The agency plans to eliminate its current listing over time by rulemaking as listings are determined to be duplicative of FDA regulations.  However, FSIS will retain its own regulations on specific substance use prohibitions and will add new prohibitions as necessary."Also, for the convenience of its inspectors, inspected establishments and other interested persons, FSIS will maintain a comprehensive listing, in its directive system, of substances authorized for meat and poultry uses under USDA's 9 CFR and FDA's 21 CFR.  This listing will include:Substances currently listed in 9 CFR;Substances currently listed for meat or poultry uses in FDA food additive, GRAS or prior-sanctioned listings;Approved color additives currently listed under FDA regulations (21 CFR section 73,74, and 82), approved food additives listed in 21 CFR 172-173 and 180, prior sanctioned substances listed under part 181, GRAS substances listed in 21 CFR 182 and 184, if permitted for general use on foods (which includes meat and poultry) in accordance with good manufacturing practices, unless meat or poultry uses of the substances are otherwise precluded;GRAS substances found by FSIS to be suitable for specified meat and poultry uses on the basis of information and data submitted by petitioners to FSIS.  Factors affecting FSIS findings of suitability include:  Existing FDA GRAS listings, which need not explicitly permit but may not preclude the specific use in meat or poultry products; and, concurrence of FSIS with the petitioners and FDA acceptance of FSIS' determination;FDA food additive, color additive, GRAS, prior-sanctioned substance listings promulgated after this proposal becomes final that provide for meat and poultry uses.Comments must be received by Feb. 27 (at FSIS) or March 14 (at FDA).  For more information, contact FSIS' Ralph Stafko at 202-720-8168 or FDA's George Pauli at 202-418-3090.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NU-TECH POULTRY SYSTEM RESULTS IN LESS VISIBLE CONTAMINATION BUT SIMILAR MICRO COUNTS, FSIS SAYSAn automated poultry evisceration system being tested in a Georgia plant significantly reduced visible carcass contamination over a Streamlined Inspection System line, but microbiology tests between the two lines were not significantly different, according to a Food Safety and Inspection Service midterm report on the pilot project (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 23, Page 30).The October report on Stork Gamco's Nu-Tech Poultry Processing System, being tested in a Gainesville ConAgra plant, concluded that "the data supports continuing the pilot and approving a second pilot to verify the Nu-Tech system."  The Nu-Tech system operates at up to 140 birds per minute, with four USDA inspectors.Postmortem disposition agreement for the Nu-Tech and SIS-2 lines compared favorably (0.7% for the Nu-Tech line vs. 0.4% for the SIS-2 line) and supports the acceptability of the inspection procedure, the FSIS report said, adding that "higher condemnation rates on the Nu-Tech line may be due to improved visibility of the viscera target organs and the inside carcass cavity."The Nu-Tech system's complete evisceration prior to inspection "greatly reduced internal and external visible contamination (digestive tract contents, feces, gall)," the FSIS report said, adding, "Visibly cleaner carcasses were presented for inspection.  Carcasses prior to final washing and chilling were visibly cleaner.  Visible contamination on the Nu-Tech line remained constant from post-evisceration to the final wash at 11% outside contamination and 4%-5% inside contamination.  Visible contamination was markedly higher and increased on the SIS-2 line from post-evisceration to the final wash from 19%-27% outside contamination and 12%-15% inside contamination."  The Nu-Tech evisceration probe causes less organ damage compared to the conventional spoon eviscerator, FSIS said.The number of carcasses identified for reprocessing at the inspection stations was similar for both systems.  The Nu-Tech line was higher, as expected, FSIS said, adding, "The one-step evisceration on the Nu-Tech line prior to inspection allows for greater visibility inside the bird.  The SIS-2 reprocessing rate does not include the inside and outside carcass contamination observed post-inspection at viscera separation."No Correlation Between Visible Contamination and Microbial Load:  FSISThe microbiological testing "showed no significant difference between the lines or between points within each line," the report said, adding, "There does not appear to be correlation between the amount of visible contamination on the carcass and the microbial load."The report noted a "significant decrease in Salmonella presence on the SIS-2 line between rehang and prior to the cropper.  The interpretation of the Salmonella decrease in this study is not clear and will require further evaluation of the raw data."  ((6FCN 4609, 19 pages, $9)Nu-Tech Project Has Lost Union Support:  CarneyThe Nu-Tech pilot project, called the Poultry Carcass Inspection/Evisceration Project (PCIEP) by FSIS, has lost the support of the inspectors' union, the National Joint Council of Food Inspection Locals, NJC Chairman David Carney said in a Dec. 19 letter to acting Under Secretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor.At a Dec. 14 consultation with the agency on the project, Carney said, "it was evident ... that FSIS management has made every attempt to promote PCIEP to the poultry industry by reducing the number of the line inspectors and increasing line speeds. ... FSIS has been remiss in the efforts of promoting PCIEP by not conducting ergonomic impact studies and has yet to follow through with Cumulative Trauma Disorder Task Group.  With lack of supporting data for PCIEP progression, the National Joint Council must now take the position that we can no longer subject inspectors to whimsical accommodations to the poultry industry.  It will now be the position of the National Joint Council that (the union) will no longer participate in Poultry Carcass Inspection Evisceration Projects."The union asked to negotiate the "'methods, means and technology' of performing work" with FSIS.  Carney noted that although the NJC's Southern Council had engaged in a memorandum of understanding for the ConAgra pilot plant, "this does not circumvent nor diminish impact to the bargaining unit at other proposed test sites."Inspectors Walk Off Line at Georgia Poultry Plant; FSIS to Fill Future VacanciesAs many as eight FSIS inspectors walked off a poultry line at a Georgia plant for several minutes recently because they had not been given a break.  The union said the action underscores how serious the shortage of inspectors has become.  FSIS officials said a break was planned for the inspectors, but that the inspectors walked off the line before the Inspector-in-Charge could get to them.  FSIS officials said poultry carcasses piled up on the floor during the inspectors' absence and that the agency may take disciplinary action.  "This tells me they think they're more important than the food hundreds of people are going to eat," one agency official said.The only solace for the agency and industry is that the shortage may not get any worse.  Taylor has apparently decided to hire one new inspector for every one that leaves in the future, although the new inspector may be hired in a different area if agency officials think a more critical vacancy exists elsewhere.Final 1,000-Plant Review Report Reiterates: Sanitation Biggest ProblemThe final report of the 1,000-plant review conducted by FSIS' Review and Assessment Program was released last month, and the conclusions were similar to those of an interim report:  sanitation remains the biggest problem found in plants (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, March 13, Page 27).The review of 1,014 plants between October 1993 and February 1995 resulted in 129 plants being issued Accelerated Deficiency Notices.  Sixty percent of all deficiencies found in the review were in the area of sanitation, and over 90% of those deficiencies were found in less than half of the plants reviewed.  The report also said that "dramatic short-term decreases" in sanitation problems were found in plants where ADNs and Progressive Enforcement Action measures were applied.  The 1,000-plant review results were used to develop FSIS' proposed standard operating procedures for sanitation included in the HACCP proposal.  ((6FCN 4611, 22 pages, $10)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DRAFT NUTRITION ACTION PLAN URGES HACCP, FOOD CODE ADOPTIONA draft report of the U.N. Plan of Action for Nutrition recommended the application of HACCP to pre- and post-harvest of all foods and encouraged universal adoption of the Food and Drug Administration Model Food Code by all levels of government.The U.S. Departments of Agriculture, Health and Human Services and Agency for International Development are seeking comment on the draft plan by Jan. 29, a Dec. 28 Federal Register notice said.  The final U.S. Plan for Action is to be submitted to the World Health Organization for approval.  The latest effort stemmed from a 1992 meeting of the International Conference on Nutrition in Rome where 159 countries agreed upon a general blueprint for improving world nutrition status.Besides the HACCP and Food Code recommendations, the draft plan urged policymakers to improve the health and environmental status in animal agricultural systems by expanding the use of proven research such as baseline studies of microbiological problems to gauge contamination levels in the slaughter and processing of cattle and other species.The report urged expanded automated information systems such as the Field Automation and Information Management initiative to support the modernization of USDA field inspection programs.  In-plant inspectors should have access to automated information systems and such technology should be used to improve field to headquarters communication, the draft plan recommended.Plan Also Calls for Monitoring Dietary Exposure to Toxic ChemicalsOther recommended strategies to improve U.S. food safety included:  stepped-up monitoring of dietary exposure to toxic chemicals in foods, and continued assurances that food and food ingredients developed through new processing, packaging and packaging technologies are safe and nutritious.  Special nutritional foods should be regulated following the same standards of method and validation as for regular foods, the draft plan said.The government-wide plan endorsed new technologies that increase shelf life of perishables, improve safety in crop production including Integrated Pest Management, and improve ways to monitor food additives and detect toxic chemicals in foods.One emphasis in the draft plan was on expanding public education on food safety by promoting the use of hotlines and enhancing government disease reporting systems. The draft plan earmarked gaps in the U.S. food safety system that must be addressed in order to improve good health and nutrition.  The plan's authors recommended that more food processing operations use modern, proved effective systems to prevent food contamination, that legal requirements and enforcement for safe food handling need to keep pace with changes in marketing and preparation, and that some public water systems need to be upgraded.The nutrition plan also focused on the need for improved diagnosis and reporting of foodborne and waterborne illnesses and for expanded consumer education.  Gaps in the following food safety research areas were highlighted:  "Rapid detection and identification of foodborne and waterborne biological, chemical, and physical hazards; prevention of food and water, biological, chemical, and physical contamination; achievement of desired behavioral changes among consumers and food producers and processors; measurement of the incidence of foodborne and waterborne illness; and assessment of risk related to microbial organisms." Nutrition Monitoring Gaps Identified in Draft ReportPointing to the current budget climate, the draft plan ranked the "most critical gaps" in nutrition monitoring that should be corrected.  The report urged the government to develop culturally sensitive survey instruments for dietary information from high-risk groups; a set of methods and interpretive criteria for nutritional status and health conditions and improved dietary indicators; and methods that can be used by states, local communities and researchers that are comparable with national methods and allow for surveillance.  Guidelines for verifying and updating food composition data should also be revised as new methodologies are developed, the draft plan said.The report also cited gaps in nutrition-sensitive food production and economic programs and agricultural research that can hinder efforts to incorporate nutrition considerations in national policies.  The draft plan found that decision-makers need to improve coordination and dissemination of nutrition information to food producers, improve information on sustainable agriculture, step up research information to support cost/benefit analysis of nutrition policies, and increase interdisciplinary training for those seeking careers in nutrition.To address gaps, the report recommended a strategy that included basic research to enhance plant germplasm and sustainable production, to increase animal and fish production through integrated management and health systems, and to beef up economic analysis methods that can chart costs and benefits to society of healthy eating.  The draft plan identified gaps in human nutrition research that may block understanding between diet and disease.  Issues identified included:  the range in intake of nutrients and other food components that optimize health and reduce chronic disease; patterns of food intake and physical activity that provide the nutrition standard and appropriate energy balance to improve health; the point where nutrients interact with human genes to alter disease risk; factors affecting adoption and maintenance of behaviors that support optimal nutrition and physical activity patterns; and how research can translate into community interventions that improve health and nutritional status.The draft plan called for expanded public and private basic and applied research into a host of areas, such as basic studies of nutrition and dietary modulation of gene expression and cellular and metabolic processes, bionutrition, interaction with nutrients and environmental agents, safer upper limits of nutrition and nutritionally vulnerable populations.The document also mentioned gaps in U.S. policies that promote breastfeeding and proposed strategies to fix them.  The draft U.S. action plan identified the following themes in the December document:  Eating for Health, Nutrition Security for All, Safe Food and Water from Source to Table, Promoting Breastfeeding, Nutrition-Sensitive Food Production and Economic Policy, Human Nutrition Research and Nutrition Monitoring.  The plan also includes an international section, which outlines how the U.S. government can support developing countries in each of the World Plan of Action's subject areas.Single copies of the draft U.S. Plan of Action for Nutrition are available from Jay Hirschman, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, USDA, 1120 20th St., N.W., North Lobby, Suite 200, Washington, D.C. 20036; 202-418-2312, or fax 202-208-2321.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CALIFORNIA MARKET OWNERS FINED FOR SELLING, MISBRANDING MEAT ADULTERATED WITH SODIUM SULFITEThe U.S. District Court, Central District of California, has fined owners of a California meat market over $7,000 for selling adulterated and misbranded meat, according to USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service.Cazares Carniceria, a partnership doing business as Maywood Plaza Market, Inc., Riverside, pled guilty to selling meat to which sodium sulfite had been added and mixed to conceal damage and make the meat "appear of better and greater value," FSIS reported.  The partnership was fined $6,200.  Also fined was another partner, Ignacio Cazares, who pled guilty to misbranding meat because it had no labeling saying it contained sodium sulfite.  FSIS also reported that the partnership and Ignacio Cazares were placed on two years' probation for the incident, which took place in 1993.Bacteria-Tainted Ice Cream, Decomposed Tuna Steaks RecalledPotential contamination with Listeria monocytogenes bacteria prompted Friendly Ice Cream Corp. to recall half-gallon containers of its Chocolate Fudge Brownie Yogurt and Purely Chocolate Yogurt, according to news wire reports.  The company said there have been no reports of illness linked with the yogurt, which was manufactured in Troy, Ohio.    The Massachusetts-based firm said it halted production of the frozen yogurt and issued recall of 30,000 containers after the Food and Drug Administration detected the contamination during routine testing.  The recall affected product distributed in Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont and Virginia.  A recent FDA Foods Class II enforcement report noted the recall of over 14,000 pounds of frozen yellow fin tuna found to be decomposed and containing "hazardous levels of histamines."  Recalled by Tysons Foods, Inc., Springdale, Ark., the recall involved IQF Tuna Pieces; 4-oz. Tuna Steaks; 6-oz. Tuna Steaks; 8-oz. Tuna Steaks, and 4-oz. Tuna Sandwich Cuts manufactured by Tyson Seafood Group, Seattle, Wash.  Recall of the tuna, distributed nationwide as well as internationally, is ongoing, FDA reported.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FDA CLEARS MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITE FOR USE IN CHICKEN, TURKEY FEEDIn a final rule issued Jan. 2, the Food and Drug Administration amended  573.625, menadione nicotinamide bisulfite, to provide for the safe use of the food additive, 1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-2-methyl-1,4-dioxo-2-naphthalene sulfonic acid with 3-pyridine carboxylic acid amine, CAS Reg. No. 73581-79-0, as a nutritional supplement for the prevention of vitamin K deficiency and as a source of supplemental niacin in chicken and turkey feed when used at a rate not to exceed 2 g/t of complete feed.  Vanetta (U.S.A.) Inc. petitioned the agency for the regulation (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Aug. 22, 1994, Page 38).Animal Drug Sponsor Changes Announced by FDAJan. 4, FDA issued final rules amending animal drug sponsor regulations to reflect changes in sponsor name and addresses and one change in sponsor: 522.883, etorphine hydrochloride injection, was amended to change the sponsor from Fort Dodge Laboratories to Wildlife Laboratories, Inc.; 510 was amended to reflect a change of sponsor name and address from American Cyanamid Co. to American Cyanamid, Division of American Homes Products, P.O. Box 1339, Fort Dodge, Iowa  50501, and to reflect a change of sponsor address for TRINADA, Inc. to One Executive Drive, P.O. Box 1399, Fort Lee, N.J. 07024.   Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996POLYMALEIC ACID AND ITS SODIUM SALT CLEARED FOR USE IN PRODUCTION OF BEET AND CANE SUGAR JUICE, LIQUORThe Food and Drug Administration issued a final rule Jan. 5 amending  173.45, polymaleic acid and its sodium salt, to clear its use to control mineral scale during the production of beet and cane sugar juice and liquor at higher levels than the maximum currently permitted, as well as to amend specifications for the additives.  Ciba-Geigy, Inc. submitted a petition to FDA for the regulations (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 3, 1990, Page 34) containing information on a new manufacturing process which resulted in a lower weight-average molecular weight and number-average molecular weight than those currently permitted.  FDA issued a tentative final rule May 2, 1995 (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, May 8, 1995, Page 22), noting that the molecular weight determinations (weight-average in the range of 540 to 850; number-average in the range of 520 to 650) are to be based on the improved analytical method submitted by Ciba-Geigy, entitled "Determinations of Molecular Weight Distribution of Poly(Maleic) Acid."  Having received no comments or responses to the tentative final rule, FDA concluded it should be issued as a final rule.   Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CDC FOODBORNE DISEASE INVESTIGATION EFFORTS CRIPPLED BY BUDGET STALEMATEThe month-long budget stalemate has yet to have long-term consequences for the national sentinel site program but has crippled the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's ability to investigate foodborne outbreaks (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, July 17, Page 37)."No doubt the furloughs have made it difficult to keep the national surveillance system going," remarked CDC Medical Epidemiologist Fred Angulo.  State and local health departments are still collecting and reporting surveillance data to CDC investigators, but the agency cannot synthesize the data without support staff, he explained.  Travel is severely restricted, so CDC has had to postpone site assistance to state officials who have requested help from federal disease investigators, he added.  The budget crisis means states are not provided with resources to determine the magnitude of potential foodborne outbreaks."Fortunately, nothing major has happened," Angulo said, warning that the government shutdown could place CDC officials in a difficult situation if there were another deadly outbreak such as the Hanta Virus.  "How would we respond when we have no support?" Angulo said.Another key area where disease control officials are crippled is laboratory support.  With CDC's reference laboratory closed, federal officials are unable to analyze difficult case samples forwarded by state health departments.  These samples are checked against the federal laboratory's large specimen collection.  "We are the only lab in the country that does this," Angelo noted.While CDC has not been able to synthesize data from the national sentinel site program, a multi-agency effort to chart foodborne disease trends, the schedule is not likely to slip, CDC's Angulo predicted.  Since the objective of the program is not to respond to daily outbreaks but to record long-term trends, the furloughs are expected to have only a short-term impact.  The information is still being forwarded to CDC and, once the government budget battle is over, the data can be "run through computers," he explained.  "We've been unable to compile information and look at it," he said.  "But when the furlough ends, we will be on the same schedule."HHS Moves to Shore Up Health Statistics BranchMeanwhile, CDC Director David Satcher was told Dec. 13 that the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services would be designating a "consolidated health statistics entity" to strengthen and coordinate general-purpose health surveys throughout HHS.HHS Secretary Donna Shalala said the new effort will create a stronger National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) while keeping the agency within CDC.  Shalala stressed that the new effort must continue to be objective and neutral in providing the foundation for health policy. Among the changes, Shalala plans to strengthen the role of NCHS director, expand NCHS's role in HHS data policy and provide the agency with greater independence and "a greater ability for NCHS to assume responsibility for the integrity, quality and efficiency of HHS statistics effort."Shalala said she plans to review the changes in two years and assess whether NCHS should stay in CDC in meeting statistics objectives.  ((6FCN 4612, 35 pages, $13)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES VIRTUALLY UNCHANGED FROM ADVISORY PANEL'S RECOMMENDATIONSThe fourth edition of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, unveiled last week as the "gold standard for good nutrition and health," is virtually unchanged from the draft prepared this summer by the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Aug. 28, Page 38).  The guidelines for the first time include information on physical activity and dieting, vegetarian diets and recommendations that adults maintain their body weight as they age.  They also include an expanded section on grains, fruits and vegetables.The guidelines, last issued in 1990, were generally praised by industry and consumer groups.  However, the American Frozen Food Institute said the guidelines mislead consumers by suggesting that eating cooked or raw vegetables is the only way to obtain proper vegetable servings.  "[T]his language omits other categories of vegetable products, such as frozen," the group said.In the only reference to frozen foods, the guidelines state, "The availability of fresh fruits and vegetables varies by season and region of the country, but frozen and canned fruits and vegetables ensure a plentiful supply of these healthful foods throughout the year." Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala stressed that the guidelines reflect an increased understanding of the role of physical activity in maintaining an adequate diet.  "Diet and exercise are the twin engines that can carry you on the road to good health," she said at a Jan. 2 news conference.Baltimore Researchers Find Weight Loss Is More Effective than Exercise in Reducing CHD in Middle-aged and Older Overweight MenSeveral recent studies published in prominent medical journals have examined the effects of weight loss and aerobic activity on heart disease and other health conditions.Weight loss proved more effective in improving coronary artery disease profiles than exercise did in a group of 170 obese middle-aged and older men, a group of Baltimore-based gerontology experts led by physician Leslie Katzel of the University of Maryland School of Medicine noted in a study published in the Dec. 27 Journal of the American Medical Association.  The scientists set out to compare the effects of weight loss vs. aerobic exercise training on CAD risk factors in healthy, sedentary, obese, middle-aged and older men.  Ninety-seven percent of the study subjects were white.Seventy-three subjects started a nine-month, diet-induced weight loss program; another 71 an aerobic exercise program, and 26 served as a control group.  The "controls" were instructed not to lose weight or change their diets or level of physical activity for nine months.  During the test time period, dropouts affected each group  -- 44 finished the weight-loss program, 49 finished the aerobic program and 18 controls completed their assignment.  All original test subjects were instructed for three months in the principles of an isoenergetic American Heart Association phase I diet before the study began.Study results showed that "weight loss significantly improves lipoprotein concentrations, glucose tolerance, postprandial insulin levels and blood pressure levels, whereas aerobic exercise training in the absence of weight loss training has substantially less beneficial effects on these parameters," Katzel et al. noted, adding:  "This suggests that weight loss should be an integral part of interventions to reduce CAD risk in obese, middle-aged and older individuals."In an editorial in the JAMA issue, physician William Hazzard of the Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, N.C., noted that "the most encouraging news from this study is that carefully supervised weight loss achieved through reduced energy intake ... can significantly reduce blood pressure, fasting glucose levels (and improve oral glucose tolerance), triglycerides and low density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, all serving to improve CAD profiles.  Correlational analyses suggested that the reduction in fat mass achieved was central to these changes."The study by Katzel et al. also "forms another link in the chain of evidence pointing toward weight control as a principal feature of a successful preventive strategy" for slowing the negative health effects often felt by aging Americans, Hazzard noted.  Successful aging, or preventive gerontology, has as its cardinal principle "the discovery of synergistic strategies or common pathways to preserving health and promoting health longevity," he said, adding:"This study further legitimizes the pathogenetic sequence that has underlain our advice to aging Americans -- i.e., sedentary behavior begets central adiposity begets insulin resistance begets hypertriglyceridemia, hyperglycemia, increased LDL concentrations, decreased HDL concentrations and hypertension.  ... However, as demonstrated in this study, weight loss reverses this cascade."Noncentral Obesity, While Less Serious than Central Obesity, Still Has Major Health Effects:  Manitoba ResearchersWhile central obesity, which is characterized by fat concentrated in the upper body and high waist-to-hip ratios (WHR), is considered the most potentially health-adverse type of obesity, Canadian researchers who published a study in the same JAMA issue are concerned that people who are noncentrally obese are not aware that their condition also is likely to be bad for their health.  The scientists defined noncentrally obese people as being overall obese but with low WHR.A representative sample of 2,792 adult residents of Manitoba, Canada, aged 18 to 74, were interviewed for the Manitoba Heart Health Survey.  Of that group, 2,339 underwent clinical examinations.  Blood pressure, fasting plasma glucose, total cholesterol, triglycerides, high density lipoprotein and low density lipoprotein measurements were compared with body mass index (BMI) and WHR.The Manitoba survey was part of a national effort to estimate the prevalence and distribution patterns of cardiovascular risk factors and assess the level of knowledge regarding cardiovascular health among Canadians.  In conducting the survey, physician T. Kue Young and colleague Dale Gelskey of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, found that noncentral obesity is not metabolically benign.  BMI as an overall measure of obesity is as important as, and sometimes more important than, WHR in predicting metabolic effects."Noncentral obesity is associated with a more unfavorable profile of blood pressure, plasma lipids and glucose compared with the nonobese, the researchers noted.  The Manitoba findings were similar to those from a study on male Japanese urban workers, among whom both BMI and WHR were associated with blood pressure, total cholesterol and HDL."There was a gradation in mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure between the nonobese, the noncentrally obese and the centrally obese," Young and Gelskey said, adding:  "While WHR was the stronger predictor than BMI for systolic blood pressure, the reverse was true for diastolic blood pressure. ... Our data relating to BMI and WHR are relevant to the design and implementation of health education and promotion.  Participants of risk assessment programs who are identified as noncentrally obese should still be offered appropriate nutritional and behavioral counseling for weight control, since this type of obesity is associated with significant metabolic effects, although of a reduced magnitude than central obesity."JAMA Contributors Disagree on the Possibility that Blood Cholesterol-lowering Drugs May Contribute to CancerResearchers/physicians Thomas Newman and Stephen Hulley of the School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, concluded in a "special communication" in the Jan. 3 JAMA that, after a literature review of the findings and implications of rodent carcinogenicity linked to lipid-lowering drugs, "the results of experiments in animals and humans suggest that lipid-lowering drug treatment, especially with the fibrates and statins, should be avoided except in patients at high short-term risk of coronary heart disease."  They added that "most cholesterol-lowering drugs cause or promote cancer in rodents."They caution, however, that extrapolation of this evidence of carcinogenesis from rodents to humans is an uncertain process, requiring longer-term clinical trials and careful postmarketing surveillance during the next several decades.Two physicians/researchers from the University of Arizona School of Medicine in Tucson disagreed with Newman and Hulley's findings, noting in a JAMA commentary in the same issue that "Newman and Hulley speculate that some classes of lipid-lowering drugs are more likely to cause cancer than others.  This speculation overlooks the fact that dietary treatment [used to lower lipids] has been reported to have the same apparent impact on cancer mortality as drug therapy.  If there is a relationship between treatment of elevated cholesterol levels and cancer, the critical factor would have to be lowering cholesterol levels, not the specific drug selected for therapy."James Dalen and William Dalton noted that they agreed with Newman and Hulley that all drugs should be subjected to safety monitoring before and after their introduction to clinical use.  But they added:  "We do not agree that a 20-year randomized clinical trial is feasible or necessary."The Arizona doctors said that Newman and Hulley "have not presented convincing evidence that cholesterol lowering by diet or drugs increases the risk of cancer death.  Their frequently reported recommendations that screening for and treatment of high cholesterol should be limited to those patients who are at greatest risk of CHD death, i.e., those with established CHD, might be supported by cost considerations but cannot be supported on the basis of safety or the risk of cancer."Primary prevention of CHD should remain an important public-health priority, Dalen and Dalton said, but deciding "the appropriate age to begin screening and treatment requires further discussion and careful consideration of the costs.  We hope the National Cholesterol Education Program will address these issues in their future meetings."Long-term Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy Does Not Halt Weight Gain, Fat DistributionMenopause has been associated with increases in upper body (android) fat distribution, researchers Donna Kritz-Silverstein and Elizabeth Barrett-Connor of the Department of Family and Preventive Medicine, University of California in San Diego, noted in the Jan. 3 JAMA, and they set out to see if such weight gain and distribution occurred in women taking hormone replacement therapy at the same rate as it occurred in women not taking HRT.They reported the results of a 15-year cohort study of 671 women aged 65 to 94 who lived in Rancho Bernardo, Calif.  The women fell into three groups  -- those who had never used hormone replacement therapy (194), those who used HRT intermittently (331), and those who used HRT continuously from the start of the study (from 1972 to 1974, ending with follow-up clinic visits between 1988 and 1991).After adjustment for potentially confounding covariates, "there were no significant differences between estrogen users and nonusers in BMI at follow-up, change in weight or BMI between baseline and follow-up, or WHR or fat mass at follow-up," Kritz-Silverstein and Barrett-Connor said.The researchers noted that many factors other than menopausal status are related to the prevalence of obesity and fat distribution, which varies substantially by ethnic and socioeconomic group.  The Rancho Bernardo subjects were white, relatively well-educated and at baseline leaner on average than the U.S. population, Kritz-Silverstein and Barrett-Connor said, adding:  "Therefore, these findings may not be generalizable to populations consisting of other racial, ethnic or socioeconomic groups."Studies Look at Adult Alcohol Consumption's Role in Adult Respiratory Health, Children's Cancer A group of researchers led by physician Mark Moss of the Department of Medicine, Denver General Hospital, looked at the effect of chronic alcohol abuse on the incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and in-hospital mortality.  Their results, published in the Jan. 3 JAMA, showed that a prior history of chronic alcohol abuse "increases the risk of developing ARDS in critically ill patients with an identified at-risk diagnosis."There are seven diagnoses that have been defined as causing a patient to be at risk for the development of ARDS:  sepsis, severe pancreatitis, hyper-transfusion, witnessed aspiration of gastric contents, abdominal trauma, chest trauma and multiple fractures, Moss et al. noted.  They had a total of 351 consecutive patients enrolled in their study between 1986 and 1993, with the largest group being white males.ARDS is associated with a mortality rate of 40% to 60%, Moss et al. noted, and they hope that their results "may be useful in the earlier and more accurate identification of patients at high risk for developing ARDS."  No specific therapy currently exists for treating ARDS, but people at high risk for the syndrome might benefit from the early use of respiratory and cardiovascular monitoring devices and other forms of intensive care unit  technology, the researchers said, adding:  "Furthermore, the identification of additional risk factors for the development or ARDS could yield new insights into the pathophysiology of the syndrome."The use of alcoholic beverages "poses a serious health problem for the American society," Moss et al. noted, adding that in 1985, an estimated 10.6 million Americans were dependent on alcohol, and an additional 7.3 million experienced some negative sociological consequences of alcohol abuse.  The National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism "has estimated that alcohol-related problems cost our society $117 billion in 1983, and this figure has likely increased over the past decade."  Meanwhile, an evaluation of data from a Children's Cancer Group case-control study was conducted by a group of researchers led by Xiao-Ou Shu and Julie Ross of the Division of Pediatric Epidemiology/Clinical Research, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis."  The conclusions reached by Shu et al., and published in the Jan. 3 edition of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, were that maternal alcohol consumption during pregnancy increases the risk of infant leukemia, especially acute myeloid leukemias (AML), while maternal smoking does not elevate risk for either AML or acute lymphoid leukemias (ALL).  The implication is that "in utero exposure to alcohol may contribute to leukemogenesis involving myeloid cells."Paternal alcohol consumption did not confer an increased risk of infant leukemia, but paternal smoking one month prior to pregnancy was related to an elevated risk of ALL (OR = 1.56 and 95% CI = 1.03-3.26).In the Children's Cancer Group study, 302 leukemia cases (203 ALLs, 88 AMLs and 11 other leukemia types) were diagnosed in children 18 months of age and younger, and 558 individually matched, regional controls were included in the analysis.  Information about parental alcohol consumption and smoking behavior during pregnancy and the month prior to it was collected by telephone. Future studies should focus on the evaluation of the effect of timing of alcohol consumption, morphology-specific associations and interaction between alcohol consumption and other environmental exposures, Shu et al. noted.  Studies of biologic mechanisms for alcohol exposure during pregnancy and infant leukemia are also warranted, they said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FUTURE FSIS INSPECTION SYSTEM TO BE DEVELOPED BEGINNING WITH FEDERAL REGISTER NOTICE, PUBLIC MEETING:  TAYLORUSDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service will begin a public process soon to determine how the agency will use its inspection resources under a HACCP-based inspection system, acting Under Secretary for Food Safety Michael Taylor told FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS in an interview last week (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 29)."We've begun talking informally with constituencies about a process through which we would develop alternative modes of deploying our inspection resources both within plants and downstream, during transportation, distribution and retail," Taylor said, adding that the agency "would then pilot test and gather data to demonstrate that these alternative modes are better from a food safety standpoint.  Our goal here is not to save money or to reduce the resources we apply to this oversight, but to improve food safety by redeploying our resources.  We aren't going to make any changes in our inspection program unless we are confident that it will work to improve food safety."Taylor said the process will begin "in the next month or so" with a Federal Register notice announcing a public meeting "and other opportunities for people to help design the pilots."  The data from the pilots "will be made available in a way that people can participate in evaluating what we've learned" so the agency gets "the broadest possible input into modernizing how we use our inspection resources," Taylor said.The agency has been plagued by a shortage of inspectors and a budget shortfall that has stretched resources thin.  At the same time, Taylor has pledged to expand the agency's inspection oversight as part of a farm-to-table food safety system, and FSIS inspectors are also expected to perform additional monitoring and verification duties under HACCP.  Figuring out how to reconcile all that was one of the main charges of the agency's "top-to-bottom" review (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Sept. 11, Pages 4, 7 and 27).Reinventing Inspection Central to New Strategy" ...  We have a new framework, a HACCP framework, for the plants we inspect, which will require new tasks being performed by our inspectors; we also have a farm-to-table strategy that says there are going to be roles for FSIS at the transportation stage, distribution, and perhaps greater involvement in the retail level," Taylor said, adding, "So we've got new roles and responsibilities, we've got to keep achieving what we've achieved in the past, because what we've done in the past is valuable, but with all that, we're not likely to get significant new resources to do this job.  So it's very clear and very central to our new strategy that we reinvent inspection itself."How the agency carries out its statutory mandate of carcass-by-carcass inspection is likely to be central to the debate.  One agency plan would replace the current two to three line inspectors in broiler plants with one "zone" inspector, with plant employees performing sorting tasks (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 25, Page 53).  Agency officials have also discussed eliminating one of the inspection points of head, viscera or rail, and one top-to-bottom team recommended requiring plants to present only "normal" animals for inspection. "There's a lot of work that's gone on to begin to develop some possible alternative modes of inspection, and certainly looking at alternative ways to carry out the carcass-by-carcass mandate would be part of an overall alternative," Taylor said, adding, "We wouldn't be looking at that in isolation from how we're overseeing HACCP within that plant or how we're inspecting downstream from that plant.  But there's no question, going back to the National Academy of Sciences' report on a risk assessment approach to poultry inspection (1987), that there are opportunities to still achieve the very important consumer protection objectives of the current system of inspection but then make better use of our inspectors in addressing higher-priority food safety issues.  We're not wed to any particular alternative. ... We plan to lay out some possibilities in the Federal Register and the public meeting and have a public discussion about them."Taylor was sympathetic to the concerns of the inspectors' union, the National Joint Council of Food Inspection Locals, which is likely to be a formidable obstacle to change in the current inspection system.  "Everybody knows that we need to improve the way we do our job and use our resources and I think everyone is also rightfully concerned that we make these changes in a way that really will make things better," Taylor said, adding, "It's not change for change's sake.  Our employees, the industry community, the consumer community, the scientific community all have a legitimate set of interests and concerns that we need to consider and take full advantage of, and we're going to have a process that does that.  It's a very important undertaking, but it's very central to the success of the food safety initiative."Reorganization Plan to Go to Glickman This Week; Reinventing Government DiscussedTaylor also said that the agency's reorganization plan will formally go to Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman this week.  Details on the plan, which appeared in FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS in December, will likely be made available this week (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 11, Page 5).  Taylor said the plan is a "sweeping reorganization aimed not at downsizing the agency but at making the best possible use of all the resources we have both in the field and in headquarters.  It will be a reorganization that is in line with our HACCP, our farm-to-table food safety strategy."Taylor made his comments as the agency published several documents as part of USDA's reinventing food safety initiative (See stories, Pages 18 and 25).  A National Performance Review report on current and future USDA and FDA food safety initiatives is expected to be released today.Taylor said the "focal point" of the four FSIS documents was an advance notice of proposed rulemaking laying out the agency's regulatory reform strategy and listing regulations to be revised or eliminated to conform with HACCP.  "I know this has been a concern of a number of constituencies, particularly industry, that we not simply layer HACCP on top of the existing system," Taylor said, adding, "We are very committed to having a single integrated inspection that's centered around HACCP.  For HACCP to be successful, we have to very thoroughly review and reform our existing regulations."Taylor said the regulatory review, reinventing inspection and the reorganization are all part of the agency's reinventing itself as it moves to a HACCP-based inspection system.  "In order to make HACCP work, we need to change FSIS in a very fundamental way," he said.Taylor reiterated his commitment to make existing regulations compatible with HACCP before plants are required to implement HACCP.  Taylor said the agency is conducting a "page-by-page review" of existing regulations.  The initiative "goes beyond those that relate to safety and thus to HACCP to include all of our labeling regulations, our standards of identity, all of our prior approval systems for labeling, equipment, facilities.  There are a significant number of rulemaking initiatives coming along that not only support our HACCP initiative but are part of the president's regulatory reform and reinvention of government."Two published proposals would eliminate duplicative review of ingredients with FDA and establish a "generic amendment that would permit nutritionally improved standardized foods to be sold under a standardized name," Taylor said.  A final rule published the same day (Dec. 29) streamlined the prior label approval process.Other "very significant proposals" are forthcoming that would eliminate prior approval of facilities, equipment and blueprints and establish a performance standard for cooked meat and poultry products, Taylor said.  A "very good draft" of an advance notice of proposed rulemaking on transportation, being done in concert with FDA, has been completed and will be published in the "next couple months," Taylor said.The agency is also moving ahead on the issue of carcass washing versus trimming after an October public meeting on the issue (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 30, Page 31).  "That was a good discussion of that issue and we have a lot of information to consider," Taylor said, adding, "We have data from the steam-vacuum trials that are very relevant to this issue, and we intend to take a next step on that issue and we're working on it."Despite the frenzy of activity at FSIS, rumors have persisted that Taylor will depart with the publication of a final HACCP rule.  Taylor said the rumors are untrue.  "I've heard the rumors but there's absolutely nothing to it," he said, adding, "We've got a lot of work to do.""We're all very busy but we've got a lot of very capable, committed people working very hard to get this done," he said, adding, "It is amazing to me how much is being produced.  It's a heroic effort that employees here are making."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD CHEMICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BRIEF NOTESThe Produce Marketing Association on Dec. 22 asked the Federal Trade Commission to investigate an advertisement in the Dec. 11 issue of Supermarket News by Food & Water, Inc.  PMA charged that the ad, which stated that pesticide residues on produce kill more Americans than assault weapons (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 18, Page 45), are unfair and deceptive.  PMA asked the FTC to issue a cease-and-desist order against the ad as well as statements by Food & Water that produce treated with agricultural chemicals in compliance with government regulations is unsafe. The Food Safety and Inspection Service Dec. 29 issued a final rule that expands the types of labeling that are authorized for use on meat and poultry in both official U.S. establishments and certified foreign establishments.  The rule is said to eliminate unnecessary duplication in the labeling system, and is part of the Reinventing Government proposal (See related stories, Pages 18 and 25).  The effective date of the rule is July 1.FSIS Dec. 29 also published another Reinventing Government proposed rule that would give definitions of meat and poultry products that have been altered due to their nutritional content (i.e., "fat free," "low fat," "light").  Comments on the proposal are due Feb. 27, and questions should be addressed to Charles Edwards, 202-254-2565.Egg quality assurance and the end of the federal Salmonella program were the subjects of two recent letters.  On Nov. 20, Rep. Joe Skeen (R-N.M.), chairman of the Appropriations subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration and related agencies, asked for "an appropriate" amount of federal assistance to be given to the Salmonella enteritidis program in 1996 (the budget for which has been entirely cut) to allow for a smooth transition from a federal program to a state-industry program.  William Bell, executive director of the New England Poultry Association, wrote to Michael Taylor, USDA acting under secretary for food safety, Dec. 13, asking that FSIS employee and SE program worker Sheila Foster be funded through June to help train state egg-grading personnel to act as SE control monitors.FSIS will be inviting the American Association of Meat Processors, the Eastern Meat Packers Association and other industry groups to discuss the inspector harassment issue.  The meeting probably will be held this month in Washington, AAMP said Jan. 1 (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Nov. 13, Page 8).FSIS Dec. 1 allowed Venta de Especialidades Quimicas S.A., a Spanish firm, the right to allow the use of a blend of carrageenan (70%), xanthan gum (15%) and locust bean gum (15%) as a binder mix injected in water-added hams to prevent purging of the brine solution.  A letter to the firm said FSIS anticipated initiating rulemaking on the subject shortly (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Oct. 2, Page 9).Food & Water, Inc. is planning a Jan. 23 press conference in Washington at which Samuel Epstein of the University of Illinois will present new research on the health risks of dairy products from cows treated with bovine somatotropin.George Giddings died suddenly Dec. 24, according to Isomedix, Whippany, N.J.  Giddings was a consultant to Isomedix, and helped prepare the petition, now under consideration by the Department of Agriculture, seeking approval of irradiation of beef.The "Seafood HACCP Road Show," a series of seminars explaining the recently published final rule, has a couple of tentative dates lined up for this winter.  Put on by FDA's Office of Seafood, the road show hopes to hit the highway in February, with a meeting held before, after or during the Feb. 18-21 Pacific Fisheries Technologists conference in San Diego, Calif.  Also on the agenda are as-yet-unscheduled seminars in New Orleans and Baltimore and one coinciding with the March 12-14 Boston Seafood Show, an FDA-er said last week.  Funds permitting, the road show may also get to Hawaii, the FDA-er noted, because regulators and industry there complained about the difficulty they had getting to any of the Pacific Coast meetings of FDA's earlier series of informational seminars about the seafood HACCP proposed rule (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Jan. 31, 1994, Page 16).  For more definite information about the upcoming seminars, call the Office of Seafood at 202-418-3133 in early February.None of the 186 samples of domestic and imported animal feeds tested for pesticide residues by FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 1995 (July 1 to Sept. 30, 1995) were considered to have exceeded regulatory guidances, according to a Dec. 26 memorandum to regional food and drug directors, district directors and state feed control officials from Randy Arbaugh, Division of Federal-State Relations, Office of Regional Operations, of FDA's Office of Regulatory Affairs.  Tests conducted by FDA regional offices found a variety of pesticides, including diazinon, chlorpyrifos-methyl, chlorpyrifos-ethyl, malathion, pirimiphos-methyl, diazinon, DDT, lindane, fonofos and gardona.  ((6FCN 4613, 8 pages, $6)The Food and Drug Administration announced Jan. 4 the availability of a report prepared by the Center for Veterinary Medicine's Fluoroquinolone Working Group.  Addressing issues related to the center's approval of fluoroquinolone antimicrobial drugs in food animals, the report was written to respond to concerns about "increased  ... resistance in zoonotic organisms" in food animals that are transmitted to humans and cause disease.  The report, which will be featured in a full-length story next week, is available by contacting the Communication and Education Branch, CVM, 7500 Standish Place, Rockville, Md. 20855.A test being developed by Cornell University researchers with funding from the New York Center for Advanced Technology in Biotechnology is aimed at being a more sensitive and reliable method to test municipal water supplies for Cryptosporidium parvum, the university reported.  Cornell also said that researchers at the university have worked out a way of using carbonation to keep dairy products fresh and fortified for months.The Lancet reported in its Dec. 23/30 issue that Streptococcus suis is a threat to pig farmers and abattoir workers.  The study found that the pathogen can enter the body through cuts or cracks in the skin surface, and can lead to fulminate sepsis and a type of meningitis, among other serious diseases.  "Infection could possibly be prevented by prompt disinfection of skin injuries of persons at risk," the article said.Caroline Smith DeWaal of the Center for Science in the Public Interest said she did not mean to imply that only restaurants are responsible for food safety (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Dec. 25, Page 23).  "The bottom line is that -- from farm to table -- we all need to share responsibility for food safety.  My remarks at the USDA conference are clear that neither consumers nor restaurants have sole responsibility for ensuring the safety of food products," DeWaal wrote the National Restaurant Association's Robert Harrington.  Harrington had expressed concern about her use of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data.Tracking Foodborne Pathogens from Farm to Table:  Data Needs to Evaluate Control Options is available from USDA's Economic Research Service.  The proceedings cover the meeting held on the issue last January (See FOOD CHEMICAL NEWS, Jan. 16, Page 38).  It costs $18; call  1-800-999-6779 to charge a copy or send a check to ERA-NASS, 341 Victory Drive, Herndon, Va. 22070.Some of the active compounds in Sho-saiko-to, a Chinese herbal medicine, may have antimutagenic effects, according to a paper by Masanori Ohtsuka and colleagues published in the December Japanese Journal of Cancer Research.Some noted food writers and scientists don't want olestra used, according to an article in the Jan. 3 New York Times.  Marion Nestle, chairwoman of the department of nutrition and food studies, New York University, and Clark Wolf, a New York restaurant consultant, both listed the product as one of the things they would "best like forgotten."  Others said that they wanted a return to fatty foods (eaten in moderation) instead of less tasty low-fat substitutes.Conjugated lineoleic acid, a polyunsaturated fat found in red meat, has been proven to inhibit breast and skin cancer in three rodent studies, according to the November/December issue of the 1995 Meat Board Research/Meat Science Update.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-5IA060-000326-B017-275http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb17.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015125 text/html 82010HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:49:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:43 GMTContent-length: 81821Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb17.html Sample Issue Copyright FOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PROCESS TECHNOLOGY Butter Flavor Derived from Lactic Acid (448 words) Honey Makes Fat Free Chips Crisper (438 words) Vegetable Fibers to Resemble Meat (219 words) Better Cinnamon Rolls with SFE (599 words) PRESERVATIVES/ANTIOXIDANTS Isothiocyanates Are Natural Alternative (550 words) Covi-Ox Protects Against Rancidity (226 words) Rosemary Puts Pep in Pepperoni (243 words) FATS AND SUBSTITUTES FDA Committee Says Olestra Safe (496 words) Fatty Acid Polyester Used in Low-Cal Food (201 words) Product Bakes Moister Cakes (99 words) Proprietary Process for Peanut Butter (211 words) Chicken Fat Powder With a Milk Carrier (85 words) SWEETENERS Glazing Over Caramel Corn (244 words) Systems Bio-Industries Adds on Aspartame (273 words) Splenda Sweetens Mexican Drinks (117 words) Sugar-Containing Solutions Softened (300 words) FLAVORS AND ENHANCERS Honey Heightens Taste Perception (537 words) Report Determines That MSG Is Safe (522 words) More Intense Cinnamon Flavor (123 words) TESTING AND ANALYSIS SFE Compared with SPE for Ham Analysis (151 words) Pesticides Removed from Fruits, Veggies (428 words) RESEARCH REPORTS Focus on Foods' Health Benefits (655 words) Consumers Trust Farmers the Most (164 words) INDUSTRY NEWS New Markets Sought by U.S. Food Makers (513 words) Companies Expand and Restructure (267 words) Xylose Plant Now Under Construction (102 words) Processors Acquire Ingredient Firms (382 words) Meats and Baked Goods Acquired (181 words) MARKETS Sugar Prices Drop, Maybe Up for Milk (366 words) Shifts Seen in Vitamin E (384 words) Demand for Garlic Is Seen Tripling (151 words) REGULATIONS FDA Proposes Changes in NLEA (664 words) FDA Requires HACCP for Seafood (213 words) Meat Processors Want Safety Rules, Too (157 words) RESOURCES Product Information in Print, Online (174 words) MEETINGS (72 words) CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Butter Flavor Derivedfrom Lactic AcidA pilot-scale catalytic reactor system will be used by Natura, Inc.(3900 Collins Rd., Suite 1007, Lansing, MI 48910; Tel: 517/336-4635) for the natural processing of 2,3-pentanedione from lacticacid. 2,3-Pentanedione is used as the buttery flavor in popcorn andother food products.  According to Chemical Marketing Reporter, anestimated 15,000 lbs. of 2,3-pentanedione are annually consumedworldwide in food related applications.The Dept. of Agriculture (USDA) awarded $203,000 to Natura in asecond-phase grant to develop a large-scale catalytic reactionprocess and to improve product purity and yields of natural 2,3-pentanedione.  The large-scale process should result in lowerprices for the product.  At present, the natural form costs $60-$80/lb., while the synthetic version costs $50-$60/lb.When FIN first spoke with Prashant Kokitkar, the principalinvestigator in the development of the catalytic reactor system, hesaid the pilot-scale reactor was "nearly at the end of theconstruction stage" and that he expected to have the system running"within a week."  The commercial-scale reactor should beoperational within one year.  Kokitkar explained that the one-stepprocess provides a shortcut in manufacturing, thereby offeringtime-saving and cost-cutting advantages over the other twoapproaches used by industry currently.Other advantages are that the process is environmentally friendlyand that the starting material is lactic acid, derived from thefermentation of corn. The commercial methods of 2,3-pentanedioneproduction either extract the chemical from dairy products or startwith petroleum in a multi-step, expensive process.While a post-doc at Michigan State University (MSU), Kokitkar waspart of the group that invented the process.  Dennis Miller ofMSU's Dept. of Chemical Engineering and Ned Jackson of the Dept. ofChemistry were also part of the team.  MSU has filed a patent forthe process, which will be licensed to Natura.  A contractor willmanufacture the product for Natura.  Kokitkar points out that thechemical produced by this method has been tested and found to be"nature-identical."  The investigator adds that in addition tobeing a valuable food ingredient, 2,3-pentanedione has thepotential to be used as a starting material for other flavorcompounds.Natura is a spin-off company of the Michigan BiotechnologyInstitute, located at the same address.  Natura, which wasincorporated in December 1994, focuses on the production of naturalfood flavors and ingredients.  Ron Carlotti, Natura's president,explained that the young company is "looking for prospectiveinvestors to get through the start-up phase."  Natura is seekingpotential customers, in both food and non-food areas.  In additionto 2,3-pentanedione, products under development for the foodindustry include a salty flavor and a sugar bulking agent.  Abiophosphorescent material has potential applications outside thefood industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Honey Makes FatFree Chips CrisperFat-free potato chips can be made with microwave technology, butthe appearance and texture of these chips does not compare withcommercial chips.  Scientists in California have found thatincluding honey in the process can enhance the color and crispnessof microwavable fat-free potato chips.  This research project waspart of a larger effort to develop healthy snack foods.In the process, sliced potatoes are soaked in brine and honey,drained, and then sent through a microwave tunnel.  The scientistsinvestigated 27 combinations of study variables--type of honey,concentration of honey in solution, and duration of exposure to themicrowave oven.  Liquid honey, drum-dried honey, and a mixture ofthe two were investigated.  The level of concentration was 4%, 5%,or 6% honey.  For each trial, the exposure time variable was set at4.45, 9.86, or 12.59 min.  Color and texture were measuredquantitatively with a chromasensor and a texturometer,respectively.The brownest chips resulted from the potatoes soaked in drum-driedhoney, which contained 70% honey solids.  The 6% honey solution wasfound the best for browning.  Not surprisingly, the darkest chipsalso resulted from the longest exposure time to the microwave oven.The potatoes soaked in 5% honey solution made the crispest chips,based on the amount of force needed to break the chip.  Also, themedian experimental variable for exposure time made the crispestchips (9.86 minutes).  After statistical analysis, the authorsconcluded that the process variables resulting in the crispest,brownest fat-free chips were 4% liquid honey solution and anexposure time of 4.45 min.Kyros Demetriades, Clarissa Guffey, and Hany M. Khalil (Dept. ofFood Science and Nutrition, California Polytechnic StateUniversity, San Luis Obispo, CA 93407; Tel: 619/756-2852) published"Evaluating the Role of Honey in Fat-Free Potato Chips" in FoodTechnology [49(10): 66-67, 1995].  The article was based on a paperfirst presented at the Annual Meeting of the Institute of FoodTechnologists, Anaheim, CA, June 3-7, 1995.  The project was fundedby the National Honey Board.In an interview with FIN, Khalil said that the potato chips "tastedvery good," especially if you desire a chip with more of a potatotaste.  For those who crave the fatty taste of regular chips, theymay need to lower their expectations.  Khalil explained thatswitching to reduced fat snack foods means you need to "compromisea little bit for the health benefits."Khalil's work focuses on the use of microwave energy in processdevelopment.  In addition to developing potato chips and carrotchips as snack foods, Khalil currently is devising a microwavemethod for reducing microbial content in spices.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Vegetable Fibersto Resemble MeatEdmund W. Lusas, Gabriel J. Guzman, and Steven C. Doty of the FoodProtein Research and Development Dept. at Texas A&M University(College Station, TX 77843-2476; Tel: 409/845-2777, Fax: 409/845-7244) have patented a method (U.S. 5,437,885) for convertingoilseed protein meal into meat-like fibers.  The fibers can be usedin a product such as beef jerky to provide a more nutritionallybalanced snack food.The first step of the new process is to mix water with dehulled,defatted oilseed protein meal, such as that originating fromsoybeans.  The mixture is heated at a temperature between 200 and350F, extruded, coated with edible oil or fat, and extruded again.Non-spongy fibers with a nonporous texture result. The fibersresemble glistening, broiled meat fibers.Lusas explained that when these fibers are worked into beef jerky,the product looks fresher and has a good appearance.  The objectiveof the project was to develop fibers that look shiny, which is whyoil is applied in the last stages of extrusion.The department is a contract process research and development groupthat focuses on oilseed processing.  One of their strengths is oilextraction, and most of the projects are supported by industry.Projects include the development of reduced-calorie peanut snacksand a low-cost texturized soybean product that resembles groundmeat.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Better CinnamonRolls with SFEThe true cinnamon of commerce is prepared from the inner bark ofthe tropical tree Cinnamomum zeylanicum, while an inferior productgenerically termed "cassia" is obtained from closely related treesof the same genus. Tests for cinnamon purity and quality controlhave previously relied on Soxhlet extraction, solvent extraction atreflux, or simultaneous steam distillation-solvent extraction, butthree U.S. and British researchers have determined that solvent-assisted supercritical fluid extraction isolates the essential oilsof true cinnamon and cassia more efficiently for separation andanalysis by series-coupled column gas chromatography.Kenneth G. Miller, Colin F. Poole (Centre for Analytical Chemistry,Imperial College, South Kensington, London SW7 2AY, U.K.) and TinaM.P. Chichila optimized extraction conditions for essential oilsfrom powdered cinnamon by carbon dioxide at 300 atm and 70C. Theymixed 0.5 g of powdered cinnamon with 4.5 g anhydrous sodiumsulfate and added 1.0 ml acetonitrile at the beginning ofsequential 30 min. static and 30 min. dynamic extraction periods.They collected the semivolatile essential oils by solvent trappingin ethyl acetate and analyzed them directly by series-coupledcolumn gas chromatography after filtration and partial solventevaporation.The authors used a Suprex 200A supercritical fluid chromatographthat was modified for supercritical fluid extraction. Controlextractions were made from each sample by Soxhlet extraction. Theauthors used a Seimens Sichromat-2 dual-oven gas chromatographfitted with a split injector and a flame ionization detector. Forgas chromatography/mass spectrometry, they used a 3400 gaschromatograph equipped with a model 1075 splitless injectorinterfaced to a Finnigan MAT Magnum ion tap detector.Poole reports in Journal of High Resolution Chromatography [18-8,461-471, 1995] that the three authors identified and quantified 21compounds in 24 authenticated and retail samples of cinnamon andcassia. The dominant essence in both cinnamon and cassia is trans-cinnamaldehyde, which varies in concentration from 0.5-53 mg/g,with smaller amounts of various aromatic compounds and esters. Truecinnamon and cassia are easily distinguishable by the presence incinnamon of eugenol and benzyl benzoate, which are absent ornegligible in cassia. Cassia, in contrast, contains coumarin anddelta-cadinene, which are absent or trace components in cinnamon.The extractions were slow or incomplete at pressures below 300 atmand temperatures below 50C. The authors found that solvent-assisted supercritical fluid extraction was at least equivalent toSoxhlet in its ability to extract semivolatile compounds fromcinnamon and cassia, and preferable to Soxhlet for generalapplications because it gives faster extractions without generatingartifact peaks. Absolute recoveries by supercritical fluidextraction and Soxhlet were about the same while solvent reflux for2 hrs. and simultaneous steam distillation/solvent extractionachieved significantly lower recoveries of many components.The concentration of cinnamaldehyde is one parameter for judgingthe flavor quality of spice, with quality being directlyproportional to concentration. The average cinnamaldehydeconcentration in cassia, however, is actually higher. Principalcomponent analysis of the 23 samples using the relative compositionof the 12 major semivolatile essences gave a clear distinctionbetween cinnamon and cassia. The loadings for "principal component1" are heavily weighted to benzyl benzoate, 2-methoxycinnamaldehyde, and benzaldehyde as positive coefficientsand coumarin and beta-caryophyllene as negative coefficients forcinnamon.High relative concentrations of benzyl anzoate and 2-methoxycinnamaldehyde are characteristic of cinnamon and highrelative concentrations of coumarin and beta-caryophyllene arecharacteristic of cassia. The authors conclude that principalcomponent 1 effectively discriminates between cinnamon and cassia.A plot of PC-1 versus PC-2 clearly separates the 24 samples intotwo groups of 11 and 13, with all the U.S. cinnamons falling in thecassia group.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Isothiocyanates AreNatural AlternativeAlthough the commercial use of isothiocyanates is limited, Canadianscientists propose that the natural agents could replace syntheticpreservatives in certain applications of packaged foods.  Theirvolatility make them attractive candidates for use in modernpackaging, either with other antimicrobial agents or on their own.Pascal J. Delaquis and Joe Mazza of the Agriculture and Agri-FoodCanada Research Centre (Summerland, BC V0H 1Z0; Tel: 604/494-7711)have reviewed the effect of isothiocyanates on microbes."Antimicrobial Properties of Isothiocyanates in Food Preservation"was a peer-reviewed article published in Food Technology[49(11):73-84, 1995].Isothiocyanates are found in cruciferous plants, such ashorseradish, cauliflower, mustard, cabbage, turnip, radish,rapeseed, and Brussels sprouts.  The Romans used mustard seed topreserve wine and fruit juices.  These sulfur-containing compoundscan be recovered commercially by steam distillation of ground wetplant material, but synthetic manufacturing processes have beenavailable since the 1940s.  Isothiocyanates have been used formilitary tear gas, pesticides, and industrial purposes.The molecular structure of isothiocyanates varies.  The genericmolecular formula is R-N=C=S where the R-side group may be methyl(CH3), allyl (CH2-CH-CH2), or a number of other possiblestructures.Isothiocyanates have been found potent inhibitors of microorganismswhen tested with a variety of fungi, yeasts, and bacteria.  In the1960s, about 100 natural and synthetic isothiocyanates were testedfor antifungal activity, and it was found that the aromaticderivatives were the most effective of the natural compounds.  Inthe 1990s, Japanese scientists have shown that vapors can inhibitthe growth of several fungi.  At a concentration of 1%, allylisothiocyanate can prevent yeast growth in fruit juices.  A reviewof the antibacterial studies determined that isothiocyanates arenot as effective at impeding the growth of bacteria as they arewith fungal growth.  Also, certain strains are more resistant tothe bacteriocidal and bacteriostatic effects than others.Natural extracts of allyl isothiocyanate (CH2-CH-CH2-N=C=S) areused as a preservative in Japan.  Synthetic forms may becontaminated with a toxic substance, allyl chloride, which is usedin the manufacturing process.  Allyl isothiocyanate is incorporatedinto the packaging material in order to extend the shelf life ofcertain foods.Isothiocyanates are not widely used because the health effects areunknown.  The findings are mixed regarding toxicity and potentialhealth benefits.  At least three recent studies show that certainisothiocyanates may inhibit the development of cancers.  At thesame time, certain kinds are thought to be linked to thedevelopment of goiters through the binding of iodine by thethiocyanate ion.  Some isothiocyanates are thought to be cytotoxicor mutagenic.  The data are contradictory.  The authors urge thatmore research be conducted in this area, since these compoundscould provide a natural source of preservatives.Another reason isothiocyanates may not be used widely as foodpreservatives is the pungent flavor and odor of these compounds.Threshold levels range from 8 parts per billion (ppb) for allylisothiocyanate to 380 ppb for 3-butenyl isothiocyanate.  But,antimicrobial activity in foods may be possible with concentrationsbelow the threshold level in the vapor phase.  Allyl isothiocyanateis used to control surface growth.  Studies have not been conductedon the absorption and dissolution of these compounds into foodproducts.  Delaquis and Mazza urge that more investigations beconducted to determine the potential of isothiocyanates as foodpreservatives.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Covi-Ox ProtectsAgainst RancidityHenkel Corp. (5325 S. Ninth Ave., La Grange, IL 60525-3602; Tel:708/579-6150, Fax: 708/579-6152) markets a product consisting ofnatural mixed tocopherols to protect foods containing highlyunsaturated oils.  Covi-Ox protects against oxidative rancidity,which leads to off-odors and off-flavors.  Natural mixedtocopherols are GRAS (generally regarded as safe) substances andare approved as a preservative by the Food and Drug Administration(21 CFR 182.3890).  According to the company, Covi-Ox tocopherolsare the only approved natural fat-soluble antioxidants available.Since the tocopherol mixture is of low volatility, Covi-Ox can beadded to the food product during high-temperature processingwithout losing activity.  By contrast, synthetic antioxidantsusually volatilize at the same high temperatures.  According toHenkel, Covi-Ox may be used as an antioxidant to protect lecithin,vegetable and citrus oils, milk fat, cereal, dehydrated potatoes,meat products, and a long list of other foods or ingredients.Covi-Ox is available as a water dispersible powder (Covi-Ox T-30P)and as clear, viscous oils (Covi-Ox T-50 and T-70).  The optimallevel of tocopherols in food products ranges between 0.01% and 0.2%of the fat or oil content.Henkel Corp. is one of the top 200 international companies, and itsFine Chemicals Div. is the leading producer of natural tocopherols.In addition to Covi-Ox, the Fine Chemicals Div. markets mediumchain triglycerides, whipped topping concentrates, and bread/bakingingredients.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Rosemary PutsPep in PepperoniDiversitech, Inc. (2411 NW 41st St., Gainesville, FL 32606-6662;Tel: 904/377-7071, Fax: 904/377-7073) markets three forms ofRosemary extract for extending the shelf-life of pepperoni andother meat products.  The extract stabilizes color and flavor andretards the oxidation of fat in the meats.ColorLife Rosemary extracts come in an oil-soluble powder (RosemaryPowder-P), an oil-soluble liquid (Rosemary Liquid-O), and a water-dispersible liquid (Rosemary Liquid-W).  The powder may be added tothe meat mix directly or mixed with dry spices or solids.  Whenrefrigerated and protected from moisture, light, and oxygen, thepowder remains stable for at least two years.The usage rate is 0.01% to 0.05%.  Liquid-O can be added to the fatportion of a food, mixed with flavorings and then added to thefood, or diluted with oil and sprayed onto food.  Liquid-W can beused in sausage, snack flavorings, and soups.  Depending on fatcontent, Liquid-O inhibits rancidity at dilutions of 0.02% to0.10%, while Liquid-W inhibits at dilutions of 0.03% to 0.14%.Diversitech markets spice blends to the food industry, primarily tothe meat industry.  The company markets ColorLife as a standardizedrosemary extract.  An advantage of this product is its standardizedactive ingredients.  Diversitech offers customized blends withother antioxidants or spices. According to the company, most of therosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) imported to the U.S. is grown inSpain, France, and Portugal.  The leaves contain compounds thatstabilize the fats in meat.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FDA CommitteeSays Olestra SafeThe fat substitute olestra is undergoing Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) review.  The FDA Food Advisory Committee metrecently and determined that olestra poses no harm as a foodingredient.  Olestra is the only fat-based fat substitute ever toundergo federal review in the U.S.  Other fat substitutes arecarbohydrate- or protein-based.Procter & Gamble Co. (One Procter & Gamble Plaza, P.O. Box 599,Cincinnati, OH 45201-0599; Tel: 513/983-1100, Fax: 513/983-9369)first sought approval to use olestra as a food ingredient in 1987.At that time, the company filed a food additive petition for usingolestra in shortening and cooking oil.  In 1990, the petition wasamended to use olestra as a fat substitute in savory snacks.Examples of salty or sharp-tasting snacks of interest to thecompany are cheese puffs and crackers.The Advisory Committee discussed the findings of a team of seniormanagers from FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutritionand FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine, who met earlier in 1995.The team of senior managers reviewed safety data and discussed thedata with experts from academia and federal agencies.  Since theoriginal petition was filed in 1987, Procter & Gamble has submitteddata from more than 150 investigations on the safety of olestra.A working group of the Food Advisory Committee reviewed the fatsubstitute's chemistry and consumption, toxicology, potentialinterference with drug absorption, effects to the digestive system,labeling, and nutritional effects.  The group decided that thestudy questions and data were sufficient, but the vote was notunanimous for deciding that the data indicated that olestra wassafe for human consumption.  The group recommended that productsmade with olestra carry a warning label that the ingredient mightcause intestinal discomfort or might have a laxative effect.Although no studies showed that olestra has an adverse effect onthe ability to absorb water-soluble vitamins, the committeerecommends that olestra be fortified with vitamins A, D, E, and K.The full Food Advisory Committee concurred with the findings of theworking group.  The Advisory Committee decided that "a reasonablecertainty exists of no harm" from olestra's proposed foodapplications.  The FDA will use this analysis in order to decide onwhether to allow Procter & Gamble to use olestra as a foodingredient.Olestra is a fat substitute formed from the combination of sucrosewith fatty acids.  The food ingredient does not liberate caloriesbecause the body cannot metabolize it.  In olestra, the glycerolmolecule present in fat is replaced by sucrose.  And instead ofthree fatty acid molecules, olestra has seven or eight.  The fatsubstitute is not metabolized because digestive enzymes cannot getpast the fatty acid molecules to access the sucrose center beforeolestra exits the digestive tract.Procter & Gamble reported food and beverage sales of $3.988 billionin 1995.  Crisco, Jif, Duncan Hines, Folgers, Hawaiian Punch, andSunny Delight are examples of its more common household food andbeverage products.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Fatty Acid PolyesterUsed in Low-Cal FoodA two-step process prepares saccharide fatty acid polyesters froma sugar and a reagent containing a fatty acid.  The resultingpolyesters can be used as fat substitutes or low-calorie fats infoods.Gerry Hasenhuettl of Kraft General Foods (3 Lakes Dr., Northfield,IL 60093; Tel: 708/646-7469) invented the process (U.S. Patent5,440,027).  First, the sugar is partially esterified.  Then, areagent containing a fatty acid is used to react with the partiallyesterified sugar.  The reagent may be fatty acids, fatty acidesters, salts of fatty acids, or fatty acid anhydrides.  Saccharidefatty acid polyesters result from the reaction.Less carmelization and fewer decomposition reactions are two basicadvantages of using a partially esterified sugar for the reaction.Also, the reaction system is more homogeneous, and the formation oflow molecular weight ester byproducts is less.According to Hasenhuettl, these saccharide fatty acid polyesterswould fall into the same category as olestra, a zero-calorie fatsubstitute made from sucrose and fatty acids.  Procter & Gamble(One Procter & Gamble Plaza, P.O. Box 599, Cincinnati, OH 45201-0599; Tel: 513/983-1100, Fax: 513/983-9369) manufactures olestraand has petitioned the FDA for approval to use the fat substituteas an ingredient.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Product BakesMoister CakesJuan M. Gonzalez-Sanz of the Pillsbury Co. (200 S. 6th St.,Minneapolis, MN 55402-1464; Tel: 612/330-4741) invented a low-fatspreadable composition that can be used with baked foods or alone,as a frosting.   Shortening, starch, a hydrocolloid, an emulsifier,and a sweetener make up the product.  The starch has a hydrophilicstarch component and a modified hydrophobic starch component.When used as a frosting, the low-fat composition exhibits enhancedadhesion.  When used in baked foods, such as cakes, rolls, breads,biscuits, and pastries, the product increases the moistness. U.S.Patent 5,439,697 was issued to Pillsbury for this invention.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Proprietary Processfor Peanut ButterSeabrook Enterprises, Inc. (100 Galleria Pkwy. NW, Suite 580,Atlanta, GA 30339; Tel: 770/951-0404) now markets a reduced-fatpeanut butter for fillings, coatings, bakery items, nutrition bars,dairy products, and candy centers.  Only two reduced-fat peanutbutters have been commercialized.  A similar product is the low-fatpeanut spread, which does not contain the minimum level of 90%peanuts to qualify as peanut butter.According to Tucker Dodson, Seabrook Enterprise's VP of sales, themain advantage of Seabrook Enterprise's reduced-fat peanut butteris that it "has all the same nutritional function with 25% lessfat" than whole-fat peanut butter.  No vitamin or mineralsupplement is added to the all-natural product.  The flavor is moreconcentrated, the product is less apt to separate, and the peanutbutter is more heat stable.About 25-30% of the fat is removed by their proprietary method.  In1994, the company applied for a patent for the fat-extractingtechnology.  Although this product is sold solely as a foodingredient on the industrial market, the peanut butter is availablefor repackaging for retail sale.Dodson describes the company as a "vertically integrated peanutshelling and processing company" that is the largest of its kind inthe U.S.  Seabrook Enterprise processes 400 million pounds ofpeanuts annually.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Chicken Fat PowderWith a Milk CarrierInternational Dehydrated Foods, Inc. (IDF, 3801 E. Sunshine,Springfield, MO 65809; Tel: 417/881-7820, Fax: 417/881-7274) ismaking available a Powdered Chicken Fat that uses nonfat dry milkas a carrier. To protect flavor, BHA, propyl gallate and citricacid are added, but natural antioxidants are also available.The powder is white to ivory-colored, has a mild flavor and odortypical of chicken fat, and meets all applicable FDA requirements.Suggested applications are chicken seasoning, cream soups, drygravy mixes, sauces and dry soup mixes.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Glazing OverCaramel CornMichael L. Jensen and Sara J. Risch of Golden Valley MicrowaveFoods, Inc. (7450 Metro Blvd., Edina, MN 55439; Tel: 612/835-6900)have invented a microwavable mixture for sweetening microwavepopcorn.  The mixture is composed of unpopped popcorn, a sweeteningblend, and a glazing blend.  Salt may also be added to the unpoppedcorn.The sweetening blend is made from an oil and sugar crystals.  Theweight ratio of sweetening blend to unpopped popcorn is between0.5/1 to 1.5/1.  The oil's melting point is above 115F. Thecrystalline sugar has a moisture content less than 2% by weight.The glazing blend, which is mixed with the unpopped popcorn, ismade from corn syrup (80-90% by weight), oil (10-20% by weight),and an emulsifier.  As with the oil used for the sweetening blend,the glazing oil's melting point should be above 115F.Jensen, a food technologist with Golden Valley Microwave Foods,told FIN that the method has been used in the past for a marketedpopcorn product.  The work originated in order to eliminate thesecond step necessary in making caramel popcorn.  In order tosweeten the popcorn, a wafer is placed on the cooked popcorn andmelted in a second microwaving step.  Jensen and Risch's inventioneliminates the need for a separate wafer containing sweetener.Instead, the popcorn is coated with both sweetening and glazingblends.  The patent may be licensed by companies interested inusing the mixture in their own products.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Systems Bio-IndustriesAdds on AspartameThe NutraSweet Co. (1751 Lake Cook Rd., Deerfield, IL 60015; Tel:708/940-9800) no longer has exclusive rights to aspartame, andSystems Bio-Industries (8 Neshaminy Interplex, Suite 213, Trevose,PA 19053; Tel: 215/638-7801) joins the list of other companies whohave added aspartame to their line of food ingredients.Aspartame is about 200 times sweeter than table sugar (sucrose).The artificial sweetener is an ingredient in 500 foods andbeverages, such as yogurt, drink mixes, and carbonated soft drinks.The product loses sweetness when exposed to heat, moisture, oralkaline conditions.  Aspartame is made by joining two amino acids--aspartic acid and phenylalanine--which are found in naturalproteins.Aspartame is one of the most widely tested food ingredients.  Morethan 100 safety tests were conducted before it was marketed.  Theproduct was approved in the U.S. in 1981 as an ingredient inpowdered mixes and for use as a tabletop sweetener.  In 1983,carbonated drinks were added to the list of approved uses. The foodingredient is marketed in more than 70 countries.  Product namesinclude NutraSweet, Equal, Spoonful, and Natra Taste.According to Jim Duffy, account manager, sales and marketing (620Progress Ave., Waukesha, WI 53186; Tel: 800/654-2396), the companyis an industry leader among food ingredient manufacturers. Inaddition to Aspartame 200, they manufactures a variety of foodingredients and additives, including enzyme-modified dairyingredients, gels, fruit preparations, pectins, and natural flavorsystems.  In January 1995, when SKW Trostberg A.G. of Germanyacquired the company, the name was changed to Systems Bio-Industries from Sanofi Bio-Industries.  The acquisition increasedSKW's total sales to the food industry by $1 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Splenda SweetensMexican DrinksMcNeil Specialty Products Co. (501 George St., New Brunswick, NY08903-2400; Tel: 908/524-1837, Fax: 908/524-6735) is awaiting FDAapproval for its Splenda brand sweetener (sucralose) in the U.S.,but this low calorie sweetener made from sugar can be found in manyoverseas applications.The latest is a line of diet, lightly-flavored sparkling watersmarketed under the name Spark Lite and made by Agua de MasaJunghanns, a privately-held company located in Puebla, Mexico. Thedrink is available in three flavors:  tangerine, kiwi and peach,and is packaged in 12-ounce cans. Splenda is made here by McNeil,a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, and is imported and distributedin Mexico by Johnson & Johnson S.A. de C.V.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sugar-ContainingSolutions SoftenedA cation exchange resin-based process for softening aqueoussolutions such sugar juice or molasses has been investigated.Michael Saska of the Louisiana State University (LSU, ChemicalEngineering Dept., Baton Rouge, LA 70803; Tel: 504/388-3327)reports that the sugar cane and sugar beet industries produce largequantities of non-crystallizable sugar juice, or sugar factorymolasses.  This molasses has a high sugar content and is treatedto extract the sugars.Such conventional treatment involves subjecting the molasses to anion exclusion chromatography process using a fixed support of astrong sodium (Na) or potassium (K) cation resin.  The problem isthat magnesium (Mg) and/or calcium (Ca) salts dissolved in themolasses and, as charged Ca2+ and/or Mg2+ ions, replace the Na+ andK+ ions during the chromatography operation, reducing theseparating power of the technique.  As a result, the chromatographyoperation is interrupted periodically to regenerate the cationresin.Regeneration reagent is consumed and productivity is reduced.  Oneapproach to overcome the problem involves the elimination of theCa2+ and/or Mg2+ ions prior to the chromatography step.  Such atechnique also requires the use of a regeneration reagent and hasthe additional disadvantage of producing wastewater containingsugar, reducing the yield from the overall process.In the new process, the sugar juice is softened by bringing it intocontact with Na+ and/or K+ cation exchange resins in a conventionalmanner.  The key to the new technique is the regeneration part ofthe process, which makes clever use of one of the liquid effluentsin a sugar factory.  The raffinate generated during thechromatographic separation and charged with Na+ and/or K+ ions isnormally discarded.  The researchers concentrated the raffinate andused it to regenerate the resin used in the primary separation.U.S. Patent 5,443,650 covers the new technique.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Honey HeightensTaste PerceptionAnna Resurreccion and her colleagues at the Dept. of Food Scienceat the University of Georgia (Center for Food Safety and QualityEnhancement, Georgia Station, Griffin, GA 30223; Tel: 770/228-7284;email: aresurr@gaes.griffin.peachnet.edu) have demonstrated in arecent study that honey can have an effect on the perception ofsweet, sour, bitter, and salty tastes.  The sensory evaluationtests were performed by panels of trained evaluators.The intensity of sweet solutions is enhanced by the addition ofhoney.  When 25% honey is added to a 5% sucrose solution, thesweetness intensity is doubled.  Other solutions, such as 10%sucrose, are not enhanced to the same degree.  Orange blossom honeywas shown to have the most enhancing power.Pure solutions of citric acid were used to evaluate honey's effecton the sourness of solutions.  The sourness intensity rating of acitric acid solution was decreased from 50 to about 17 by theaddition of 25% honey.  The more sour the solution, the morepronounced the effect.  A citric acid solution rated at 100 wasreduced to about 28 by the addition of honey.  This study showsthat honey has the ability to increase consumer acceptability ofvery sour products, such as citrus beverages, yogurts, and berry-based products.Caffeine solutions were used to measure the reduction of bitternessresulting from the addition of honey.  Orange blossom, wildflower,and clover honeys were used to evaluate the reduction.  Cloverhoney showed the widest margin of difference; the bitternessintensity plunged from 50 to 3.2.  Food developers could use honeyin order to mask bitterness in certain foods, which can result frommolecular breakdown during processing.Honey can mask the high saltiness intensity of salt-cured products,such as ham and bacon.  The panel of evaluators indicated thatadding honey to a sodium chloride solution decreases the saltintensity score from 50 to about 28.  With a saltier solution, thescore dropped from 150 to about 45 with the addition of honey.The carbohydrate composition varies between honeys, which mightexplain why orange blossom, wildflower, and clover honeys hadslightly different results in this study.  Fructose and glucose arethe main carbohydrates in honey.  In addition to thesemonosaccharides, maltose, sucrose, and other oligosaccharides arefound in honey.In addition to being a sweetener, honey as an ingredient can holdmoisture, can extend shelf-life, can promote color and flavordevelopment, and can be used as a browning agent or surface coatingin microwavable products.  The National Honey Board Food TechnologyProgram (P.O. Box 281525, San Francisco, CA 94128-1525; Tel:800/356-5941) conducts studies on the use of honey in foods.According to Veronique LaGrange, senior scientist and spokespersonfor the Honey Board (TJP Market Development, 3242 Jones Cr. NW,Washington, DC 20007; Tel: 202/625-6055), the primary purpose ofthe Honey Board Food Technology Program is to "help manufacturersuse honey in their products."  The studies tend to be applications-oriented for products already in existence.  The program providesprinted documents, in the form of newsletters and researchmonographs, and assistance to manufacturers who wish to use honeyin their products.  New ways of using honey, as well as new marketsfor honey, are offshoots of the program.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Report DeterminesThat MSG Is SafeFor most people, ingestion of monosodium glutamate (MSG) does notpose a problem.  For others, this flavor enhancer can causeheadaches and other unpleasant effects.  The Life Sciences ResearchOffice of the Federation of American Societies for ExperimentalBiology analyzed the adverse reactions people have had to MSG.  Thereport was prepared for the Center for Food Safety and AppliedNutrition of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).Free glutamate, in the form of MSG or protein hydrolysates, is usedto enhance flavor.  Currently, MSG must be listed when added as aningredient to foods.  But free glutamate is a natural component ofmany foods, such as Parmesan cheese and even tomatoes.The FDA is using the analysis in order to determine whether thelevel of free glutamate should be included on labels when presentin a "significant" amount.  A quantitative value of "significance"is yet to be defined.  According to the Institute of FoodTechnologists ("Monosodium Glutamate: A Statement of the Instituteof Food Technologists" Food Technology [49(10):28, 1995]), theglutamate content of MSG is 78%, while the glutamate content ofhydrolyzed vegetable protein is about 8%.The report concluded that MSG is safe since the short-lived adversereactions are confined to a small subset of the population.  Nostudies have demonstrated long-term effects from the ingestion ofMSG, such as the development of tumors or toxicity to the nervoussystem.  Other organizations deeming MSG safe include the WorldHealth Organization, American Medical Assn., Commission on EuropeanCommunities, and Institute of Food Technologists.Most foods contain less than 0.5 grams of MSG per serving.  Thereport found that about 3 grams of MSG are necessary for an adversereaction to occur.  Subjects eating large amounts of MSG on anempty stomach were most likely to complain of ill effects.MSG is made by fermenting starch, corn sugar, or molasses fromsugar cane or sugar beets.  The ingredient harmonizes with saltyand sour tastes, but does little to enhance sweet foods.  Somescientists classify MSG's effect as a fifth taste sensation knownas "umami."According to Chemical Marketing Reporter [248:18, 1995], the annualU.S. market for MSG is 40,000-50,000 metric tons.  Two companiesproduce the ingredient domestically, Archer Daniels Midland Co.(4666 Faries Pkwy., P.O. Box 1470, Decatur, IL 62525; Tel: 217/424-5200, Fax: 217/424-5839) and Ajinomoto USA (Eddyville, IA).  Bothoperations are fairly new:  Ajinomoto USA's domestic plant has beenin operation since 1993, and Archer Daniels Midland Co.'s site wentonline in 1994.  MSG's cost per pound is about 69 cents.While the domestic demand for MSG is stable, exports are on theincrease.  About 60% of the exports are sent to Canada, Mexico, andthe U.K., but the Netherlands and France are also consumers ofAmerican-made MSG.  In 1994, exports totaled about 193 metric tons,and in 1995, shipments increased to 5,000 metric tons.  One sourceclaims that the worldwide demand for MSG is increasing by 10% or20% annually.  The report prepared for the FDA may help to redressMSG's tarnished image in the U.S. and enhance annual consumptionlevels here.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996More IntenseCinnamon FlavorBaltimore Spice, Inc. (9740 Reisterstown Rd., Owings Mills, MD21117; Tel: 800/365-3229, Fax: 410/363-6619) is introducing anencapsulated cinnamon to help bakers who have yeast leaveningproblems when adding ground cinnamon to a yeast dough. Typically,bakers either reduce cinnamon usage in the dough to allow moreleavening or change to topical cinnamon application rather thanadding to the dough. Both of these techniques, however, candiminish desired cinnamon flavor.To provide a stronger flavor impact and instant release of volatileoils, encapsulated cinnamon may be used instead of regular groundcinnamon, and at a slightly lower level that will still produce anacceptable cinnamon flavor. The outcome is greater leaveningbecause there is a decreased percentage of cinnamon in the dough.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SFE Compared withSPE for Ham AnalysisThe conventional method for analyzing N-nitrosamines in hams waschallenged by the development of a supercritical fluid extraction(SFE) method.  Scientists at the Eastern Regional Research Centerof the Dept. of Agriculture (Agricultural Research Service,Philadelphia, PA 19118; Tel: 215/233-6400) compared solid phaseextraction (SPE) to SFE for extracting N-nitrosamines in hamsprocessed in elastic rubber nettings.Both the SPE and the SFE methods used gas chromatographic-chemiluminescence detection.  The SFE's variable restrictor wasequipped with a silica gel adsorption cartridge.  No statisticaldifference was found between the results obtained by the twomethods.  Advantages of SFE are the reduction in solvent use andthe speed of the analysis.John W. Pensabene, Walter Fiddler, Robert J. Maxwell, Alan R.Lightfield, and James W. Hampson published "Supercritical FluidExtraction of N-Nitrosamines in Hams Processed in Elastic RubberNettings" in the Journal of the Association of Official AnalyticalChemistry [78(3):744-748, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Pesticides Removedfrom Fruits, VeggiesTwo recent publications describe the removal of pesticides fromvegetables and fruits using supercritical fluid extraction (SFE).Both studies found SFE an acceptable method for the removal ofpesticides from produce for analysis.Steven J. Lehotay and Konstantin I. Eller of the BeltsvilleAgricultural Research Center of the Dept. of Agriculture(Environmental Chemistry Lab, Bldg. 7, Rm. 224, Beltsville, MD20705-2351; Tel: 301/504-6078) developed a method for analyzing thelevels of 46 pesticides in grapes, carrots, potatoes, and broccoli.The multiresidue method used SFE in conjunction with gaschromatography/ion trap mass spectrometry in order to extract andanalyze residues.The SFE was performed at 320 atm and 60C, and the extracts weretrapped on solid phase media.  Silica gel bound to octadecylsilanewas found suitable for this purpose.  The trap was then eluted withacetonitrile.  Next, the chromatographic analysis was performed.Greater than 80% recoveries were achieved for 39 of the 46pesticides.  The recoveries of the other pesticides, with theexception of methamidophos and omethoate, were more than 50%.Both incurred and fortified samples were used in a subsequentanalysis to evaluate the method.  The blind experiment showed thatthis method resulted in recoveries similar to results from sevenlaboratories using solvent-based extractions with traditional gaschromatograph detectors.Lehotay tells FIN that the focus of his work is pesticide analysisof agricultural commodities, and SFE is one of the primary methodsof extraction being developed by the lab.  The study was publishedas "Development of a Method of Analysis for 46 Pesticides in Fruitsand Vegetables by Supercritical Fluid Extraction and GasChromatography/Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry" in the Journal of theAssociation of Official Analytical Chemistry [78(3):821-830, 1995].In a similar study, scientists in Spain used a simple SFE method toremove pesticide residues from fresh pepper, cucumber, and tomatosamples.  Under moderate conditions, commercial SFE equipmentextracted methamidophos at a level greater than 70%, as well aschlorpyrifos, endosulfan, and procymidone.The fresh samples were mixed with anhydrous magnesium sulfate.Methanol was used as a modifier for the carbon dioxide fluid.Extraction conditions were a pressure of 300 atm and a temperatureof 50C.  The authors recommend further development of this methodfor the extraction of multiple residues.A. Garcia-Valverde, A.R. Fernandez-Alba, A. Aguera, and M.Contreras of the Pesticide Residue Research Group of theUniversidad de Almeria (Facultad de Ciencias Experimentales, Spain)published "Extraction of Methamidophos Residues from Vegetableswith Supercritical Fluid Carbon Dioxide" in the Journal of theAssociation of Official Analytical Chemistry [78(3):867-873, 1995].Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Focus on Foods'Health BenefitsMarketers of dairy, tomato, and perhaps flour products have someheartening news about the health benefits of their foods. Thefindings from three independent studies concluded that aged personsshould eat more dairy foods to get vitamin D to reduce risk of boneloss, men should eat tomatoes to reduce risk of prostate cancer,and women of childbearing age should eat foods rich in folic-acidto reduce risk of birth defects.A report published in the December 5 issue of The Journal of theAmerican Medical Association found that many elderly people fail toget enough vitamin D because they lack opportunities to get outdoorexposure to sunlight.  Sitting by a sunny window won't do the jobbecause the glass filters out the ultraviolet light needed toconvert precursor molecules to vitamin D in the skin.The report was based on a study conducted at the Union MemorialHospital's Div. of Geriatrics in Baltimore. The subjects were 244people age 65 and over, some of whom were confined to nursing homesor in their own homes, and some who were able to go outdoors. Thestudy raised the question as to whether recommended dietaryallowance levels should be reevaluated in order to see if higherlevels of vitamin D supplementation are needed.  Mentioned as goodnatural sources of vitamin D were milk, dairy products, egg yolk,oily fish such as sardines, salmon, tuna and liver.Foods containing tomatoes, which are rich in the antioxidant,lycopene, are believed to provide higher levels of protectionagainst prostate cancer, according to Harvard Universityresearchers led by Dr. Edward Giovannucci of  the Harvard School ofPublic Health. Men who ate at least 10 servings per week were foundto have a 45% lower rate of the cancer compared to men who ate 4-7servings weekly and had only a 20% reduction in the cancer.Further good news is that the tomatoes could be in any form, suchas sauces, juice, raw and even in pizza. In fact, cooked tomatoproducts appeared to be more protective than either juice or rawtomatoes, on the assumption that when tomatoes are heated theircells burst and release more lycopene.The nine-year study examined the eating habits of 47,000 men in thehealth professions between the ages of 40 and 75, and was publishedin the December 7 issue of The Journal of the National CancerInstitute. The first survey was taken in 1986, and the subjectswere followed and periodically re-examined. At the end of the studyin 1992, there were 812 cases of prostate cancer among thesubjects, and the dietary histories of these cancer subjects werethen compared with the subjects who did not develop the cancer.Also published in the December 5 issue of JAMA  was a report fromthe University College in Dublin, Ireland which stated thatfortifying food with folic acid may be the best way to reduce thenumber of babies born with severe birth defects.  Irish researchersat the college said a four-year study of blood samples frompregnant women showed that those with the lowest levels of folate,a salt of folic acid, in red blood cells had the highest risk ofbearing a child with a neural tube defect such as spina bifida.A 48% reduction in the total neural tube defect rate istheoretically achievable with an increased population intake of 0.4milligrams per day of folic acid, according to the report, and thiscould better be realized by fortifying foods than withsupplementation. Folic acid, a vitamin necessary for blood marrowto make red blood cells, is found in a wide variety of foods,particularly liver and raw vegetables. In the U.S., there isdiscussion about fortifying flour with folic acid because it is astaple in the diet and women wouldn't have to change their dietaryhabits in order to intake adequate levels.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Consumers TrustFarmers the MostAfter all the money and trouble that food processors went throughto create new labels, how do consumers rank them as crediblesources of information about foods?  Second only to farmers,according to the second annual American Food Consumer Surveyrecently conducted by Purina Mills, Inc. of St. Louis.  The studyasked more than 3,500 consumers from across the country about theirattitudes, practices and sources of knowledge concerning their foodsupply, during August-September, 1995.The food information sources considered as "most credible" by thesurvey's respondents included farmers (26%), food labels (19%),family and friends (14%), food industry (10%), educators (9%),government agencies (9%), grocers/supermarkets (6%), news media(4%) and advertising (3%). Further findings were that 74% believethat farmers should use high yield farming technology to feed ourgrowing population; 63% feel that the food they consume is safe,and the greatest concerns among respondents about our food supplyare in the areas of water contamination, bacterial contaminationand pesticide use.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996New Markets Soughtby U.S. Food MakersThe search for new markets via new product development or new landsto sell to have forged three recent marketing agreements between aleading baking products company and the market leader of fat-freeand reduced-fat snack foods, a maker of natural foods and threeJapanese companies that will market them, and a world-leading soupcompany acquires a controlling interest in a joint venture topenetrate southeast Asian markets.Pillsbury, the Minneapolis-based subsidiary of Britain's GrandMetropolitan PLC will produce, market and sell SnackWell's bakingmix products under license from Nabisco.  The first product will beSnackWell's Low Fat Fudge Brownie Mix, and shipments will beginthis month. The mix was created by a proprietary balancing ofingredients in order to achieve the rich chocolate flavor of high-quality brownies, but with less fat. Each brownie has just 2.5grams of fat, compared with 7 grams in regular fudge brownie mixes.The baking mix marks the first time the SnackWell's name appearsfor this type of product. Currently, the Snackwell's line includesfat-free and reduced-fat cookies, crackers, breakfast bars, yogurtsand instant puddings.  In just three years, Nabisco's SnackWell'shas become the largest cookie and cracker brand in the U.S.Since Japanese consumers are like their American counterparts andwant healthy foods, Kushi Macrobiotics Corp. of Stamford, CT hasformed an agreement with three major Japanese natural food retailand wholesale companies that will market the Kushi Cuisine line ofpremium natural food products:  Meiwa Sangyo Co. Ltd., a subsidiaryof Mitsubishi Corp., Anew-Naturally Yours Co. Ltd., and TKB Mart.Kushi Cuisine products will be the only nationally available line,and it will include 33 premium, easy-to-prepare natural foods.Camden, NJ-based Campbell Soup Co., which is the world's leadingsoup company, is acquiring its first manufacturing facility inSoutheast Asia, in Malaysia. Campbell has achieved this move byacquiring the controlling interest in a joint venture with one ofMalaysia's leading food firms,  privately owned Cheong Chan (HupKee) Sdn. Bhd. of Petaling Jaya. The new company will manufacturesoups, chili sauces, ketchup and foodservice products and ethnicChinese sauces.  Campbell will market and distribute these productsthroughout the ASEAN (Association of South East Asia Nations)countries of Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei, Thailand, ThePhilippines and Vietnam.Campbell is hoping to capitalize on the love of soup in Asia, aswell as the strength of Malaysia's economy. A total of 40% of theworld's soup is consumed in Asia, either homemade or commercial.Soup consumption is strong in Southeast Asia, particularly amongethnic Chinese, and prepared, packaged soup is popular among peoplein the upper income segments. The top selling Campbell soup in Asiais corn soup designed especially for the local market.Malaysia has one of the strongest and fastest growing economies inthe Asia Pacific region, and 1995 was the seventh year in which thegrowth rate was above 8%. While only 17.5 million people live inMalaysia, there are  some 300 million people living in southeastAsia, 83 million of whom live in urban areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Companies Expandand RestructureTo deal with projected domestic growth, one company expands afacility, and with an eye toward global growth, two companiesreorganize their U.S. or international divisions.Opta Food Ingredients, Inc. headquartered in Bedford, MA hascompleted the expansion of its Louisville, KY facility that willdouble its capacity to produce Oat Fibers, its line of functionaltexturizing agents that can also increase dietary fiber in foods.The expansion was in response to increased demand for theproprietary ingredient from its customers, who include foodprocessors and foodservice operators. Among the former are five ofthe 10 largest U.S. consumer packaged food companies.Eastman Chemical Co. based in Kingsport, TN has combined two of itsbusinesses to create a new organization to be known as PerformanceChemicals.  As of January 1, the company's Polymer Modifiers andNutrition and Formulation Products businesses will be oneorganization that includes four business units, one of which isFood Ingredients and Specialty Products. Specialty Products is aconsolidation of four business segments--Cosmetics  and PersonalCare, Nutritional Supplements, Textile Chemicals and  UrethaneIntermediates.  (The other three business units comprisingPerformance Chemicals are involved with chemicals andpharmaceuticals.)International giant, Philip Morris Co. has reorganized Kraft FoodsInternational, a subsidiary of Kraft Foods, Inc. The internationalsubsidiary has extensive coffee, confectionery, cheese and otherfood operations throughout Europe, the Middle East, Africa and theAsia/Pacific region. The restructured Kraft Foods Internationalwill include four separate regional units--Kraft Jacobs SuchardWestern Europe; Kraft Jacobs Suchard Northern Europe; Kraft JacobsSuchard Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa, andKraft Foods Asia/Pacific.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Xylose Plant NowUnder ConstructionCultor (Kyllikinportti 2, SF-00240 Helsinki, Finland) plans toconstruct a $70 million xylose plant in Austria.  Xylose is used inthe production of xylitol, an ingredient used to sweeten chewinggum and oral hygiene products. Cultor's subsidiary, Xyrofin, claimsthat worldwide demand for xylitol is increasing by 25% annually.The subsidiary also claims to have 80% of the world market forxylitol.The xylose plant will be located next to a birch pulp productionunit, allowing Cultor to use one of the byproducts of pulpproduction for the extraction of xylose.  The streamlined logisticswill enhance the efficiency of the process.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Processors AcquireIngredient FirmsSome processed products used as basic ingredients in processedfoods have new addresses, as does a supplier of flavors andseasonings. Some recent sales include companies that make potatoproducts, fruit products, Italian food products, and pickle andspecialty food products.Minneapolis-based Michael Foods, Inc. bought the institutionalrefrigerated potato products business of Interstate Food ProcessingCorp., located in fort Fairfield, MR  Interstate is the secondlargest producer in the U.S. of foodservice refrigerated potatoproducts after Michael Foods' Northern Star Co. subsidiary.Monitor Sugar Co. of Bay City, MI has purchased Graceland FruitCooperative of Frankfort, MI, the country's premier supplier ofpreservative-free dried fruit products to the food processing,foodservice and grocery markets. Food processors use the fruits incereals, baked goods, dairy products, trail mix, candy and otherfood products.Garma Gourmet Group of Milan, Italy has acquired the Italian FoodProducts division of The Quaker Oats Co. The divested businessesinclude edible oils marketed under the Cuore and Topazio brandnames, and Polenta Valsugana, a pre-cooked corn flour meal. TheItalian Food Products division is located in Silea, Italy. Thiscontinues the company's recent policy of shedding divisions outsideits core beverage and grain-based foods businesses.Dean Foods Co. of Franklin Park, IL has acquired Paramount Foods,LLC, a pickle and specialty products processor located inLouisville, KY.  Paramount sells pickles and other specialty fooditems under the Paramount label, and private labels to retail andfoodservice outlets throughout the Mid-South.  Dean Foods startedits pickle business over 30 years with the acquisition of theoriginal Green Bay Food Co.  Subsequently, through the acquisitionof successful regional pickle companies, Dean has grown to becomeone of the two largest pickle businesses in the U.S.  In addition,on a national basis, Dean is a leading producer of dairy products,ranks third in market share in processed vegetables, and second inpickles and specialty  products.Technology Flavors & Fragrances, Inc. located in Amityville, NYbought Seafla, Inc. of Milford, OH. Seafla is a maker of premiumsavory flavors, seasonings and cheese powders used in makingconvenience foods, snack foods, condiments, bakery products,confectioneries, deli-foods, and meat, poultry and seafoodproducts. Technology develops and makes flavors for use in naturalflavored beverages, confectioneries, and health foods.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Meats and BakedGoods AcquiredConAgra Inc.'s Bronx, NY-based National Foods has acquired MogenDavid's meats sold under the brand names of Mogen David, AmericanKosher, Isaac Gellis, Judea and Zion. Mogen David distributeskosher products, including smoked and cured meats and sausageproducts throughout the tri-state New York metropolitan region andin Florida.  The purchase reflects ConAgra's continuing interest inthe kosher meat market, which began in 1992 with its acquisition ofNational Foods, manufacturer of Hebrew National, a leadingprocessor of kosher meats in the U.S. National  Foods, reports toConAgra's Armour Swift-Eckrich division.Chiquita Brands International, Inc. of Cincinnati sold its MeatDiv. to Smithfield Foods, Inc. This action now completes Chiquita'sexit from the meat business, which is outside its core business ofprocessing food products, and where it is an international leader.Silverado Foods, Inc. of Tulsa, OK purchased MarveLoaf Corp. ofHolbrook, NY, maker of a low fat yogurt cake, and a line of muffinsand crumb cakes.  The purchase complements Silverado's specialtybaked goods products, part of the company's product line which alsoincludes gourmet and snack foods.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sugar Prices Drop,Maybe Up for MilkWith the announcement by a leading candy maker that prices for acandy bar will go up five cents, the Washington DC-based AmericanSugar Farmers were quick to point out that the price hike hadnothing to do with the price of sugar.  That's because sugar priceshave decreased during the past five years, and cane and beetfarmers have not had a price increase in 10 years.Supporting this contention are figures from the Dept. ofAgriculture and the Bureau of Labor Statistics which report thatthe wholesale price that food manufacturers pay for their sugar hasfallen 16% since 1990.  However, during this same period, theprices for sugar-containing products, such as candy, bakery goods,cereal and soft drinks, have increased from 10-22%. So like the mansaid, it can't be because of sugar.Milk prices are another matter because their increase may be tracedto the well-meaning but misguided program currently underconsideration by Congress. According to the International DairyFoods Association of Washington, DC, the new dairy plan would lockin milk prices at January 1996 levels,  the highest levels in thepast five years, and would cost consumers an estimated $1 billionmore annually.The plan was worked out by the National Milk Producers Federation,an organization that represents the major dairy farmercooperatives. The plan would eliminate some of the surplus productsthe government would purchase, locking in a minimum price level forfluid milk, and adding several new ways that milk producers wouldshare the money paid for their milk.  Budget savings would beaccrued by changing the government's policy of buying surplus dairyproducts. Currently, the dairy price support program buys anybutter, milk powder or cheese that isn't purchased.  Under the newplan, this would involve only cheese.The outcome could be that butter and powder would be dumped onworld markets at low prices, which would then be subsidized by anew system assessing all dairy farmers to cover the differencebetween lower prices and former government support levels. Thisscenario could cause a shortage of dairy ingredients for U.S. foodmanufacturers, forcing up prices of finished products at theconsumer level.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Shifts Seen inVitamin EThe market for tocopherol is undergoing major changes a naturaltocopherol is becoming increasingly available for food applicationsand as key players in the business are forming strong alliances.The global tocopherol market is currently almost $1 billion. Mostof this tocopherol, which is produced by synthesis, is used inagricultural feed. About $100 million in sales are generated by thefood industry.  The market for synthetic tocopherol is shared byfour companies: Hoffmann-LaRoche, with a market share of 45%; BASF,with a market share of 28%, Rhone Poulenc, with a market share of16%; and Eisei, at 11%.A specialty in the food market is natural tocopherol. This isobtained by an extraction and purification process from soya scams,the residues which remain after soya oil is processed and refined.The current worldwide market for natural tocopherol is about $50million and is shared by Henkel, Eastman Chemical, and Eisei.Although these companies produce their natural tocopherol by theirown technology, they all depend on the provision of the rawmaterial by other companies.  The global soya oil industry iscontrolled by only two companies: Archer Daniels Midland (ADM),which has a 40% share, and Cargill, with 35%.Hoffmann-LaRoche signed an agreement with Cargill in early 1995 tojointly construct a 1000 ton natural tocopherol plant.  WhileCargill is responsible for supplying raw material, Hoffmann-LaRocheis responsible for marketing.The plant is scheduled to come onstream in late 1996. At fullcapacity, it will consume about 50% of the worldwide production ofsoya scams.  Since the global production of soya oil has reached aplateau, there is not much raw material left for competitors.Eastman obtains its soya scams from ADM, but a major procurementproblem will  arise for Henkel--and especially Eisei.  Roche couldeventually obtain a market share of 70%.Tocopherol is also contained in significant amounts in palm oil andpalm leaves. However the extraction of  pure tocopherol is muchmore difficult.  Henkel and Eisei both have a strong position inthe palm oil market, especially in Malaysia and Indonesia.  Thesecompanies may well turn their efforts to developing  new processingtechnology to wrest tocopherol from palm sources.  The palm oilindustry is booming and the raw materials available to makingtocopherol are therefore increasing.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Demand for GarlicIs Seen TriplingGarlic production in the U.S. has tripled in the past 20 years,according to a cover story appearing in Smithsonian.  In 1975, theDept. of Agriculture recorded 140 million pounds of garlicproduced, and in 1994, the figure had soared to 493 million pounds.The current annual growth rate is about 10%.The U.S. also imports garlic from Argentina, Chile, China, Mexico,Spain, and Taiwan.  About 100 million pounds of the pungent,bulbous herb are imported each year.  The per capita consumptionwas estimated to be 0.6 pounds in 1975 and 1.6 pounds in 1994.  InEurope, per capita garlic consumption is twice as great.As a food ingredient, garlic is available as a puree, dry flakes,and powder.  The product is used in a variety of foods, includingfrozen dinners, powdered mixes, and bottled sauces.  California isresponsible for 90% of the commercial garlic produced in the U.S.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FDA ProposesChanges in NLEAIf you market a food that can deliver health benefits to consumers,you want to let them know about it.  That's the attitude of membersof the Washington, DC-based National Food Processors Assn. (NFPA)who have been petitioning the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) tomake changes in the NLEA since October 1994.  Now it looks liketheir efforts will be rewarded because the FDA is proposing toamend existing regulations governing health claims and nutrientcontent claims.The October 25 petition was followed by a preliminary answer fromthe FDA on May 11, 1995 which stated there would be some favorableresponses to some requests. The newly proposed rule, published inthe Federal Register on December 21, 1995, calls for: Flexibility in Health Claims Language - provides greaterflexibility in health claims language for some of the longer healthclaims currently in effect. One proposed amendment focuses on thecalcium-osteoporosis health claims removing the requirement fornoting that specific populations (i.e., White and Asian women) areat particular risk for osteoporosis. FDA is proposing to permit,under certain conditions, abbreviated health claims that aretruthful and non-misleading and that include a referral statementdirecting consumers to the complete claim elsewhere on the label.FDA has acknowledged the benefits of permitting more consumer-friendly messages and communications as supporting the intent ofthe health claims concept. Synonyms and Implied Nutrient Content Claims - allows the use ofsynonymous nutrient content claims on food labels when consistentwith, and adjacent to the defined nutrient content claim term.FDA's proposal allows the use of synonymous nutrient content claimson food labels.  In the FDA's view, undefined synonyms of nutrientcontent claim terms must be presented on the label immediatelyadjacent to a defined term.  The defined term would be required tobe used with the most prominent undefined term, following the rulesoutlining prominence of claims. Modifications to the "Jelly Bean" Rule in Health Claims -modifies the requirement prohibiting a health claim from being madeon a food which does not contain at least 10% Daily Value perserving of at least one of a number of nutrients.  The FDAsproposed rule modifies the minimum nutrient contributionrequirement, or "jelly bean" rule, for health claims.  Thisrequirement prohibits a health claim from being made on a foodwhich does not contain at least 10% Daily Value per serving ofvitamin A, vitamin C, calcium, iron, protein, or fiber.Specifically, FDA has proposed to exempt raw and processed fruitsand vegetables, and enriched cereal grain products and enrichedbread with standards of identity, from the "jelly bean" rule.  TheFDA also will consider whether other types of foods, such asformulated products, should also be exempt from the "jelly bean"rule. Health Claims Disqualifying Nutrient Levels - discusses case-by-case evaluation of changing disqualifying levels for total fat,saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium, which would prohibit the useof any health claim, to levels which would trigger a disclosure-type referral statement. FDA denied a request in the NFPA petitionthat FDA change disqualifying nutrient levels for total fat,saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium, which would prohibit the useof any health claim to levels which would trigger a disclosure-typereferral statement.NFPA had requested that health claims be prohibited only when thenutrient is adversely associated with the disease referenced in thehealth claim. While FDA denied this broad approach, the Agencyindicated it will evaluate this case-by-case.  FDA included in thepreamble to the claims proposed rule substantial guidance topetitioners, and discusses factors to be considered in any requestthat disqualifying nutrient levels be changed to levels requiringlabel disclosure.Another denial by the FDA was NFPA's request that the agency allowtruthful, non-misleading health claims established as presumptivelyvalid based on the findings of scientifically authoritative thirdparties. The FDA stated it does not have authority under existinglaw to approve such a policy change.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FDA RequiresHACCP for SeafoodConsumer concern about the safety of eating seafood is about to bemitigated. The FDA has set safety regulations for the seafoodindustry that involve using preventive controls based on principlesof the system, Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP).Seafood processors must identify potential problems that could makeseafood unsafe, then establish and monitor targeted control pointsto minimize the hazards, and then keep a record of the results.FDA surveillance and inspection programs will still be in place butHACCP recordkeeping will enable regulators to monitor productsafety more effectively on a more continuous basis rather than relyon the previous system which involved spot checks.  Seafoodprocessors are responsible for both domestic and imported seafoodmaterials. The program will be fully implemented over the next twoyears but inspections begin in 1996.The new ruling was immediately applauded by the commercial seafoodindustry which sees the HACCP program as one that will benefitfederal and state inspectors, consumers and seafood processors.Inspectors will now have a historical view of the facility becauseHACCP records will date back to the last inspection visit.Consumers will be assured of seafood safety and quality, andprocessors will have a cost-effective system that will help toincrease sales of processed seafood products.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Meat Processors WantSafety Rules, TooNow that consumers will be assured of the safety of seafoodproducts, processors of some types of meat products feel that theyare at a disadvantage because they can't provide the sameassurances. Specifically, the day after the FDA announced its newrequirements for seafood processors (see above story) the NationalPork Producers Council and the National Cattlemen's Assn. announcedthat beef and pork industry leaders formed a working group toprepare a plan of action to achieve equity between red meat andpoultry inspection and food safety issues.The aim is to improve the food safety process, create a more levelplaying field for producers, and provide better information forconsumers.  The group is to consider regulatory, legislative, andjudicial issues to ensure that new safety regulations set the samerequirements for all meat and poultry products, and "to eliminateeconomic inequities that put beef and pork at an economicdisadvantage in the meat case."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Product Informationin Print, OnlineProduct information is being offered by two test makers with freecatalogs, and one leading confection maker on the Internet.Biomerieux Vitek (595 Anglum Dr., Hazelwood, MO 63042-2395; Tel:314/731-8500, Fax: 314/731-8700), is making available its 1996Industrial Products Price List with product numbers, pricing andordering information for its entire line of automated microbiologysystems, manual test systems, automated immunoassay test systemsand related products.Supelco, Inc. (Supelco Park, Bellefonte, PA 16823-0048; Tel:800/247-6628, Fax: 800/447-3044) has just released its 1996 SupelcoChromatography Products catalog which lists 13,000 products, ofwhich over 1,000 are new. The 950-page catalog features productsfor GC, HPLC, LPLC, TLC, sample handling, chemical standards, morethan 500 application chromatograms and conditions, four indices forquick searches, and theory introductions and technical productdescriptions..Hershey Foods Corp. (100 Crystal A Drive, Hershey, PA 17033-0810;Tel 717/534-7631) has a new address--on the World Wide Web:http://www.hersheys.com/~hershey. Targeted mostly to consumers,food industry professionals might still be interested in the site'scompany history, financial information and new product information.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD INGREDIENTS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MEETINGSMarch Conferencefor DFISA & FISAThe Dairy and Food Industries Supply Assn. (DFISA) and the FoodIndustries Suppliers Assn. (FISA) will hold its 1996 Annualconference from March 30 to April 2 at the Loews Coronado BayResort in San Diego, CA. Intended for suppliers to the food, dairy,beverage and related processing industries, the conference willhave feature speakers, business and technology sessions.Contact: Dorothy Brady (Tel: 703/761-2600).Back to Headline List WT03-B40-6IA060-000326-B017-351http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb10.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015228 text/html 112601HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:49:56 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:40 GMTContent-length: 112411Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb10.html Sample Issue Copyright FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNet January 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MEAT AND POULTRY PROPOSAL: (114 words) FSIS REGULATORY STREAMLINING (48 words) OAT PRODUCTS (50 words) FDA STREAMLINING: (127 words) ACTION FOR NUTRITION (100 words) LABEL SNAFUS (77 words) CANNED TUNA: (53 words) BATF ACTIVITY: (110 words) PHYTOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATOR URGES DENIAL OF OLESTRA PETITION (1559 words) RESEARCHERS QUESTION LINK BETWEEN TRANS FAT, HEART DISEASE (1208 words) WARNING LETTER ISSUED TO CHICKPEA MANUFACTURER FOR UNDECLARED ADDITIVES (197 words) DIETARY GUIDELINES' EMPHASIS ON CAROTENOIDS CITED IN CSPI OLESTRA LETTER (469 words) FDA REJECTS OPTIMAL HEALTH STANDARD FOR DETERMINING RDIs (533 words) STRUCTURE/FUNCTION CLAIMS, DISCLAIMER STATEMENTS PROPOSED (1288 words) FSIS ISSUES FINAL RULE REDUCING PRIOR LABELING APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS (1398 words) STANDARDS MODIFICATIONS PROPOSED BY FSIS (1651 words) DIETARY GUIDELINES GENERALLY RECEIVE FAVORABLE REVIEWS (561 words) FDA STRIVES FOR CONSISTENCY IN DSHEA NUTRITION LABEL RULES (4954 words) FDA SUPPLEMENT PROPOSAL DEFINES 'HIGH POTENCY ANTIOXIDANT' TERMS (1488 words) WARNING LABEL ON CURED MEATS SOUGHT IN PETITION TO FSIS (715 words) CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996MEAT AND POULTRY PROPOSAL:  MEAT AND POULTRY PROPOSAL:  The Food Safety and Inspection Service published a Dec. 29 proposed rule to amend its meat and poultry inspection regulations to "harmonize and improve" the procedures used by FSIS and FDA for reviewing and approving the use of substances in meat and poultry products.  Under the proposal, FSIS would no longer issue its own regulations listing the substances it finds suitable, instead deferring to FDA for future regulations on suitable substances for meat and poultry products.  FDA published a similar proposal in the same issue of the Federal Register.  (EDITOR'S NOTE:  This proposal will be covered in greater detail in next week's issue of FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS.)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FSIS REGULATORY STREAMLINING FSIS REGULATORY STREAMLINING was pledged again by the agency in a Dec. 29 Federal Register notice accompanying proposals on prior label review, modifying standards and elimination of prior approval for additions to meat and poultry products (See separate stories).  The agency asked for comment by Feb. 27.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996OAT PRODUCTS OAT PRODUCTS and reduced risk of coronary heart disease proposal was published by FDA in the Jan. 4  Federal Register in response to a petition from Quaker Oats Company (See FLN July 13, Page 6).  (Details of the proposal will appear in FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS Jan. 11.)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA STREAMLINING:  FDA STREAMLINING:  The Grocery Manufacturers of America said it is pleased that FDA has taken a partial step toward streamlining its "bulky" nutrition labeling regulations, but added that it remains to be seen whether the agency's proposal on nutrient content and health claims will actually allow food companies to make changes in label claims, a GMA spokesman told FOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS (See FLN Dec. 21, Page 11).  CSPI's Bruce Silverglade argued, however, that FDA's proposed changes will allow companies to "clutter up" the label with information that will make it more difficult for consumers to identify "low" and "reduced fat" foods.  "FDA should be clearing up these problems instead of making it easier for food companies to make health and nutrition claims," Silverglade said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996ACTION FOR NUTRITION ACTION FOR NUTRITION draft U.S. plan was made available through  Dec. 28 Federal Register notice by the three sponsoring agencies:  USDA, Department of HHS and the Agency for International Development.  The nine aspects of the international plan include:  (1) incorporating nutritional objectives into development policies; (2) improving household food security; (3) protecting consumers through improved food quality and safety; (4) preventing and managing infectious diseases; (5) promoting breastfeeding; (6) caring for the socio-economically deprived and nutritionally vulnerable; (7) preventing and controlling specific micronutrient deficiencies; (8) promoting appropriate diets and healthy lifestyles, and (9) assessing, analyzing and monitoring nutritional situations.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996LABEL SNAFUS LABEL SNAFUS led to two recalls:  (1) 7,875 cases of Kellogg's Low Fat Pop Tarts with Smucker's Real Fruit Frosted Strawberry with Natural and Artificial Flavors; strawberry cartons actually contained chocolate fudge Pop-Tarts; (2) 10,565 cases of Pope brand Tomato Paste in six-ounce cans, by Pope Foods, Oradell, N.J., product manufactured by T.E.C., Pompeii, Italy, because the bottom label of the product said "Product of Italy," while the top label said, "Product of Hungary."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996CANNED TUNA:  CANNED TUNA:  Bumble Bee Seafoods has withdrawn a petition filed in July 1993 to amend the standard of identity for canned tuna to allow for the addition of chopped or diced jalapeno peppers.  The firm said it is no longer interested in pursuing the petition (See FLN July 29, 1993, Page 13).Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996BATF ACTIVITY:  BATF ACTIVITY:  The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms issued a Dec. 29 final rule allowing up to 300 milligrams per liter (300 ppm) of citric acid to be added to vodka without changing the product's designation as "vodka."  "This level was intended to ensure that distiller may continue to use citric acid as a smoothing agent to correct objectionable tastes which might result from such things as the water used in reducing the proof, the charcoal used in distillation or the glass in which packaged," BATF said, noting that by definition, vodka may not have any distinctive taste, color, aroma or character.  The rule went into effect immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996PHYTOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATOR URGES DENIAL OF OLESTRA PETITIONA researcher investigating the anti-cancer potential of phytochemicals has warned FDA not to approve the pending food additive petition for olestra, predicting that use of the product may have a negative health impact.  However, a host of letters received by the agency last week stressed that research has confirmed the safety of the fat substitute (See FLN Dec. 21, Page 3, and Dec. 28, Page 3).Jed Fahey, faculty research associate with the Brassica Chemoprotection Laboratory at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, said he was "distressed" by the data indicating that olestra may reduce absorption of many fat-soluble vitamins.  "There are a great number of other, fat-soluble phytochemicals, some of which we are investigating in my laboratory for their anti-cancer potential," Fahey said, adding, "Many of them have yet to even be isolated in pure form and are therefore unavailable for testing.""The inclusion of olestra in commonly consumed American foods has a high probability of effecting the wholesale reduction of a multiplicity of beneficial compounds from the diet of a great many Americans," the letter to FDA Commissioner Dr. David Kessler said, adding, "Based on overwhelming epidemiological evidence, there is a high probability that the use of this product would have a negative health impact."Comments from the American Diabetes Association and the American Heart Association took no specific stand on whether FDA should approve olestra.  ADA said it supports the development and introduction into the marketplace of food products that help people lose or maintain weight, but added that it "looks to and respects the FDA review process for assurance of product safety."  AHA encouraged FDA to continue the review of all fat replacers.  The group noted that many products on the market labeled as "reduced fat" have significant amounts of mono- and diglycerides, which are a source of calories and are metabolized as fat.The comments of a variety of researchers supporting approval of the fat substitute -- some of which were sent in by Procter & Gamble, the petition's sponsor --  were also included in the FDA administrative file on olestra.  Many of these letters included positive comments about the conduct of the four-day Food Advisory Committee meeting held by FDA in November to consider the data on olestra (See FLN Nov. 23, Page 10).  The comment period on the petition ended Dec. 21.The American Dietetic Association said one of its representatives attended the advisory committee and working group meetings on olestra, and added:  "We believe that the process allowed for a full airing of ADA's views on this matter.  We fully support the FAC review process including its interpretation of the data and consideration of public comment."A co-discoverer of olestra, Dr. Fred Mattson, professor of medicine emeritus at the University of California in San Diego, noted that as early work on the compound progressed, "I came to the conclusion that olestra posed no hazard as a food ingredient.""Subsequent studies have served to strengthen this opinion," Mattson noted.  He noted that olestra "is now supported by a much wider range of studies and now many of these are on human subjects.  Moreover, the level of use is inherently limited by the nature of the food products in which it will be used."Nutritionist Johanna Dwyer of Tufts University said her interest in fat substitutes such as olestra led her to independently review some of the studies in the peer-reviewed literature.  Later, she was asked by P&G to review and edit two papers for publication on consumption models and use of the pig and other data for assessing human effects of feeding olestra.  Citing her specific interest in gastrointestinal effects, Dwyer said she requested and received additional information on GI effects, and devoted particular attention to what might be expected at very high levels of intakes.At Dwyer's request, P&G sent her blinded samples of olestra-containing potato chips and regular potato chips at amounts that would constitute the 95th percentile of intake.  Dwyer said she ate these potato chips in a single bolus amount for a meal on two separate days and subsequently recorded her own views of signs and symptoms of GI distress.  "I felt more GI distress when eating the regular potato chips, and did not record any differences in stool consistency in this brief experiment," Dwyer wrote.  She noted that very high chronic use might produce changes in the consistency of the stool, but it is "inappropriate to describe these changes as diarrhea."Dwyer said she concluded that the product "is safe and may provide a benefit to some consumers who wish to eat low fat, low saturated fat salty snacks."  She added that the FDA evaluation process and the advisory committee deliberations "were reasonable, thorough and helpful."Dr. Harry Greene, clinical professor of pediatrics at Vanderbilt University Medical Center, said he attended the advisory committee meeting in November and was "extremely impressed with the presentations by the FDA scientists and the presentations by the expert consultants brought in by FDA in providing an unbiased and scientific approach to the relevant studies which have been performed with olestra."CSPI took data out of context, researcher chargesGreene criticized presentations by the Center for Science in the Public Interest, saying much of the data "was taken out of context" or "completely misinterpreted due to a lack of scientifically acceptable statistical evaluation, and in many instances was anecdotal."  In contrast, he said, "the data presented by Procter & Gamble scientists represented clear examples of well controlled, scientifically credible studies."Greene said the chairman of the advisory committee made sure that CSPI had an equal opportunity to present its objections.Also charging that CSPI took data out of context, Dr. Michael Davidson, medical director of the Chicago Center for Clinical Research at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, noted that the clinical studies by P&G "were purposely designed to assess the extreme intakes of olestra in subjects of various body sizes and dietary habits."  Davidson pointed out that olestra "was used to replace almost 50% of the daily fat intake for those in the 32-gram dose group," which he said "included petite young women who were unaccustomed to large intake of non-digestible food.""The vast majority of subjects with gastrointestinal events were women who would rarely consume 32 grams of olestra on a single day, yet were fed 32 grams daily for eight weeks," Davidson added.  He noted that approval of olestra "has significant health implications for the entire U.S. population," since high fat consumption is a leading cause of heart disease, diabetes, cancer and obesity.Researcher reports positive response to olestra in nutrition education studyDr. John Foreyt of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston said he conducted a study on the use of olestra in a nutrition education program.  Female adults were randomly assigned to either an olestra or non-olestra group, and various food products containing olestra, including shortening, potato chips, oven-ready french fries and a mayonnaise-type salad, were made available as part of an overall nutrition education program, Foreyt said.  "Response to the product was positive," he commented, noting that subjects in both groups reduced their dietary fat consumption to approximately 30% of total calories."Responses to our questionnaire suggested that subjects with access to the olestra products experienced less deprivation while reducing dietary fat intake than the subjects without access to the olestra products," Foreyt said, adding that the study is currently in press."Based on our study, and my reading of the olestra research, I believe that olestra can help consumers lower overall fat intake because it gives them a choice, without sacrificing taste," he said.Dr. Gail Harrison of the University of California School of Public Health in Los Angeles complimented the special consultants utilized by FDA as in-depth review experts on olestra, calling them "absolutely the best in the field."  Harrison added, "Their reports can be relied upon in terms of scientific validity and perspective."Recommending approval of the compound, Harrison said she is "quite thoroughly acquainted with the data base supporting the safety of olestra as it is proposed for use in savory snacks in the U.S. food supply, and am convinced on the basis of reasonable scientific judgment it is safe by the standard that FDA must apply."Other letters recommending approval came from Dr. Elijah Saunders of the University of Maryland's School of Medicine, Division of Hypertension, and Dr. George Bray, executive director of the Pennington Biomedical Research Center at the Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge.A letter from Penny Kris-Etherton, professor of nutrition at Penn State University, reiterated conclusions she had presented for P&G at the advisory committee meeting -- that inclusion of olestra snacks would reduce dietary carotenoids over a period of seven days by approximately 10%.  The calculations assumed that all savory snacks included in  dietary records randomly selected from study subjects in target groups of interest were olestra-containing snacks, she said."Obviously, in a real world setting, not all savory snacks consumed will contain olestra.  Nonetheless, I believe that our estimates are reasonable as a means to gain a perspective about the average impact of olestra-containing snacks in different free-living population groups," Kris-Etherton added.  ((6FLN 1401, 26 pages, $11)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996RESEARCHERS QUESTION LINK BETWEEN TRANS FAT, HEART DISEASEThe alleged link between trans fatty acid intake and coronary heart disease risk is questionable, according to a critical review of research studies on Trans Fatty Acids and CHD Risk conducted by P.M. Kris-Etherton, Ph.D., and R.J. Nicolosi, Ph.D., for the International Life Sciences Institute.The report found that the effect of partially hydrogenated vegetable oils is relative to the fats or oils they are replacing.  Partially hydrogenated vegetable oils actually reduce blood total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol concentrations when substituted for animal fats (e.g., butter and lard) and vegetable fats rich in saturates (e.g., palm, palm kernel and coconut oil), the researchers said.  Hydrogenated vegetable oils, however, modestly raise blood cholesterol levels when substituted for the unhydrogenated native oil.  Therefore, the report said, the overall effect of hydrogenated fats on blood cholesterol concentrations in the population depends on the net change in the ingestion of saturated, trans, cis-monounsaturated, and cis-polyunsaturated fatty acids.These findings run contrary to the position of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, which filed a petition with FDA two years ago to require that trans fat be included with saturated fat on food labels, and to limit the trans fatty acid content of foods making fatty acid, cholesterol or vegetable oil claims (See FLN Feb. 24, 1994, Page 14).CSPI's position is based on evidence supported by studies such as one conducted by Judd et al., published by the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, which suggests that trans fat, at levels consumed by the average American, was found to raise LDL-cholesterol about the same as does saturated fat.  Another study supporting CSPI's stance on the issue is the recently presented Sundram et al. abstract, which found trans fat to be even more hypercholesterolemic than saturated fat (See FLN June 29, Page 5).Kris-Etherton and Nicolosi's review, however, found that epidemiological data are limited in that they may suggest relationships but cannot prove cause and effect.  Epidemiologic investigations conducted in the 1970s and 1980s found, for the most part, no significant associations between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk, they said.  Some investigation conducted in the 1990s found significant associations between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk.  But most of the study results, over the years, have illustrated inherent limitations of epidemiological research, according to the report.Investigations conducted in the '70s and '80s, which showed no significant association between trans fatty acid and CHD risk, examined concentrations of specific trans fatty acids in various body tissues or estimated dietary intake of trans fatty acids in comparison to various measures of CHD.  Some of the studies indicated that the trans fatty acid t-16:1 was associated with an increased risk of CHD -- the predominant source of this fatty acid is animal fat.  This suggests that any association between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk may be due more to trans fatty acids from animal sources than from partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, the report stated.Three studies published in the 1990s suggested a significant relationship between levels of trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk or risk factors, the report said.  One of the studies found that individuals with the highest and lowest intakes of trans fatty acids also had correspondingly lower and higher risks of suffering a heart attack.  The lowest risks occurred among individuals eating intermediate levels of trans fatty acids.  This finding suggests that other factors may be involved in the association, the report indicated, adding that lack of a dose-response relationship between trans fatty acid intake and risk of heart attack illustrates one of the limitations of epidemiological research.Current epidemiological data also appear limited in their ability to distinguish between the possibility that trans fatty acids cause CHD risk or that CHD risk causes increased trans fatty acid intake, the report said.  For example, individuals who perceive themselves to be at risk of CHD may increase their intake of products made with partially hydrogenated vegetable oils such as margarine, and decrease their intake of products with higher levels of saturated fat, which could induce a biased association between trans fatty acids and CHD or CHD risk factors.  A 1992 study that reported a significant relationship between trans fatty acid intake and CHD risk factors attempted to control for this possibility.  The result showed that the relationship between trans fatty acids and lipids was indeed stronger for subjects who had been told that their blood cholesterol levels were high.  This study, the report said, supports the theory that those who perceive themselves to be at greater risk of CHD may increase their intake of trans fatty acids.Atherosclerotic properties of trans fatty acids in animals examinedTo define the impact of fatty acids on CHD risk, scientists have compared the atherosclerotic properties of saturated, unsaturated, and trans fatty acids in animals, the report said.  Numerous studies support the atherogenicity of saturated fats, and other studies indicate that the saturated fatty acids lauric, myristic, and palmitic acids appear to have similar arterogenic effects.  A similar association with trans fats, however, is not apparent, the report said, adding that data suggest that trans fatty acids do not increase risk of arteriosclerosis.  Studies conducted over the past 30 years on rabbits, monkeys and pigs have demonstrated little if any difference between the effects of nonhydrogenated and hydrogenated vegetable oils containing high concentrations of trans fatty acids on the incidence or severity of atherosclerosis, the report said.Clinical studies conducted over the past 40 years indicate that the effects of hydrogenated fats on blood cholesterol levels were intermediate between the unhydrogenated native oil and more saturated fats, the report said.  To verify these findings, metabolic studies of longer duration with a more appropriate number of subjects were conducted.  Ten of 11 studies confirmed that feeding hydrogenated fat produced higher total cholesterol concentrations than did unhydrogenated native oils. All of these studies also confirmed that the increase was less than that observed when butter, palm oil, or coconut oil was substituted for the native oil, the report said.  In addition, several outpatient feeding studies have confirmed the finding that consumption of hydrogenated fats resulted in lower blood cholesterol concentrations than typical intakes of butter or mixed animal and vegetable fats, according to the researchers.Inconsistent effects of trans fatty acids on HDL cholesterol levels have been found in other studies.  Three studies reported that the consumption of trans fatty acids was associated with significant reduction in HDL cholesterol.  However, three other studies in which trans fatty acids were fed at levels consistent with current intakes in the U.S. reported no such reduction in HDL cholesterol, the report said.The report indicated that because substituting hydrogenated fats for more saturated fats will lower LDL, and lowering LDL has been shown to decrease CHD risk, the overall effect of hydrogenated fats substituted for saturated fats in the food supply may still be beneficial, despite possible small reductions in HDL cholesterol concentrations.  This conclusion is supported by a large body of evidence that shows that populations with habitual low-fat diets have lower levels of both LDL and HDL cholesterol and a low incidence of heart disease, according to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996WARNING LETTER ISSUED TO CHICKPEA MANUFACTURER FOR UNDECLARED ADDITIVES An FDA warning letter was issued to a chickpea product manufacturer for the presence of undeclared FD&C Red #3 and FD&C Red #40, and for failing to declare net contents in metric as well as in inch-pound units.Chicago District Director Raymond Mlecko warned Eden International Inc. about undeclared FD&C Red #3 in "Eden's Red Chickpeas," and FD&C Red #40 in "Eden's Gourmet Mix," colors which are required to be declared by name in the statement of ingredients, he said.In addition, Mlecko advised Eden that the net contents should be declared in metric units and inch-pound units.  Because FDA has not published final regulations as to how the declaration is to be made, Eden may add the metric statements now, using guidance in the proposed regulations published in the Federal Register of December 21, 1993, Mlecko said.In the August 30 warning letter, Mlecko also told Eden that the violations mentioned are not necessarily an all-inclusive list of deficiencies on its labels.  Eden was advised to review all of its food labels to determine whether they are in compliance with all applicable statutes enforced by FDA.  ((6FLN 1402, 2 pages, $5)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES' EMPHASIS ON CAROTENOIDS CITED IN CSPI OLESTRA LETTERThe consumer group Center for Science in the Public Interest, continuing its quest to keep olestra out of the food supply, has reminded FDA that the newly revised Dietary Guidelines for Americans encourage consumers to eat foods containing carotenoids.  CSPI contends that the fat replacer inhibits the body's ability to absorb fat-soluble vitamins (See Page 3 and FLN Dec. 14, Page 3).In a Jan. 2 letter, intended as an addendum to earlier CSPI comments on Procter & Gamble's petition for olestra, CSPI Executive Director Dr. Michael Jacobson referred to the agency actions as "ironic."  "The National Cancer Institute is urging Americans to consume more carotenoid-rich fruits and vegetables, in part because of the probable benefits of carotenoids themselves," Jacobson said, adding that the guidelines stress the importance of carotenoids as follows:"Most fruits and vegetables are naturally low in fat and provide many essential nutrients and other food components important for health.  These foods are excellent sources of vitamin C, vitamin B6, carotenoids, including those which form vitamin A (see Box 7), and folate (Box 8).  The antioxidant nutrients found in plant foods (e.g., vitamin C, carotenoids, vitamin E and certain minerals) are presently of great interest to scientists and the public because of their potentially beneficial role in reducing the risk for cancer and certain other chronic diseases.  Scientists are also trying to determine if other substances in plant foods protect against cancer."Also included in the new guidelines is a special box (Box 7) that lists "Some Good Sources of Carotenoids," Jacobson said.  Considering the level of recognition carotenoids have received in the guidelines, it would be "extra ironic," Jacobson said, "if the FDA approves carotenoid-depleting olestra just weeks after the newly revised federal nutrition policy."Addressing the issue of whether carotenoids serve any biological purpose in humans other than beta-carotene's role as a provitamin A, CSPI also submitted an abstract of an intervention trial which CSPI said provides further evidence that beta-carotene has anti-cancer potential and "offers further basis for denying the food-additive petition for olestra," CSPI said. The study was conducted by Harinder Garewal, M.D., Ph. D., of the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Tucson, Ariz., and his colleagues at three cancer-research centers, CSPI said.  "The key portion of the study involved giving 50 patients a daily dose of 60 mg of beta-carotene for six months.  Twenty-six (52%) of the patients responded to beta-carotene, with their oral leukoplakia diminishing.  The result is similar to that found in an earlier study by Garewal that used half as much beta-carotene," according to CSPI.The abstract is an addendum to earlier CSPI comments on Procter & Gamble's petition for olestra that included intervention trials demonstrating that beta-carotene causes regression of oral leukoplakia, CSPI said.  ((6FLN 1403, 2 pages, $5)Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA REJECTS OPTIMAL HEALTH STANDARD FOR DETERMINING RDIsThe Food and Drug Administration has rejected the concept of "optimal health" -- a standard requested by dietary supplement groups -- as the standard for determining Reference Daily Intake values, opting to continue basing values on "nutrient adequacy" (See separate stories).In its Dec. 28 final rule establishing Reference Daily Intakes for vitamin K, selenium, manganese, chromium, molybdenum and chloride, FDA wrote that it was "not persuaded" that a change in the basis for determining RDIs is warranted, but noted that since the National Academy of Sciences is in the process of evaluating the basis by which it determines the Recommended Daily Allowances -- on which RDIs are based -- FDA will revisit the issue once NAS reports its findings."The agency believes that any action to change the basis for the RDIs should await completion of the NAS process to ensure that such an action reflects scientific consensus and to avoid the possible need for consecutive relabeling of foods that might occur if FDA were to proceed to revise the RDIs before NAS published new values," FDA said. The rule also modifies the units of measure used to declare the amount of biotin, folate, calcium and phosphorus in food.  FDA decided not to establish an RDI for fluoride because it found no scientific consensus determining that fluoride is an essential nutrient.Vitamin K to be considered in evaluating nutritional inferiority of substitute foodsFDA will consider vitamin K when it determines if substitute foods are nutritionally inferior to the foods for which they substitute, the agency said.  Although it received several comments expressing concern that vitamin K should not be included in such determinations because of difficulties in determining levels of vitamin K in foods,  FDA said it was "not persuaded by the comments that there is a lack of analytical methods for vitamin K, or that technological barriers to analyzing foods for vitamin K, or to adding vitamin K to foods, are insurmountable."The agency noted that many foods that are reformulated as substitute foods do not contain much vitamin K in the first place, such as foods made primarily of sugar and water, as well as many oils, drinks, fruits and fish.  Important sources of vitamin K, such as green leafy vegetables, legumes and soybean oil, are not generally reformulated, FDA noted."The primary categories of substitute foods that may need to be reformulated or relabeled appear to be those that substitute for foods containing eggs, milk, grains, or those oils that contain vitamin K," FDA said.  Leaving vitamin K out of a substitute food when it is present in the original food would make the substitute food nutritionally inferior, FDA said. The final rule makes the consideration of selenium, chromium, molybdenum and chloride optional in determining whether a food is nutritionally inferior to a food for which it substitutes.Companies that wish to add the new RDIs to their product's nutrition label may do so immediately, FDA said.  Others have until Jan. 1, 1997, which corresponds with the effective date of DSHEA regulations and should give industry time to do the appropriate analysis and implement the changes, FDA said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996STRUCTURE/FUNCTION CLAIMS, DISCLAIMER STATEMENTS PROPOSEDOne of the key proposals in FDA's triad on dietary supplement labeling (See separate stories) would establish rules for declaring percentages of nutrients not covered by current RDIs or RDAs.  The same proposal, as part of the implementation of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act, would:-- withdraw a provision of NLEA that dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals may not give prominence to any ingredient that is not a vitamin or a mineral;-- specify how the disclaimer required by DSHEA is to be presented along with "statements of nutritional support";-- remove the current NLEA definition of dietary supplements in health and nutrient content claims rules.FDA set a comment deadline of March 13 and proposed an effective date of Jan. 1, 1997.Summarizing in an analysis of impacts which expressed FDA's uncertainty as to whether the rule would provide any consumer benefit, the agency said, "The proposed rule does not significantly change the way in which claims are made, with three exceptions: "(1) Percentage claims for dietary supplements that do not have RDIs or DRVs are no longer prohibited;"(2) Dietary supplements of vitamins and minerals may now highlight an ingredient that is not a vitamin or mineral, and"(3) Labels or labeling of dietary supplements may include statements of nutritional support so long as those statements include an appropriate disclaimer and the manufacturer has substantiation that the statement is truthful and not misleading."New definitionThe agency's proposed new definition of the term "dietary supplement" in the section on nutrient content claims would apply to "foods that are intended for human consumption and that are offered for sale, including conventional foods and dietary supplements," eliminating the current reference to "vitamins, minerals, herbs and other similar nutritional substances (dietary supplements)."  The simplification was called for by DSHEA, FDA said.  Discussing the coverage of the nutrient content proposal, FDA said:-- "The broad range of substances that can be dietary ingredients under Section 201(ff) has the potential to create ambiguities as to the coverage of the nutrient content claim regime.  With respect to some substances that can be dietary ingredients, the context in which statements about them are made will determine whether they are nutrient content claims or not.  For example, garlic can be the dietary ingredient.-- "A claim on the label or in the labeling of a dietary supplement that it is 'high in garlic' or that it 'now contains more garlic' is a nutrient content claim within the meaning of the act, and the food is misbranded unless such a claim has been authorized by FDA through regulation....-- "On the other hand, a label statement on garlic bread, for example, that the product now contains more garlic would not be a nutrient content claim if the bread is not labeled as a dietary supplement and if it is clear from the context in which the claim is made that the claim refers to the taste of the product...."Percentage claims for non-RDI ingredientsFDA noted that DSHEA specifically permitted percentage claims for ingredients not covered by Reference Daily Intakes (RDIs) or Daily Reference Values (DRVs), using as an example "40% omega-3 fatty acids."  DSHEA also would allow statements that characterize the percentage of ingredients in relation to an equivalent in another food product.  Examples were "100% of the allicin in a bulb of garlic" or "twice the allicin as (product alternative) where 'twice' is another way of saying 200%.""Accordingly," FDA said in the preamble to the proposal, "percentage claims such as '40% omega-3 fatty acids' that do not in any way characterize the level of a nutrient in terms of defined claims such as 'high', 'low' or 'reduced' were permitted on dietary supplements as well as conventional foods before the enactment of the DSHEA."The agency said, however, that percentage statements would be misleading unless the ingredient is in a meaningful amount, continuing:  "Therefore, firms will need to determine on a case-by-case basis whether the stated amount of a dietary ingredient for which an RDI or DRV has not been established, and the difference between the amount of such a dietary ingredient in two products, is meaningful...."An example:  The statement "300% of the bioflavonoids in a large grapefruit" is permissible, but a claim such as "high in bioflavonoids" is not.  "FDA has concluded," the agency continued, "that if the defined term (i.e., the nutrient content claim) is to have any meaning, there must be a level that can be used as a reference in determining whether the claim is valid and appropriate.  The RDIs and DRVs provide such levels.  Thus, FDA has limited the use of 'good source', 'high' and other defined terms to use with nutrients for which RDIs or DRVs have been established."FDA said it considers that when a percentage comparison is made for ingredients for which no RDI or DRV has been established, information on the identity of the reference food and on the quantitative amount of the dietary ingredient in both products is necessary.  The proposal would require that the reference food be clearly identified, and the actual amount of the dietary ingredient in both foods be provided, adjacent to the most prominent claim or to the nutrient label.  When the nutrition label is on the information panel, the quantitative information may be placed elsewhere on the panel.Statements of nutritional supportTo escape characterization as a drug while making statements of nutritional support (so-called structure/function claims), manufacturers must, according to the proposal, have substantiation that the claim is truthful and not misleading and include on the label a disclaimer: "This statement has not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration.  This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any disease."A plural version of the first sentence would be allowed when more than one structure/function claim is made.  Prominence of the disclaimer is at issue.  Where one structure/function claim is made, FDA decided the disclaimer must appear immediately adjacent to the claim with no intervening material.  When multiple claims are made, however, the agency would allow asterisks on the claim, referring to a specific place on the label, such as the information panel, where the disclaimer would appear.  Allowing information panel placement, however, must be supported by comments, the agency said, noting the receipt of a petition on the subject from the Nutritional Health Alliance.  The agency said it is concerned that the placement of the disclaimer on another panel would not reveal material facts in conjunction with the statement of nutritional support.  The preamble's discussion continued:-- "... In addition, the requirement in the act for prominent display means that when the disclaimer does not appear immediately adjacent to a statement of nutritional support, it must be presented on the label or labeling in a manner that renders it as readily observable and as likely to be read as the statement of nutritional support itself....-- "Therefore, FDA is proposing in Section 101.94(c)(2) to require that a box be drawn around the disclaimer when the disclaimer is not immediately adjacent to the statement of nutritional support."Type size and style FDA proposed a minimum 1/16th-inch type size for disclaimer statements, saying it considers unworkable the NLEA provision for letters one half the size of the most prominent statement because nutritional support statements are likely to be long and, thus, of small type size.The proposal would remove for dietary supplements the NLEA restrictions on use of statements of levels of nutrients that are not vitamins or minerals.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FSIS ISSUES FINAL RULE REDUCING PRIOR LABELING APPROVAL REQUIREMENTSThe U.S. Agriculture Department's Food Safety and Inspection Service has issued its final rule, first proposed in 1992, amending the federal meat and poultry products inspection regulations by expanding the types of labeling which would not require submittal to FSIS for approval prior to use (See FLN Nov. 25, 1993, Page 19; Dec. 23, 1993, Page 27; Jan. 27, 1994, Page 14; February 10, 1994, Page 21, and Aug. 17, 1995, Page 7) in a notice published Dec. 29 in the Federal Register.The new rule also amends the federal meat and poultry products inspection regulations to permit the submission of only sketch labeling, except for temporary approvals, in those instances where labeling is required to be submitted for approval, and to require retention of certain labeling records.  This final rule is intended to eliminate unnecessary duplication in the labeling approval system and contribute to President Clinton's initiatives for greater efficiency in government services (as per the principles of the National Performance Review to cut red tape, put customers first and eliminate what is not needed).  The effective date of the rule is July 1, 1996.The effect of the new rule is that official establishments and foreign establishments certified by officials of foreign inspection systems will be allowed to use the following generically approved labeling without the submission of sketches for approval by FSIS:1. Labeling for a product which has a standard of identity or composition as specified in 9 CFR Part 319 or Part 381, subpart P, and which does not contain any special claims, such as quality claims, nutrient content claims, health claims, negative claims, geographical origin claims or guarantees, or which is not a domestic product labeled with a foreign language;2. Labeling for single-ingredient products (such as beef steak, lamb chops, chicken legs or turkey breasts) which does not contain special claims such as quality claims, nutrient content claims, health claims, negative claims, geographical origin claims or guarantees, or which is not a domestic product labeled with a foreign language; 3. Labeling for products marked "For Export Only" in U.S. establishments which does not contain any special claims, such as quality claims, nutrient content claims, health claims, negative claims, geographical origin claims or guarantees;4. Labeling for containers of meat and meat food products and poultry products sold under contract specifications to federal government agencies, when such product is not offered for sale to the general public, provided the contract specifications include specific requirements with respect to labeling, and are made available to the IIC;5. Labeling for shipping containers which contain fully labeled immediate containers, provided such labeling complies with 9 CFR 316.13 or 381.127. 6. Labeling for products not intended for human food, provided they comply with 9 CFR Part 325 or 9 CFR 381.152(c) and 381.193, and labeling for poultry heads and feet for export for processing as human food if they comply with 9 CFR 381.190(b);7. Inspection legends, which comply with 9 CFR Parts 312 and 316 and 9 CFR Part 381, subpart M, and 8. Inserts, tags, liners, pasters, and like devices containing printed or graphic matter and for use on, or to be placed within, containers and coverings of products, provided such devices contain no reference to product and bear no misleading feature.The rule will also permit official establishments and foreign establishments certified by officials of foreign inspection systems to use final labeling, without further authorization from FSIS, that was approved by FSIS, FLD, in sketch form if the final labeling was prepared without modification or with the following modifications:1. All features of the labeling are proportionately enlarged or reduced, provided that all minimum size requirements specified in applicable regulations are met and the labeling is legible;2. A substitution of the abbreviation "lb." for "pound," or "oz." for "ounce," or of the word "pound" for "lb." or "ounce" for "oz.";3. A master or stock label has been approved from which the name and address of the distributor are omitted and such name and address are applied before being used (in such case, the words "prepared for" or similar statement must be shown together with the blank space reserved for the insertion of the name and address when such labels are offered for approval);4. During holiday seasons, wrappers or other covers bearing floral or foliage designs or illustrations of rabbits, chicks, fireworks, or other emblematic holiday designs are used with approved labeling (the use of such designs will not make necessary the application of labeling not otherwise required);5. A change in the language or the arrangement of directions pertaining to the opening of containers or the serving of the product;6. The addition, deletion or amendment of a dated or undated coupon, a cents-off statement, cooking instructions, packer product code information or UPC product code information;7. Any change in the name or address of the packer, manufacturer or distributor that appears in the signature line;8. Any change in the net weight, provided the size of the net weight statement complies with 9 CFR 317.2 or 381.121;9. The addition, deletion, or amendment of recipe suggestions for the product;10. Any change in punctuation;11. Newly assigned or revised establishment numbers for a particular establishment for which use of the labeling has been approved by the FLD; 12. The addition or deletion of open dating information;13. A change in the type of packaging material on which the label is printed; 14. Brand name changes, provided that there are no design changes, the brand name does not use a term that connotes quality or other product characteristics, the brand name has no geographic significance, and the brand name does not affect the name of the product;15. The deletion of the word "new" on new product labeling;16. The addition, deletion, or amendment of special handling statements, such as "Keep Refrigerated" or "Keep Frozen," provided that the change is consistent with 9 CFR 317.2(k) or 381.125(a);17. The addition of safe handling instructions as required by 9 CFR 317.2(l) or 381.125(b);18. Changes reflecting a change in the quantity of an ingredient shown in the formula without a change in the order of predominance shown on the label, provided that the change in quantity of ingredients complies with any minimum or maximum limits for the use of such ingredients prescribed in 9 CFR Parts 318 and 319, or 9 CFR 381.147 or 9 CFR Part 381, subpart P;19. Changes in the color of the labeling, provided that sufficient contrast and legibility remain;20. The addition, deletion, or substitution of the official USDA grade shield on labels of poultry products;21. A change in the product vignette, provided the change does not affect mandatory labeling information or misrepresent the content of the package, or22. A change in an establishment number by a corporation or parent company for an establishment under its ownership.As originally proposed, the rule had no provision for voluntary submission of labeling to FSIS for review and approval, and many commenters to the ANPR asked that the option be retained because many products have complex compositional and minimum content requirements.  The final rule now provides for the option of submitting sketch labeling for standardized products for review, an option FSIS says it may later propose to remove.According to the Federal Register notice, the role of the ICC (inspector in charge) will not change or be diminished as a result of this regulation.  Inspection personnel are to continue observing and monitoring product formulations and processing procedures to assure conformance with general labeling requirements.The regulation is expected to benefit consumers, the meat and poultry industry and FSIS itself, streamlining the label approval process from two steps (sketch and final) to one (sketch only).  Allowing meat and poultry manufacturers to make numerous labeling modifications without submitting certain labels for approval should, according to the notice, reduce the burden on industry by making the process more convenient and cost-effective, and save the meat and poultry industries (which will be submitting approximately 82,600 fewer labels a year to FSIS' Food Labeling Division at $37 per label) at least $3 million annually.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996STANDARDS MODIFICATIONS PROPOSED  BY FSISWith some exceptions, USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service proposed Dec. 29 its expected modifications of food standards to allow substitute foods.  An interim policy had preceded the proposal (See FLN March 9, Page 16).A comment deadline was set as Feb. 27, but no effective date was noted.The terms "substitute" or "alternate" would not be required in product names for the new products.  FSIS said, "... These products will be appropriately named by use of an expressed nutrient content claim and the appropriate standardized term."The nutrient content claim, however, would have to be presented in the same style, color and size of type as in the original product.  Also, each of the ingredients must be listed, in general, by common or usual name in descending order of predominance by weight on either the principal display panel or the information panel.Permitted ingredients added at levels in excess of those allowed by the traditional standard must be appropriately identified as such, FSIS said, with an asterisk in the ingredients statement.  FSIS elaborated:-- "... The statement 'ingredients not in regular (name of the traditional standardized food)' or 'ingredients in excess of amount permitted in regular (name of the traditional standardized food)' or both statements as appropriate, shall immediately follow the ingredients statement in the same type size. -- "The asterisk statements must clearly distinguish between 'those ingredients not permitted' and 'those ingredients used in excess of amounts permitted' in a standardized product."Nutrient content claims would stand in for some requirements of current standards under the new definition as proposed by FSIS, which said:  "FSIS is proposing to define substitutes to processed meat and poultry products as: -- "Any processed meat and/or poultry product whose formulation has been minimally modified to enable it to be used as a substitute for another meat and/or poultry product that it resembles and which has a standard of identity in the regulations (9 CFR Parts 319 and 381, subpart P).-- "The meat or poultry product would be eligible to use an expressed nutrient content claim to identify it; would resemble the standardized product in appearance, form, taste and texture, and would use safe, suitable and approved substitute ingredients at proper levels and functions, i.e., the lowest level necessary to satisfy the criteria for use of the expressed nutrient content claim provided in regulations."The product would have to be labeled, according to the proposal, "in a manner that conveys allowable ingredient differences to consumers."  The agency elaborated:"The ingredient differences that will be allowed relate to the use of ingredients needed to make a product that complies with the specific expressed nutrient content claim related to a reduction in a constituent that has negative health implications ... i.e., fat, cholesterol and sodium."The substitute meat or poultry food product will be allowed to be named using a standardized term because it either will be similar to the standardized product in its performance characteristics and the ingredients used, or it will, through appropriate labeling terminology, describe how it differs from the standardized product for which it substitutes."Taboo practicesThe proposal outlined some instances, however, in which products will not be considered substitutes for standardized products, including:-- "... Modified versions of standardized products which purport to be substitutes of them must adhere to the original regulatory standards requirements ... regarding the use of meat and poultry from specified anatomical locations, the use of a specific kind and/or amount of meat or poultry tissue to prepare the product and the use of specified processing procedures....-- "For example, beef stew must contain at least 25% meat (i.e., beef).  Since the meat or poultry content of such product is integral to its identity, the label for a substitute of this product would be false or misleading if the substitute was named, in part, by a standardized term, but contained less than the amount of meat and/or poultry required by the standard....-- "For example, a product identified with the standardized name 'Chicken A-La-King' is required to contain a minimum of 20% cooked chicken meat and a substitute for this product would be required to contain the same amount....-- "... 'Turkey ham must be made from turkey thigh meat and be cured, and in 9 CFR 319.107, 'Bacon' must be made from pork bellies and be cured...."FSIS said it plans to invite comments on a broader reform of the standards in an upcoming advance notice of proposed rulemaking.Expressed nutrient content claimsFSIS proposed that "only expressed nutrient content claims, i.e., claims that have been defined and are related to reductions in constituents having negative health implications, be permitted in conjunction with the standardized name ... in substitute meat and poultry products."  Examples of approved claims were given as "low," "lower," "lite," "reduced," "lean," "extra lean" and "free."Performance characteristicsThe substitute foods also must "perform similarly to the traditional standardized products," FSIS said, "unless the product is specifically labeled to show any significant performance usage differences it has, such as a frankfurter not being suitable for freezing."Performance characteristics were listed as including physical properties (e.g., texture, cooking qualities, freezing qualities), its functional properties (e.g., body, spreadability) and shelf life.  However, the agency qualified these requirements with:-- "FSIS recognizes, however, that when a standardized product is modified so that its composition accurately supports the nutrient content claim intended to be made, it may not be possible in all cases to produce a substitute product that performs similarly in regard to all uses of the regulated standardized meat or poultry food product....-- "The product would be considered a substitute product allowed under this proposal if the limitation on use does not affect the fundamental nature of the product and is disclosed in labeling....-- "If there is a difference in performance characteristics that materially limits the use of the product, the product may still be considered a substitute if the label includes a disclaimer adjacent to the most prominent claim in accordance with 9 CFR 317.13(d) (1) and (2) and 381.413(d) (1) and (2), informing the consumer of such difference...."Elaborating with the example of a frankfurter having such characteristics as a "link" form, a cured pink color, a spongy texture and the ability for refrigeration or freezing, and the expectation that it could be prepared in a variety of ways, i.e., boiling, broiling, grilling and frying, FSIS said:-- "When fat, however, in a frankfurter or another standardized product is replaced by one or more other ingredients, it may not be possible in all cases to produce substitute products that perform identically to the traditional standardized meat and poultry products....  Fats exhibit unique physical properties in meat and poultry products, e.g., their ability to combine with protein to form emulsions and their ability to enhance tenderness.  -- "In order to make a substitute product that qualifies for a 'fat free' nutrient content claim, it may be necessary to replace fat with water and binders (i.e., additives that hold water and protein), which may result in a substitute meat or poultry food product with limitations in performance related to product uses....-- "Therefore, if a 'fat free' frankfurter does not tolerate frozen storage for long periods of time, because the ingredients needed to make the substitute product do not withstand the same conditions of storage as the standardized product ... a non- performance statement would inform the consumer of that fact, e.g., 'Do Not Freeze'."Tofu tabooThe proposal listed specific allowable and non-allowable ingredients.  Listed as allowable, although they have typically been restricted in standardized products, were:  Agar-agar, algin, sodium alginate, calcium carbonate, lactic acid and calcium lactate (or glucono delta-lactone), calcium-reduced dried skim milk, carrageenan, carboxymethyl cellulose (cellulose gum), dried milk, enzyme (rennet)-treated calcium-reduced dried skim milk and calcium lactate, food starch modified, gelatin, guar gum, methyl cellulose, isolated soy protein, sodium caseinate, dry or dried whey, reduced lactose whey, reduced minerals whey, whey protein concentrate, starchy vegetable flour (e.g., potato flour, rice flour and pea flour), vegetable starch (e.g., corn starch, potato starch and wheat starch), wheat gluten, tapioca dextrin, soy flour, soy protein concentrate and xanthan gum.Also, emulsifying agents to be permitted in combination with water and binders as part of a fat-replacement system were listed as lecithin, mono- and diglycerides and polyglycerol esters of fatty acids, commonly used as emulsifying agents in shortenings and margarines.  These are not to be considered as fat replacers when used alone.Humectants, also, would not be considered by themselves to be fat replacers, but would be allowed as part of a "fat replacement system" because of their water-binding enhancement.The proposal is not intended to allow replacement or exchange of any required ingredient or component, USDA emphasized, specifically listing as taboo under these replacement circumstances:  Textured vegetable protein, foods such as bread, rice, potatoes, cheese, fruits and vegetables.  The preamble to the proposal elaborated:"Because these food ingredients have virtually no fat, their presence in products would result in a finished product with a lowered fat content.  However, the lowered fat content would be a result of the food 'filling' or 'extending' the product rather than as a result of the food merely functioning as a fat replacer."Prohibited ingredientsIngredients prohibited in standardized foods would be prohibited also from the substitute foods, examples being poultry kidneys or sex glands in cooked sausages, because they are not approved as safe or suitable for use in meat and poultry.  FSIS continued, "For example, 9 CFR 318.7(d)(2) prohibits sorbic acid and its salts from use in formulating meat products and, thus, would continue to be prohibited in substitute products."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES GENERALLY RECEIVE FAVORABLE REVIEWSThe federal government's Dietary Guidelines for Americans, described this week as "the gold standard" for good nutrition and health, were unveiled Jan. 2 to generally favorable reviews by industry and consumer groups.  (The full text of the guidelines will be published in the Jan. 11 FLN.)The guidelines are little changed from the recommendations  issued last summer by the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee (See FLN Aug. 24, Page 3).  For the first time, they include information on physical activity and dieting, vegetarian diets and recommendations that adults maintain their body weight as they age.  The fourth edition also includes an expanded section on grains, fruits and vegetables.The guidelines recommend that Americans choose diets with plenty of grains, fruits and vegetables; eat a variety of foods; balance food consumption with physical activity; use moderate amounts of salt, sodium, sugar and alcohol, and choose a diet low in fat, saturated fat and cholesterol.  Industry generally called the guidelines balanced and reasonable.  The National Cattlemen's Association and the Beef Industry Council said they support them.  "For the 99% of Americans who enjoy meat, the Dietary Guidelines for Americans tell us we can continue to enjoy it and still be healthy," the groups said.The Grocery Manufacturers of America said, "The Dietary Guidelines provide guidance not only to consumers and health professionals, but to industry as well.  Many of the innovations in 'better-for-you-foods' over the last decade have been driven by the dietary guidelines."Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman and Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala said commodity and industry groups were "responsive" to the changes in the guidelines.  Shalala brushed aside criticism that the guidelines are too lenient on recommended consumption levels of sugar and fat.While the Council for Responsible Nutrition called the guidelines "a step forward," it said they need revision on several points regarding supplements.  The guidelines incorrectly state that supplements "usually" are not needed, inaccurately imply that the Recommended Dietary Allowances are the upper limit of safe nutrient intakes and disregard the importance of supplements in achieving recommended calcium intakes, said the supplement trade association.Michael Jacobson, director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, expressed disappointment about the guidelines, calling them only a "marginal improvement" from the previous edition issued in 1990.  The guidelines offer "bland statements" that fail to provide enough direction to help Americans improve their diets, he said.  "The government should tell people what is the best possible diet," he said.Dr. Andrew Nicholson, director of preventive medicine for the Physicians Committee for Responsive Medicine, also said the government should have offered more specific nutrition and dietary information.  "It's a placebo," he said of the guidelines, noting he is pleased they include information on vegetarian diets.  There are some "very positive statements," he said, "but the [Dietary Guidelines Advisory] Committee has not had the guts to stand up to the American Meat Institute, the pork board and the fisheries institutes and say which foods have the saturated fat and cholesterol so Americans know how to follow the recommendations."  "The important thing is to talk foods.  Don't talk nutrients.  People don't know where to find saturated fat and cholesterol," Nicholson said.HHS Secretary Shalala said 300,000 deaths and $250 billion in health costs and lost workdays annually are associated with poor diets.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA STRIVES FOR CONSISTENCY IN DSHEA NUTRITION LABEL RULESFDA's proposal for nutrition labeling of dietary supplements has sought to balance the specific requirements of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act with existing regulations for nutrition labeling of conventional foods in order to achieve some consistency -- especially in format.In the preamble to the proposal, published Dec. 28, FDA acknowledged that despite its desire for consistency in the appearance of nutrition information on dietary supplements and conventional foods, "the requirements adopted in DSHEA, such as the listing of the names and amounts of other dietary ingredients and the optional listing of source information, necessitate that there be some differences in format."  In order to signal to consumers that nutrition labeling on dietary supplements differs from that on conventional foods, FDA proposed that the title for the nutrition information be "Supplement Facts," rather than the "Nutrition Facts" title on conventional foods.  The agency asked for specific comment on the appropriateness of this title.Asking that comments be submitted by March 13, FDA said any final rule that is issued based on the proposal would become effective Jan. 1, 1997.  It specifically asked for comments to focus on the provisions in which changes are being proposed from FDA's January 1994 final rule for nutrition labeling of dietary supplements that had been published under the Dietary Supplement Act of 1992.  After passage of DSHEA in October 1994, FDA stayed enforcement of the nutrition labeling rule for supplements until it had a chance to conform the rule to the specific provisions of DSHEA.'Dietary supplement' term to be part of statement of identityIn many cases, FDA found the DSHEA statute to be vague and had to guess at its meaning.  For example, the agency noted that while DSHEA requires the identity statement "dietary supplement" on labels, it did not explicitly address where on the food label the term must appear.  However, when reading the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act as a whole, FDA decided that the term "dietary supplement" needs to appear as part of the common or usual name of the food, and proposed that the term appear in the statement of identity of dietary supplement products.Use of this term, FDA explained, "will distinguish this potentially broad class of products from other types of food."  In addition, under the broad DSHEA definition of dietary supplement, there may be supplements for which the presence of the term "constitutes the primary, if not the only, means by which consumers will be able to determine that the food is a dietary supplement," the agency said, especially when supplements are in other than tablet, capsule, powder, softgel, gelcap or liquid form.FDA concluded that no major changes in the 1994 dietary supplement final rule are needed on the listing of dietary ingredients for which Reference Daily Intakes and Daily Reference Values have been established, and proposed that the 14 nutrients that must be listed in the nutrition labeling of a conventional food, when present in a supplement "in amounts greater than that, can be declared as zero," be listed on the nutrition label.  They referred to these 14 nutrients as "(b)(2) dietary ingredients," since they are listed in proposed Section 101.36(b)(2), and to all other dietary ingredients as "other dietary ingredients."The 1994 dietary supplement rule was silent on the listing of the  "subcomponents," such as saturated fat, soluble fiber and sugar alcohols that may be declared but are not required except when claims about them are made.  Since the 1994 rule applied only to vitamin and mineral supplements, and DSHEA now includes other products such as fiber supplements to be covered by the same nutrition labeling rules, FDA said it concluded that it is appropriate to provide for the optional listing of the subcomponents.  Subcomponents not already specified in the nutrition labeling regulations for conventional foods, such as amino acids and omega-3 fatty acids, must be listed as dietary ingredients for which RDIs and DRVs have not been established, rather than as subcomponents of protein or fat.  FDA said this would provide more consistency between nutrition labeling of supplements and conventional foods and would minimize consumer confusion.Although DSHEA requires that all dietary ingredients and their amounts be listed, FDA said that requiring the listing of all vitamins and minerals with RDIs or DRVs that are present in some products, such as herbal products, would be "unduly burdensome" and in conflict with the current rules which require the mandatory listing only of sodium, vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium and iron.  FDA concluded that it is appropriate to follow the approach used for conventional foods and to require the  listing of vitamins and minerals only when they are added to the product for purposes of supplementation or when a claim is made about them.  The agency asked for comment on this approach.Noting that it did not declare in the 1994 dietary supplement final rule the amounts of vitamins and minerals that do not have to be declared because they are so small, FDA said it included an explicit statement in the proposal that the amounts of vitamins and minerals corresponding to less than 2% of the RDI shall not be declared.  FDA said this statement "does not represent a change from the 1994 dietary supplement final rule but is merely a clarification of its provisions."The proposal specified that protein not be declared in the nutrition label of dietary supplements that contain only individual amino acids.  FDA said it is misleading to declare the protein content in the nutrition label of a dietary supplement that contains free amino acids because protein, by definition, is composed of chains of amino acids connected together by peptide bonds.Use of the heading "amount per serving" is required as it was in the 1994 rule, but the agency proposed to allow it to be used either over the column of amounts or the column of names of ingredients. Requesting comment on this change, FDA said it was proposing flexibility in the placement of the heading "because space constraints may make placement over the column of amounts impractical in some cases."FDA proposed that instead of listing calories above the column of names, as is the case for conventional foods, they be listed first in the column of names, under a bar that separates the list from the heading, "amount per serving."  FDA said that giving calories prominence over other nutrients is not appropriate for supplements, which usually do not contain many calories.  In addition, this change will save space, FDA noted.  The agency also specified the synonyms that may be added in parentheses following the names of the (b)(2) dietary ingredients, which is identical to the current regulation on synonyms in dietary supplement labeling except that the agency proposed to permit the use of "folic acid" as a synonym for "folate."  While current nutrition labeling rules do not permit the term "folic acid," FDA said this was an omission and added that it intends to revise the rule for conventional foods to permit the listing of folic acid as a synonym for folate.Quantity declarations to be in column to the right of names of nutrientsSince DSHEA allows an optional listing of the source of the ingredient, FDA proposed requiring that the quantity of each ingredient, per serving, be listed in a column to the right of the column of names.  FDA said it considered continuing to have the weight of the dietary ingredient placed immediately after the name of the ingredient or its source, "but tentatively concluded that the wide variation in placement that could result when some dietary ingredients are listed by name only, while others include the source ingredient, would make it difficult for some consumers to find the declaration of weight."  FDA asked for comment on this decision and its possible impact on space requirements.FDA noted that the weight declared for any dietary ingredient "is to be the weight of the dietary ingredient rather than the weight of the source of the dietary ingredient."  For example, the agency noted, the weight of calcium would be declared for calcium carbonate, rather than the weight of calcium carbonate.  While DSHEA is unclear as to the basis for reporting the quantitative information, FDA concluded that it is appropriate to require it be provided on a "per serving" basis.  Interpreting the provision this way means there need only be one list of the quantitative amounts of dietary ingredients in a supplement, FDA pointed out.  Requiring information on a per dosage unit basis might mean that for dietary supplements whose serving size is two capsules, there would have to be two lists of dietary ingredient amounts, one per capsule and the other per serving, which would result in overcrowded labels.  However, "the rules of statutory construction" do not generally favor the FDA interpretation, the agency acknowledged, since it would make two sections of the act redundant, and specifically requested comment on its proposed interpretation.Discussing the declaration of percent daily values for each (b)(2) dietary ingredient,  FDA said it clarified that the actual amount is to be used in the calculation for vitamins and minerals, except sodium and potassium, and that either the actual amount or the rounded amount may be used for other nutrients, such as fat.  FDA said it also reworded a provision to make clear that the phrase "less than 1%" is to be used when the dietary ingredient is present in an amount by weight that requires declaration, yet the amount is so small that the percent Daily Value when rounded to the nearest percent comes to "0%." 'Less than' symbol may be used, FDA saysThe symbol "<1%" may be used in place of "less than 1%" to provide more flexibility when space is limited on the label, FDA said, noting that it did not permit the use of the symbol in the first set of nutrition labeling regulations because of concerns that many people would not understand its meaning.  However, the agency said it has received numerous requests for its use "and is aware that it is being used on some nutrition labels with tight space constraints."  FDA asked for comments on use of the symbol "and the submission of any available data that would demonstrate consumers' comprehension of it." If FDA permits the use for dietary supplements, it intends to provide for such use on conventional foods as well, the agency said.The column for "% Daily Value" may be omitted when there are no numerical values declared beneath it, FDA said.  When this happens, and the footnote "Daily Value not established" is required, the asterisk symbol must immediately follow the quantitative amount by weight for each dietary ingredient listed under "amount per serving," FDA said.In considering requirements for the listing of other dietary ingredients, FDA proposed that they be listed in the nutrition label by their common or usual name in a column that is underneath the column of names of (b)(2) dietary ingredients and that a "heavy bar" be used to separate the listing, which would enable consumers to distinguish between the two types of ingredients.Comments requested on order of dietary ingredients listingsWhile FDA said it considered specifying that the other dietary ingredients be listed in a particular order, such as alphabetical order or descending order of predominance by weight, FDA said it tentatively concluded that specifying a particular order is not justified, but requested comments on the issue.For herbs and other botanicals, FDA encouraged manufacturers to use common or usual names that are found in botanical data bases and that are widely used. While many of these names "are part of our everyday language and are easily recognized," FDA acknowledged that arriving at an appropriate name for botanicals "may be a problem because some plants have more than one common or usual name, or one name is used to describe many different species."  In other cases, a particular species may not even have a common or usual name, the agency said.  FDA said it considers the term "botanical" to include fungi and algae.FDA proposed to require that the quantitative amount listed in the nutrition label for a declared dietary ingredient be the total weight of that dietary ingredient and not the weight of a component of that dietary ingredient or of the source of that dietary ingredient.  For example, if a dietary supplement lists garlic as a dietary ingredient and makes no reference to a component of garlic, then the weight specified should be the weight of garlic.  However, if the nutrition label lists allicin as the dietary ingredient, with the garlic noted as the source ingredient, the weight specified ought to be the weight of allicin only.  Liquid extracts of dietary ingredients "are not to be treated any differently," FDA said, noting that such determinations may be difficult and asking for comment on the issue.FDA said it is giving the manufacturer the option of deciding what to list as a dietary ingredient, noting that either the botanical or one or more constituents of a botanical may be declared as the dietary ingredient.  FDA requested comment on whether it should consider allowing manufacturers to declare both the botanical and one or more constituents as dietary ingredients within a single product, with a requirement that the constituents of the botanical be indented beneath the listing of the botanical.  FDA said it rejected this approach because it could be potentially confusing to consumers, but asked whether there are alternative approaches and whether this flexibility is consistent with DSHEA.The agency proposed to require that manufacturers express the amounts of other dietary ingredients in metric units that are appropriate.  The provision requires that any declaration of 1,000 or more units be declared in the next higher set of units.Other dietary ingredients must bear an asterisk in the column under the heading of "% Daily Value" that refers to another symbol placed at the bottom of the nutrition label that is followed by the statement, "Daily Value not established."  When no (b)(2) dietary ingredients are declared and the heading of "% Daily Value" is not used, the agency proposed that the symbol follow the declaration of the quantitative amount for each dietary ingredient listed.  FDA said it gave "extensive consideration" to the most appropriate wording for the statement to which the symbol refers, considering statements such as "not currently determined essential," which was suggested by a dietary supplement trade association.  FDA said it is "unsure if such a statement would be more useful to consumers," but noted that the "Daily value not established" statement is consistent with that currently used on nutrition labels, and asked for comments on an appropriate statement.Provision outlines requirements for proprietary blendsA section of the regulation provides for the listing of dietary ingredients in proprietary blends, in order to implement the DSHEA provision that permits the listing of the total quantity of all ingredients in a blend labeled proprietary.  FDA proposed that the dietary ingredients in the proprietary blend be indented under the term "proprietary blend," or a modification of the term, and be listed in a column or in a linear fashion.The proposal would require that the total weight of the dietary ingredients listed as components of the proprietary blend appear on the same line as the name of the blend, to make it clear that the weight represents the total weight of the dietary ingredients listed.   The proposal also requires that the list of other dietary ingredients in a proprietary blend be given in order of predominance by weight, since the weights of the individual dietary ingredients need not be specified.  FDA noted that this is consistent with ingredient labeling of conventional foods and "is intended to give consumers an indication of the relative amounts of the other dietary ingredients present in the absence of information on their actual amounts."If the proprietary blend furnishes more than insignificant amounts of any required (b)(2) dietary ingredient, that ingredient must be declared, as well as the amount of the ingredient and the percent of the Daily Value, FDA said.  The agency said it would be contrary to the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act not to require such a listing.Dietary ingredients in nutrition label exempt from ingredient declarationWhile noting some ambiguity in the statute, FDA said it interpreted DSHEA to mean that any ingredient listed in the nutrition label need not be listed a second time in the ingredient statement.  FDA proposed to revise its regulations on ingredient listings to allow for this, citing a legal analysis from the law firm of Covington and Burling that agrees with its interpretation.FDA proposed that the source of any dietary ingredient may be added in parentheses immediately following or indented beneath the name of the dietary ingredient, and the words "as" or "from" must precede the name of the source ingredient, such as "calcium (as calcium carbonate)."  If the name of the dietary ingredient is itself the source ingredient or its synonym, then the listing of the dietary ingredient will fulfill the requirement for the listing of the ingredient, the agency explained.  Noting that many manufacturers already use the terms "as" or "from," FDA said these words will help to convey to consumers the understanding that such compounds are the source of the dietary ingredients.When a source is not identified within the nutrition label, the proposal provides that it shall be listed in the ingredient statement.  The ingredient statement on a dietary supplement must appear outside and immediately below the nutrition label, or, if there is insufficient space below the nutrition label, immediately contiguous and to the right of the nutrition label, FDA said.  This provision is in accordance with DSHEA, the agency explained.The agency proposed to require that the ingredients list be preceded by the word "Ingredients," unless some ingredients are identified within the nutrition label, in which case the ingredients listed outside the nutrition label shall be in a list preceded by the words "Other Ingredients."   This will indicate to consumers that some ingredient information appears in the nutrition information that precedes the ingredient list, FDA said.Ingredients that are not dietary ingredients, such as fillers and artificial colors, must be listed in the ingredient statement, FDA said, noting that a 1942 Trade Correspondence which had exempted such ingredients from dietary supplement declaration is being revoked since it has been overturned by more recent agency statements of policy on the subject.Latin form of botanicals in parentheses required for ingredientsIngredients would have to be listed by common or usual name, as is required for conventional foods. In order to ensure correct identification of herbs or other botanicals, including algae and fungi, FDA proposed that the botanical name in Latin binomial form be included in parentheses following the common or usual name.  To ensure there is consistency and clarity in declaration, the agency proposed that any botanical name declared should be "in accordance with internationally accepted rules on nomenclature, such as those found in the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature," FDA said, requesting comments on this issue.Recognizing that it is possible to have more than one acceptable botanical name in Latin form, FDA advised manufacturers "to choose the name that is most currently used in commerce and in appropriate references and, in cases of confusion, to consult with the agency."FDA also proposed to require that the part or parts of the plant, such as leaf, flower, root, fruit, seed or bark, be presented in parentheses immediately following the Latin name of the botanical ingredient, noting that DSHEA requires identification of any part of the plant from which the dietary ingredient is derived.  Whenever such information is presented, the agency said, the name of the part of the plant must be expressed in English, since the pharmaceutical names would not be recognized and their meanings would not be commonly understood by American consumers.  "When the entire plant is used, the label should specify 'entire plant' to meet the requirements of the act," FDA said.The botanical name requirements apply whether the ingredient is listed in an ingredient statement or in the nutrition label, FDA said.  Since the FD&C Act does not require ingredients to be listed when the food contains only one ingredient, FDA proposed that for single-ingredient dietary supplements, the Latin binomial name and the part of the plant from which the dietary supplement is derived may be prominently placed on the principal display panel or the information panel, or included in the nutrition label.When two or more sources are listed within parentheses, they should be listed in descending order by weight, "which is consistent with the way ingredients are to be listed" in the ingredient labeling regulations, FDA said.  Since the amounts by weight of the ingredients are listed in the nutrition label, these ingredients did not have to be listed in descending order by weight, the agency noted.Reference to official compendium permitted for individual ingredientsIndividual dietary ingredients that conform to an official compendium may be listed as such by a reference to the compendium, FDA said, citing as an example "Calcium (from carbonate USP)."  If such a representation is made and the ingredient does not comply with the specifications of the compendium, the supplement would be misbranded, the agency noted.Discussing format requirements, FDA said it is proposing to maintain the same graphic requirements in the nutrition labeling regulations, including those on type size, since DSHEA does not necessitate any changes in type size.  FDA requested comment on the requirement for a hairline rule between the listings of each dietary ingredient, noting that it had received complaints about the hairline rule's effect on space and legibility on supplements with a long listing of ingredients when this requirement was issued in the 1994 regulations.  Such comments "will be particularly helpful if actual sample labels are included as well as suggestions for when relief from such a requirement should be provided," FDA said.The proposal clarified the size of bars that are to be used to separate the various headings, FDA said, noting that there was confusion about this issue when the 1994 rule was published.A section of the proposal addressing how nutrition information is to be presented on products that contain two or more separately packaged dietary supplements is analogous to the section in the regulations for conventional foods, FDA said.Compliance will be determined using the procedures for nutrition labeling of conventional foods, according to the proposal.  FDA discussed whether to alter its longstanding compliance criterion requiring added vitamins, minerals, protein, dietary fiber or potassium to be present in amounts at least equal to the value for the declared nutrient, since USP monographs for several nutrition products require a minimum nutrient content of 90% of the label declaration.  FDA said any deviation from the criterion that is attributable to reasons other than variability of analytical methods would be a material fact that would need to be disclosed on the label, and said such a message could diminish consumer confidence.  The agency also confirmed that it is keeping its 80% criterion of the declared value for calories, sugars, total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol and sodium.FDA requested comments on appropriate analytical methods for dietary ingredients for which official methods do not exist, and also asked about information on organizations that establish such procedures.Discussing exemptions, FDA noted that it proposed a rule in March 1994 to establish a new exemption for low-volume food products from manufacturers, packers, distributors and retailers that are small businesses, and said it is proposing to cross-reference the small business exemption already in the nutrition labeling rule along with the proposed exemption.  The rule also incorporates the exemption for foods shipped in bulk that are not distributed to consumers, and cross-references special labeling provisions in the nutrition labeling rules for smaller type size for supplements in small and intermediate-sized containers.FDA said it has also cross-referenced the special provisions to allow the use of 4.5 point type size on packages with less than 12 square inches of available label space and the use of six-point type on packages with 12 to 40 square inches of label space. Multi-ingredient products may use smaller type size, FDA saysIn response to a petition from a trade association, FDA proposed to provide additional flexibility for multi-ingredient dietary supplements in packages with less than 20 square inches of available label space.The agency said it was persuaded by the petition that it is not feasible to use six-point type on many products containing multiple dietary ingredients on such packages, and concluded that it is reasonable to require the six-point type on packages with 12 to 20 square inches of available label space to bear labeling when eight or fewer dietary ingredients are used.  The use of a smaller type size of at least 4.5 points could be used when there are more than eight dietary ingredients.  Without smaller type, more than 30% of the total surface area of the package would have to be devoted to FDA-required information, the agency explained.FDA said the trade association had surveyed its member companies, who agreed that eight or 10 would be an appropriate cutoff number, triggering the smaller type size for multi-nutrient products.Primary container must bear nutrition labeling, even in small typeA special labeling provision was proposed in the rule for supplements in packages that have a surface area of 40 or less square inches available to bear labeling.  FDA said under the provision, when the nutrition information on packages of this size is presented on a label panel other than the principal display or information panels, the ingredient information must move in conjunction with the nutrition label.  In addition, for supplements of this size, when it is not possible for primary inner containers to comply with the type size requirements, the agency proposed that type as small as needed may be used in the nutrition label as long as the primary container is securely enclosed in outer packaging that bears nutrition labeling in the required type size.FDA noted that in the 1994 rule, it "erroneously advised that it considered outer packaging that securely encloses a primary container and that is not intended to be separated from the primary container under conditions of retail sale to be the equivalent of the product label."  FDA said these statements were inconsistent with the FD&C Act, and therefore nutrition labeling is required to appear on the label of the primary container.While cross-referencing current misbranding provisions for foods, FDA proposed to delete two provisions currently in Section 101.9(k) that conflict with DSHEA.  One provision states that a food is misbranded if the labeling suggests or implies that a balanced diet of ordinary foods cannot supply adequate amounts of nutrients.  FDA acknowledged that scientific and consensus groups have agreed that there are certain situations in which the use of dietary supplements may be needed for persons to obtain adequate nutrient intakes, such as pregnant women or the elderly.  The other provision, which states that a food is misbranded when the labeling implies that the food has special dietary properties when such properties are of no significant value or need in human nutrition, would conflict with DSHEA, which permits statements of nutrition support, according to FDA.FDA says nutrition labeling would cost $52 to $85 million to implementDiscussing the economic impact of the rule, FDA said it would cost manufacturers between $52 and $85 million to implement.  The agency requested comment on whether dietary supplement products will undergo analytical testing as a result of the regulations, noting that FDA assumes that manufacturers of vitamin and mineral supplements are already aware of the nutritional content of their products.  It is possible, however, that herbal and other botanical products may undergo additional testing, FDA noted, estimating that between 4,000 and 20,000 products may undergo testing once every five years.If adopted, the rule "will benefit consumers by ensuring that nutrition labeling is provided on dietary supplements in a manner that will help consumers to follow healthy dietary practices," FDA said.FDA estimated that the majority of manufacturers of dietary supplements meet the Small Business Administration definition of a small business because they have fewer than 750 employees. Noting the exemptions from mandatory nutrition labeling proposed for small businesses in the rule, FDA said some botanical product manufacturers will have unit sales and firm sizes low enough to meet the definition for low-volume products.  FDA asked for information on the impact of the regulation on small firms.  It noted that the estimated cost of the nutrition labeling regulations is 1% to 3% of industry annual sales, which range from $2.9 to more than $4 billion.  "In relation to the volume of sales, this amount does not appear to represent a significant cost," the agency said.FDA also solicited comments on whether the proposed collection of information is necessary for the proper performance of the functions of the agency, under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995. Comments on information collection must be sent "by Jan. 29, 1996, but no later than Feb. 26, 1996" to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs of the Office of Management and Budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996FDA SUPPLEMENT PROPOSAL DEFINES 'HIGH POTENCY ANTIOXIDANT' TERMSThe Food and Drug Administration's implementation of the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act will include definitions for the claims "high potency" and "sugar free" used in supplement labeling, as well as the term "antioxidant" when used in nutrient content claims on labels of dietary supplements and conventional foods (See separate stories).In one of three proposals published Dec. 28, the agency chose to limit the term "high potency" to supplement labels rather than permit the claim to be used in connection with conventional foods, noting that the term is rarely used in food labeling.  "In contrast, the term 'high potency' was in widespread use on the labels of dietary supplements before the enactment of the 1990 (nutrition labeling) amendments, continues to be used on dietary supplements, and appears to convey information to the consumer about the level of nutrients in dietary supplements," FDA said.The agency said it has tentatively concluded that 100% of the Reference Daily Intake per serving is a "reasonable definition" for the term because that level is high enough "to meet the needs of practically all healthy people."  FDA emphasized, however, that this does not mean that the agency is opposed to the presence of nutrients exceeding the 100% of RDI level.  FDA went on:"Manufacturers can formulate and describe the level of a nutrient as multiples of the RDI (e.g., using the terminology 'Daily Value' to represent RDIs on the label, a vitamin C tablet containing 500 mg would declare '833% of the Daily Value of vitamin C').  Nonetheless, because the purpose of nutrient content claims is to assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices, and given the recommendations of the NAS (National Academy of Sciences) on which the RDIs are based, FDA tentatively concludes that it is appropriate to tie a 'high potency' claim to the RDI itself."In addition to the nutrients for which RDIs have been established, FDA proposed to permit "high potency" claims to describe protein and fiber, both of which are measured with Daily Values.  Those nutrients must be present at 100% of the DRV per reference amount customarily consumed in order to qualify for the claim.The agency added that it would not propose to allow the claim to be used for nutrients such as total fat, saturated fat, sodium, cholesterol, total carbohydrate and potassium.  Tablets containing 100 mg or more of potassium are considered drugs, according to FDA.Agency sets "two-thirds" standard for multivitaminsAddressing the subject of using the "high potency" claim on labels for multivitamins, FDA stated:  "FDA tentatively concludes that it is not necessary to prohibit the use of a 'high potency' claim on multinutrient dietary supplements if the supplements do not contain 100% or more of the RDI for each vitamin and mineral that is present, or 100% of the DRV for protein or dietary fiber when present.  The agency is persuaded by the comments that the public will be better served from a public health perspective if some nutrients are allowed to be present in such products at levels that are below 100% of the RDI or DRV.""Without such an allowance," the agency said, "those nutrients that cannot be included at 100% levels because of technological difficulties could not be included at all if the dietary supplement is to bear a 'high potency' claim.  The exclusion of these nutrients will not necessarily help consumers to engage in healthy dietary practices."The agency said that out of the 33 nutrients for which RDIs and DRVs have been established, there are 11 nutrients (calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, dietary fiber, total carbohydrate, total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, sodium, chloride and potassium) for which it would be "impracticable or imprudent" to require that they adhere to the 100% RDI/DRV threshold.  This amounts to one-third of the total nutrients, the agency noted."Accordingly, the agency believes that it would be reasonable to expect that the remaining two-thirds of the nutrients for which RDIs and DRVs have been established could be present at 100% of the RDI or DRV in a dietary supplement product that contained all 33 nutrients for which RDIs and DRVs have been established," the agency said.FDA then agreed to expand the two-thirds standard to include products that do not contain all 33 nutrients for which DRIs or DRVs have been established.  "FDA tentatively concludes that two-thirds represents a reasonable standard; it provides flexibility for supplements that do not contain all 33 nutrients, and it provides a consistent standard for all supplement products.  Finally, it is a familiar fraction that is easy to use," the agency said, continuing:"With a two-thirds standard, the manufacturer would have the latitude to decide, in formulating a product that will qualify to bear a 'high potency' claim, which nutrients to include at 100% of the RDI or DRV."FDA went on:  "The agency recognizes that dietary supplements that consist of an assortment of dietary ingredients are widely available in the marketplace.  FDA agrees with the comment that stated that the presence or absence of dietary ingredients for which RDIs or DRVs have not been established (e.g., omega-3 fatty acids, choline, boron) ... should not affect the claim so long as those nutrients with RDIs or DRVs are present at levels required for the claim.""It is important to note that because the definition that FDA is proposing is based on the presence of a nutrient at 100% of the RDI or DRV, dietary supplements that do not contain nutrients for which RDIs or DRVs have been established will not be able to use the term 'high potency,'" the agency said.FDA also requested comment on whether "full potency" or similar wording may be used as a synonym for "high potency."FDA addresses nutrient content claims for antioxidantsThe agency also proposed to define the term "antioxidant" as a collective term for vitamin C, vitamin E and beta-carotene when used in nutrient content claims (such as "good source of antioxidants") on labels for supplements or conventional foods."The levels of vitamin C and vitamin E and the level of vitamin A present as beta-carotene in the food that bears the claim must all be sufficient to qualify for the claim (i.e., for 'high in antioxidants,' the product must contain 20% or more of the RDI for vitamin C and vitamin E per reference amount customarily consumed, and 20% or more of the RDI for vitamin A must be present as beta-carotene per reference amount customarily consumed)," FDA said, continuing:"The term 'antioxidants' may only be used on the label or in labeling of a food that does not contain each of the three antioxidants ... in sufficient amounts to qualify for the claim if the food contains at least one of these nutrients at the requisite level, and the claim discloses which antioxidants in the food meet the required level (e.g., 'High in antioxidant vitamins C and E)."The agency added that a "collective claim" about antioxidant nutrients -- such as "complete antioxidant formula" or "antioxidant complex" -- may be used in labeling provided that the vitamins are present at 10% or more of the RDI per reference amount customarily consumed.Agency corrects "sugar free" omissionFinally, FDA corrected an inadvertent regulatory omission that barred certain supplement products from making "sugar free" and "no sugar" claims.  "Section 101.60(c)(1) states that consumers may reasonably be expected to regard terms that represent that the food contains no sugars or sweeteners as an indication that a product is low in calories or is significantly reduced in calories," FDA said.The agency referred to its 1994 nutrient content claims final rule, in which FDA added a paragraph to Section 101.60(a) to state that "calorie free" and "low calorie" claims may not be made on dietary supplement products, "except when an equivalent amount of a dietary supplement that the labeled food resembles and for which it substitutes (e.g., another protein supplement) normally exceeds the definition for 'low calorie' in Section 101.60(b)(2)."  FDA continued:"This change in Sections 101.13(b)(5) and 101.60(a)(4) had the unintended effect of limiting the use of 'sugar free' or 'no sugar' claims on dietary supplements that would otherwise meet the requirements for 'low calorie' in Section 101.60(b)(2) but are not permitted to bear the claim because they do not substitute for a similar dietary supplement that normally exceeds the definition for 'low calorie.'""Therefore, FDA is proposing to revise Section 101.60(c)(1)(iii)(A) to excuse only dietary supplements that otherwise meet the definition of 'low calorie' under Section 101.60(b)(2), but that are prohibited by Sections 101.13(b)(5) and 101.60(a)(4) from bearing the claim," the agency said.The comment deadline is March 13, 1996.  "The agency proposes that any final rule that may issue based upon this proposal become effective Jan. 1, 1997," FDA said.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOOD LABELING & NUTRITION NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996WARNING LABEL ON CURED MEATS SOUGHT IN PETITION TO FSISJeremy Rifkin's Foundation on Economic Trends and the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine have filed a petition with USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service seeking removal of the "wholesomeness" seal, stronger language on safe handling labels and a warning label on cured meat products.USDA received the petition Oct. 26 but did not place it on file in the hearing clerk's office until recently.  The groups had been considering suing USDA to stop use of the "wholesomeness" seal; the petition cited legal precedents and the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) as the basis for the groups' claims.The petition, written by FET's Theodore Waugh and the Physicians Committee's Andrew Nicholson, cited the risk to consumers from E. coli O157:H7 as the basis for the groups' requests.  "The risk of serious permanent physical injury and death, USDA's inability to safeguard the meat supply and the lack of medical preparedness indicate both the seriousness and extent of the E. coli problem," the petition said, adding, "Until effective control measures are developed to eliminate E. coli contamination, USDA needs to take further actions to protect consumers and conform with its statutory obligations."The petitioners misstated the scope of USDA's declaration that E. coli O157:H7 was an adulterant.  The USDA declaration applied only to raw ground beef; the petition said that "USDA has determined that E. coli-contaminated meats are 'adulterated.'"The petition quoted the FMIA as saying, "It is essential in the public interest that the health and welfare of consumers be protected by assuring that meat and meat food products distributed to them are wholesome, not adulterated ...""Thus, according to USDA's own regulations, only meats lacking E. coli contamination can be labeled 'Inspected and Passed,'" the petition said, adding, "Because the FMIA prohibits misleading and false labeling, the USDA must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from meat products until it can conclusively determine that the meat is uncontaminated with the adulterant E. coli."Nicholson and Waugh said that USDA's baseline survey of steers and heifers found that "approximately 15% of all raw beef samples contain one or more species of pathogens."The petition also said that USDA has admitted that its sampling program for E. coli O157:H7 in raw ground beef "cannot eliminate E. coli from the food supply.""It is clear the number of outbreaks has remained high or continued to grow, even with USDA's safe care and handling labels," the groups said, adding, "In light of the continuing number of E. coli outbreaks, it is necessary for USDA to improve the current safe handling labels."The labels should state the consequences of undercooking, the petition said, adding:"How can consumers adapt their behavior to meet the seriousness of the health risk when they are uninformed of the potential consequences?  For all a purchaser knows, the only illness resulting from contamination is an upset stomach.  If individuals knew that kidney failure and death were potential side effects, they would take the warnings with the degree of seriousness that the hazard requires."The petitioners recommended a new safe handling label that would begin:  "WARNING:  This product may contain E. coli bacteria, which can cause serious illness, including:  death, strokes, seizures, bloody diarrhea, renal failure, red blood cell destruction."  Anyone suffering from abdominal cramps or diarrhea a few days after consumption should consult a physician immediately, the proposed label said.  The proposed label also stated that the product should be cooked until no red color remains, to a minimum temperature of 155 F.  The labels should be bigger and in larger type than the current ones, the petitioners said.They called for a similar warning for cured meat products, noting that "it has become clear that E. coli contamination can survive the curing process. ... In light of this potential danger, USDA should warn consumers of cured meat's potential dangers, and at the very least, the agency must remove the 'Inspected and Passed' labels from cured meat products until it can be certain that the meat is not adulterated with E. coli.""If USDA ignores this request, the agency will have acted in an arbitrary and capricious manner in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act," the petitioners said.  ((6FLN 1404, 16 pages, $8)Back to Headline List WT03-B40-7IA060-000326-B017-382http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb14.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015347 text/html 31218HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:51:51 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:41 GMTContent-length: 31029Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb14.html Sample Issue Copyright FOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * NEWS/NOTES * ORE-IDA DEVELOPS SNACK ZONES FOR MINI-MEALS (178 words) HEINZ EXPANDS EUROPEAN FOODSERVICE BUSINESS (136 words) WENDY'S COMPLETES MERGER WITH TIM HORTONS (152 words) NY RESTAURANT AND FOODSERVICE SHOW FLOOR 90% SOLD (185 words) NORTHEAST FOODSERVICE AND LODGING EXPO & CONFERENCE (188 words) INTERSTATE BAKERIES CLOSES NJ BAKERY (148 words) CHECKERS ELECTS KINSEY TO SERVE ON BOARD OF DIRECTORS (71 words) RYKOFF-SEXTON ELECTS VAN STEKELENBURG AS COB (169 words) FOODQUEST TO REVIEW STRATEGIES LEADING TO THE SALE OF ALL OF ITS KENNY ROGERS ROASTER'S RESTAURANTS (186 words) PIZZA HUT HIRES PETER O'TOOLE TO DEBUT IN TV AD (156 words) IMMUDYNE SELLS NEW AQUACULTURE PROCUCTS (148 words) TACO BELL DRAFTS PRO FOOTBALL PLAYERS AND ESPN ANNOUNCER (172 words) MCDONALD'S JINGLE MAKES COMEBACK (124 words) * FROM WASHINGTON * JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD ADDITIVES PERMITTED IN FEED AND DRINKING WATER OF ANIMALS; MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITE (105 words) JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD LABELING: HEALTH CLAIMS; OATS AND CORONARY HEART DISEASE (126 words) JANUARY 4, 1996 WHITE CHOCOLATE DEVIATING FROM IDENTITY STANDARD; AMENDMENT OF TEMPORARY PERMIT FOR MARKET TESTING (120 words) JANUARY 4, 1996 REPORT OF THE FLUOROQUINOLONE WORKING GROUP; AVAILABILITY (111 words) JANUARY 2, 1996 SUBSTANCES APPROVED FOR USE IN THE PREPARATION OF MEAT AND POULTRY PRODUCTS (162 words) JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING; NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS: DEFINITION FOR "HIGH POTENCY" CLAIM FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND DEFINITION OF "ANTIOXIDANT" FOR USE IN NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND CONVENTIONAL FOODS (144 words) JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING: REFERENCE DAILY INTAKES (210 words) * FDA ENFORCEMENT REPORT * RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS: FOODS -- CLASS II: KELLOGG'S LOW FAT POP-TARTS, FROZEN YELLOW FIN TUNA (322 words) RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS: FOODS -- CLASS III: POPE BRAND TOMATO PASTE (89 words) CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996ORE-IDA DEVELOPS SNACK ZONES FOR MINI-MEALS01/04/96 - Boise, ID -- Ore-Ida Foods announced that as a consequenceof the busy lifestyles that people today are leading, eating habits arechanging. This is causing more people to eat on the run and consumeseveral mini-meals throughout the day, creating "the fourth meal"occasion. This trend is also evident in restaurant settings, where moreand more families are ordering an array of appetizers instead of fullentrees. In order to capitalize on these trends, Ore-Ida Foods has helpedretailers develop a destination shopping section in grocery store frozenfood aisles across the country. This section, known as the "Snack Zone,"is anchored by Ore-Ida frozen snacks such as Bagel Bites, Cheese Bitesand Dyna Bites. The philosophy underpinning the "Snack Zone" is toposition an assortment of frozen snack items together in one section sobusy shoppers can easily find satisfying and nutritional snackingsolutions for parties, after school or the midnight munchies. Boise, IDbased Ore-Ida Foods is an affiliate of the H.J. Heinz Company and oneof North America's largest frozen food processors.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996HEINZ EXPANDS EUROPEAN FOODSERVICE BUSINESS01/04/96 - Pittsburgh, PA -- H.J. Heinz Company announced that it hasexpanded its European foodservice business through the acquisition ofBritwest Ltd., which markets single-serve condiments, beverages andsauces in Britain and France. Britwest, based in Telford, UK, operatesSingle Service Ltd., a leading supplier to UK foodservice operators; andDosette Servis, which sells condiments, beverages and sauces inFrance. Heinz affiliates in the UK, the Netherlands, France, Spain andItaly offer a broad array of foodservice items, ranging from the ubiquitousHeinz tomato ketchup to canned salads, soups and vegetables. In thepast three years, Heinz has acquired a number of Italian foodservicesuppliers, including Arimpex, Dega and Bevidea. In North America, Heinzis one of the top foodservice companies. Heinz is also a leadingfoodservice purveyor in the rapidly growing markets of Asia/Pacific.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996WENDY'S COMPLETES MERGER WITH TIM HORTONS01/04/96 - Dublin, OH -- Wendy's International, Inc. has completed themerger with Tim Hortons, a privately-owned Canadian restaurant chain ofnearly 1,200 units. Wendy's agreed to issue 16.45 million shares ofcommon stock in exchange for all of the outstanding shares of Hortons'Canadian parent company. The transaction will be treated as a pooling-of-interests. Tim Hortons has 1,170 company and franchise restaurants,primarily in Canada. It is Canada's largest national chain in the coffeeand fresh baked goods segment, and second largest in the quick serviceindustry. The merger is a continuation of a successful businessrelationship begun in 1992 when Wendy's and Tim Hortons first built acombo unit - a freestanding building with a shared dining room andseparate kitchens and staffs. Development costs are about 25% less foreach than traditional units. About 35 combo units are open, with plans forat least 30 more in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996NY RESTAURANT AND FOODSERVICE SHOW FLOOR 90% SOLD01/03/96 - Norwalk, CT -- The New York Restaurant and Foodserviceshow will serve 23,000 anticipated attendees an array of seminars andpanel discussions featuring experts on a wide range of industry topics.Sponsored by the NY State Restaurant Association, the show isscheduled for February 25-27, 1996 at the Jacob Javits ConventionCenter in New York City. Seminars include a feature presentation byRuth Fertel, founder of Ruth's Chris Steak House. Developing MenusThat Attract Business will look at the latest in menu trends withcommentary by some of the most prominent restaurateurs in NY. Also onthe topic of menu offerings will be Preparing Healthy Recipes with theAmerican Heart Assoc. There will also be a discussion on how todevelop, manufacture, market and distribute your own cookbook. A fullschedule of events are in store for attendees, including the 7th AnnualPatisfrance Pastry Competition, La parade de Chefs, where chefscompete in a working restaurant on the show floor and the New ProductShowcase returns. World renowned Chef Paul Prudhomme will also beback to entertain the crowd with his cooking expertise.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996NORTHEAST FOODSERVICE AND LODGING EXPO & CONFERENCE01/03/96 - Norwalk, CT -- Growth is a key focus of the NortheastFoodservice and Lodging Expo & Conference, scheduled for April 21-23,1996 at the Bayside Expo Center in Boston, MA. The convention,sponsored by the Massachusetts Restaurant Association, is one of thelargest regional foodservice exhibitions in the country and carries thedistinction of offering one of the most comprehensive conferenceprograms in the industry at not charge to attendees. The expo andconference features a show within a show - The Foodservice EquipmentShowcase, the second largest collection of Foodservice EquipmentCompanies and distributors in the country. More than 1/3 of the showfloor is dedicated to foodservice equipment. A new Lodging pavilion,highlighting a broad spectrum of products and services specifically forthe lodging industry, will debut this year. Other popular eventsanticipated to return with the show include the New Product Showcase,the Culinary Arts Salon and the Canadian and Italian Pavilions. Morethan 26,000 buyers, owners/operators, chefs, dietitians and buyers fromcafes to large chains and institutional feeders are expected to shopnearly 1,000 booths for foodservice products, equipment and alliedservices.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996INTERSTATE BAKERIES CLOSES NJ BAKERY01/03/96 - Kansas City, MO -- Interstate Bakeries Corporationannounced that it will close its East Brunswick, NJ bakery effective March2, 1996. Production of Wonder Bread and Hostess snack cakes at theEast Brunswick facility will be consolidated at IBC bakeries in nearbyPhiladelphia, PA and Jamaica, NY. Distribution and sales operations willcontinue in East Brunswick without change. The 30 year old EastBrunswick bakery was one of 36 bread, roll and snack cake bakeriesacquired by IBC in the July 1995 acquisition of St. Louis-basedContinental Baking Company. Operation of the Philadelphia and Jamaicabread and snack cake bakeries, both located within 60 miles of the EastBrunswick facility, had made the New Jersey bakery redundant.Interstate Bakeries Corporation, through its operating subsidiary,Interstate Brands Corporation, is the nation's largest wholesale bakingcompany with 65 bread and cake bakeries located in strategic marketsfrom coast-to-coast.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996CHECKERS ELECTS KINSEY TO SERVE ON BOARD OF DIRECTORS01/02/96 - Clearwater, FL -- Checkers Drive-In Restaurants announcedthat Keith Kinsey, current Chief Operating Officer and Chief FinancialOfficer of the Company, was elected to serve on the Company's Board ofDirectors. Checkers Drive-In Restaurants, Inc., one of the largest doubledrive-thru restaurant chains in the United States, develops, owns,operates and franchises restaurants that offer high-quality food, fastservice and  everyday value prices. CHECKERS is headquartered inClearwater, FL.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996RYKOFF-SEXTON ELECTS VAN STEKELENBURG AS COB01/02/96 - Lisle, IL -- Rykoff-Sexton, Inc. announced the election of MarkVan Stekelenburg to the position of chairman of the board. He willcontinue in his role as president and chief executive officer. VanStekelenburg, 44, had been acting in the capacity of chairman since hewas elected president and chief executive officer of the company inDecember 1992. He has been a member of Rykoff-Sexton's board ofdirectors since September 1992. Van Stekelenburg joined Rykoff-Sextonin March 1991 as executive vice president. He previously was presidentand chief executive officer of G.V.A., the largest foodservice distributor inthe Netherlands and a subsidiary of Royal Ahold, N.V. Rykoff-Sexton is aleading nationwide distributor and manufacturer of high-quality foods andrelated non-food products and services for restaurants, institutions andother locations where food is prepared away from home, as well as oneof the country's largest restaurant equipment, supply and contract designcompanies. The company has distribution centers, sales offices andcontract design facilities located throughout the United States.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996FOODQUEST TO REVIEW STRATEGIES LEADING TO THE SALE OFALL OF ITS KENNY ROGERS ROASTER'S RESTAURANTS01/02/96 - North Miami, FL -- FOODQUEST, Inc. announced that theBoard of Directors has decided to review various strategies leading to thesale of all of its Kenny Rogers Roaster's concept restaurants to potentialthird parties. FOODQUEST will immediately engage an outside valuationconsultant to determine the potential value of these concept units in themarketplace. Pursuant to this strategy change, the Company has helddiscussions with Roasters Corp., the franchisor of Kenny RogersRoasters, and has received indications that Roasters Corp. would bewilling to purchase some or all of the Roasters concept units previouslysold and financed by Roasters for a purchase price equal to net bookvalue, subject to certain other conditions of closing.  The Board believesthat it is in the best interest of shareholders to offer the assets to thirdparties as well, so as to receive the highest potential valuation for theseassets. The Company will continue to aggressively pursue and negotiatefor acquisition or merger candidates, such as the recent Paradise Bakeryacquisition target, that offer the best potential for net income growth andmaximization of shareholder value.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996PIZZA HUT HIRES PETER O'TOOLE TO DEBUT IN TV AD01/02/96 - Dallas, TX -- Pizza Hut announced that British actor PeterO'Toole will make his commercial debut in a television ad for Pizza Hut'sStuffed Crust Pizza. The accomplished theatre actor and star of theclassic "Lawrence of Arabia," O'Toole returns to the stage in his firstcommercial, this time sharing the spotlight with Pizza Hut's Pepperoni &Cheese Stuffed Crust Pizza. The Peter O'Toole ad was created by PizzaHut's agency of record, BBDO Worldwide, NY. The Peter O'Toole spotdebuted nationally on New Year's Day. In less than a year, Pizza Hut'sStuffed Crust Pizza line has set record company sales in becoming abillion dollar brand, representing approximately 20% of all Pizza Hutsales. Pizza Hut, a division of PepsiCo, Inc., is the world's largest pizzadistribution system and delivery company, with more than 8,900restaurants and delivery units in the U.S., and more than 3,300 units inmore than 90 countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996IMMUDYNE SELLS NEW AQUACULTURE PROCUCTS01/02/96 - Houston, TX -- ImmuDyne Inc. announced the initial sales ofits newly developed aquaculture products. Early product developmentactivity has resulted in the first new product, ImmuStim(TM)PX-5000,which is a non-specific immune enhancing shrimp feed premix. Othernew products, designed for specific applications are under development.Burris Feeds Inc., a large aquaculture feed distributor, has orderedImmuStim(TM)PX-5000 to be used by their shrimp farming clients inCentral America. These initial sales of ImmuStim(TM)PX-5000 will beemployed in large scale field trials to protect farmed shrimp fromopportunistic infections by bacteria, fungi and viruses. ImmuDyne, Inc. isa Texas-based biotechnology company specializing in macrophagetechnology. Its patented Immune Stimulation or Biological ResponseModification technology has numerous applications in the health market.In addition to effectively combating the Taura Syndrome in crustaceans,it has been shown to be effective in treating both bacterial and viralinfections in fish.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996TACO BELL DRAFTS PRO FOOTBALL PLAYERS AND ESPN ANNOUNCER01/02/96 - Irvine, CA -- Taco Bell has drafted America's favorite profootball players, along with ESPN announcer Chris Berman, to promotethe company's roster of popular bacon products and to introduce arookie, the Ultimate Bacon Pizza. The bacon product line will besupported with a 30-second television commercial that began airing onJanuary 1 during prime time on network television. In the newcommercial, America gets to see a humorous side of their favorite sportspersonalities and heroes including: Chris Berman, ESPN anchor, HowieLong, color commentator for FOX-TV, retired Defensive Lineman,Raiders Bruce Smith, Defensive Lineman, Buffalo Bills Jim Kelly,Quarterback, Buffalo Bills Lawrence Taylor, retired Linebacker, New YorkGiants Phil Simms, commentator for NBC Sunday Football, retiredQuarterback, New York Giants. Taco Bell Corp. is a division of PepsiCo,Inc. and is the nation's leading Mexican-style quick-serve, restaurantchain with more than 25,000 points of access and $4.5 billion in annualSystem-wide sales. The Company has 4,600 restaurants nationwide andserves more than 50 million customers each week.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996MCDONALD'S JINGLE MAKES COMEBACK01/02/95 - Oakbrook, IL -- "Twoallbeefpatties-specialsaucelettucecheesepicklesonionsonasesameseedbun(R)."McDonald's(R) "two all-beefpatties" jingle made a comeback December 26 in a national advertisingcampaign promoting special Big Mac values. The return of the jingleincludes an all new series of Big Mac commercials. One spot features amedley of characters: NBA superstar Charles Barkley, Daffy Duck,rappers and singing nuns - all contribute to the tongue twister. The jinglefirst debuted in 1975 - seven years after the creation of the Big Mac.There are 250 McDonald's restaurants in the Delaware Valley, serving ahalf million people each day. McDonald's is the world's leading foodretailer with more than 15,000 restaurants in 83 countries. Eighty percentof McDonald's restaurants are locally owned and operated byindependent entrepreneurs.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD ADDITIVES PERMITTED IN FEED AND DRINKING WATEROF ANIMALS; MENADIONE NICOTINAMIDE BISULFITEVolume 61, Number 1[Rules and Regulations, Page 5-6]21 CFR Part 573[Docket No. 94F-0283]AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Final rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending thefood additive regulations to provide for the safe use of menadionenicotinamide bisulfite as a nutritional supplement for the preventionof vitamin K deficiency and as a source of supplemental niacin inchicken and turkey feed when used at a rate not to exceed 2 grams perton (g/t) of complete feed. This action is in response to a food additivepetition filed by Vanetta (U.S.A.) Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996 FOOD LABELING: HEALTH CLAIMS; OATS AND CORONARYHEART DISEASEVolume 61, Number 3[Proposed Rules, Page 296-337][[Page 296]]21 CFR Part 101[Docket No. 95P-0197]RIN 0910-AA19AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Proposed rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toauthorize the use, on food labels and in food labeling, of health claims onthe association between oat products, i.e., oat bran and oatmeal, andreduced risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). FDA is proposing thisaction in response to a petition filed by the Quaker Oats Co. (thepetitioner). The agency has tentatively concluded that, based on thetotality of publicly available scientific evidence, diets high in oatmeal andoat bran and low in saturated fat and cholesterol may reduce the risk ofCHD.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996 WHITE CHOCOLATE DEVIATING FROM IDENTITY STANDARD;AMENDMENT OF TEMPORARY PERMIT FOR MARKET TESTINGVolume 61, Number 3[Notices, Page 352-353][Docket No. 93P-0310]AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Notice.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing thatit is amending an extended temporary permit issued to Hershey FoodsCorp. (Hershey) to market test products identified, in part, as "whitechocolate" that deviate from the U.S. standards of identity for chocolateproducts, e.g., chocolate liquor, sweet chocolate, milk chocolate,buttermilk chocolate, skim milk chocolate, or mixed dairy productchocolates. The purpose of the amendment to the extended temporarypermit is to allow Hershey to collect data on consumer acceptance of adifferent product, containing white chocolate, that also containschocolate cookies, and to identify mass production problems.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 4, 1996REPORT OF THE FLUOROQUINOLONE WORKING GROUP; AVAILABILITYVolume 61, Number 3[Notices, Page 353][Docket No. 95S-0199]AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Notice.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing theavailability of the report of the Center for Veterinary Medicine's (CVM's)Fluoroquinolone Working Group (FQWG). The report addresses issuesand contains recommendations regarding policies and proceduresrelated to approval of fluoroquinolone (FQ) antimicrobial drugs in foodanimals. The report of the FQWG is in response to concerns thatapproval of FQ drugs for use in food animals may result in increaseddevelopment of FQ resistance in zoonotic organisms harbored by foodanimals that are transmitted to humans and cause disease.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 2, 1996 SUBSTANCES APPROVED FOR USE IN THE PREPARATION OFMEAT AND POULTRY PRODUCTSVolume 60, Number 250[Proposed Rules, Page 67489-67492][[Page 67489]]21 CFR Part 71, et al.Substances Approved for Use in the Preparation of Meat and PoultryProducts; Food Standards of Identity, Quality and Fill of Container;Common or Usual Name Regulations; Proposed Rules[[Page 67490]]21 CFR Parts 71, 170, and 171[Docket No. 95N-0220]RIN 0910-AA66AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Proposed rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toamend its regulations governing the review of petitions for the approvalof food and color additives and substances generally recognized as safe(GRAS) to provide for joint review of such petitions by the Food Safetyand Inspection Service (FSIS), U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA),when meat or poultry product uses are proposed. By agreement betweenUSDA and FDA, such listings would eliminate the need for a separateFSIS rulemaking to allow the use in meat and poultry products of FDA-approved substances.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING; NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS: DEFINITION FOR"HIGH POTENCY" CLAIM FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS AND DEFINITION OF"ANTIOXIDANT" FOR USE IN NUTRIENT CONTENT CLAIMS FOR DIETARY SUPPLEMENTSAND CONVENTIONAL FOODSVolume 60, Number 249[Proposed Rules, Page 67184-67194]21 CFR Part 101[Docket No. 95N-0347]RIN 0910-AA23AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Proposed rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing toamend its regulations to define the term "high potency" as a nutrientcontent claim for dietary supplements; define the term "antioxidant"for use in nutrient content claims on labels or in labeling of dietarysupplements and conventional foods; and correct an omission pertainingto the use of "sugar free" claims on dietary supplements. FDA is takingthese actions to provide for the use of additional nutrient content claimsin response to provisions of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of1990. This proposed rule will benefit consumers by providing establisheddefinitions for use in food labeling for the terms "high potency,""antioxidant," and "sugar free."Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996JANUARY 2, 1996 FOOD LABELING: REFERENCE DAILY INTAKESVolume 60, Number 249[Rules and Regulations, Page 67163-67175][[Page 67163]]Part II21 CFR Part 101Food Labeling; Final Rule and Proposed Rules[[Page 67164]]21 CFR Part 101[Docket No. 90N-0134]RIN 0910-AA19AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, HHS.ACTION: Final rule.SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending itsregulations to establish Reference Daily Intakes (RDI's) for vitamin K,selenium, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, and chloride, but not forfluoride. The agency is also amending its regulations to modify the unitsof measure that are used to declare the amount of biotin, folate, calcium,and phosphorus in food. In addition, the agency is amending itsregulations to make consideration of selenium, chromium, molybdenum,and chloride optional in making a determination as to whether a food isnutritionally inferior to a food for which it substitutes and that itresembles. These actions are intended to assist consumers inunderstanding the nutritional significance of foods in the context of a totaldaily diet and are in recognition of the fact that the National Academy ofSciences (NAS) established Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA's)and Estimated Safe and Adequate Daily Dietary Intakes (ESADDI's) forvitamin K, selenium, manganese, chromium, molybdenum, and chlorideeither in 1980 or 1989.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS:  FOODS -- CLASS II: KELLOGG'S LOW FATPOP-TARTS, FROZEN YELLOW FIN TUNA_______________PRODUCT        Kellogg's Low Fat Pop-Tarts with Smucker's Real Fruit               Frosted Strawberry with Natural and Artificial Flavors.               Recall #F-138-6.CODE           Retail cartons are imprinted 06055GA1.MANUFACTURER   Keebler Company, Grand Rapids, Michigan.RECALLED BY    Kellogg Company, Battle Creek, Michigan, by press release on               August 4, 1995.  Firm-initiated recall complete.DISTRIBUTION   Nationwide.QUANTITY       7,875 cases of 12 cartons each were distributed.REASON         The strawberry Pop-Tarts cartons actually contain chocolate               fudge pop-tarts._______________PRODUCT        Frozen Yellow Fin Tuna:  (a) IQF Tuna Pieces;               (b) 4 ounce Tuna Steaks; (c) 6 ounce Tuna Steaks;               (d) 8 ounce Tuna Steaks; (e) 4 ounce Tuna Sandwich Cuts.               Recall #F-139/143-6.CODE           First four digits involved are: 2615, 2265, 2275, and 2285.               Last four digits involved are: 7734 and 7658.MANUFACTURER   Tyson Seafood Group, Seattle, Washington.RECALLED BY    Tyson Foods, Inc., Springdale, Arkansas, by letter faxed on               November 30, 1995.  FDA-initiated recall ongoing.DISTRIBUTION   Nationwide and international.QUANTITY       Two raw material lots were commingled to manufacture the               below listed lot totaling 14,640 lbs.               Lot 2615SEA03__-7734               Product Code   Description              Cs made   Cs dist               98575-895      Sysco 8 oz. stks 1/10#   358       358               98574-895      Sysco 6 oz. stks 1/10#   492       384               98575-036      8 oz. steaks 1/10#        73        0               98573-895      Sysco 4 oz. stks 1/10#   150       149               98574-036      6 oz. steaks 1/10#        76        76               98573-036      4 oz. steaks 1/10#        83        0               98572-538      IQF tuna pieces 1/40#     58        58               Two raw material lots were commingled to manufacture the               below listed lots totaling 33,730 lbs.               Lots 2265EA03__7658, 2275SEA03__7658, and 2285SEA03__7658               Product Code   Description              Cs made   Cs dist               98577-036      4 oz. sand. cuts 1/10#   164       149               98574-895      Sysco 6 oz. stks 1/10#   800       800               98575-895      Sysco 8 oz. stks 1/10#   905       905               98575-036      8 oz. steaks 1/10#       170        55               98574-036      6 oz. steaks 1/10#       241       241               98572-538      IQF tuna pieces 1/40#    144       144               98573-895      Sysco 4 oz. stks 1/10#   150       150               98573-036      4 oz. stks 1/10#         367       367REASON         Product is decomposed and contains hazardous levels of               histamines.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOODBYTE NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996RECALLS AND FIELD CORRECTIONS:  FOODS -- CLASS III: POPE BRAND TOMATO PASTE_______________PRODUCT        Pope brand Imported Tomato Paste in 6 ounce cans.               Recall #F-137-6.CODE           Can Code: APE 4 R 048.MANUFACTURER   T.E.C., Pompeii, Italy.RECALLED BY    Pope Foods, Inc., Oradell, New Jersey, by telephone followed               by fax on June 30, 1995, .  Firm-initiated recall complete.DISTRIBUTION   New York, New Jersey, Connecticut.QUANTITY       10,565 cases (48 cans per carton) were distributed.REASON         The label of the product showed "Product of Italy" on the               bottom label and "Product of Hungary" on the top label.  The               label also had different brand namesBack to Headline List WT03-B40-8IA060-000326-B018-35http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb04.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015425 text/html 29413HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:52:19 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:37 GMTContent-length: 29224Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb04.html Sample Issue Copyright ICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Frozen dessert year in review (1699 words) ...And a look at the year ahead (390 words) Haagen-Dazs testing cafe concept (328 words) Dairy legislation remains in turmoil (450 words) Baskin-Robbins continues convenience store expansion drive (316 words) Pascobel makes U.S. push (360 words) Last Licks (801 words) CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Frozen dessert year in reviewTea-flavored ice creams and ice cream pizza piesproliferated in 1995, but the sudden flurry ofcompetition in these segments ran second to thedevelopments in another product category, that ofsorbets, where Ice Cream Reporter's top story for theyear is the decision by Haagen-Dazs to proceed with anational rollout of its sorbet line.  The move by theworld's leading superpremium frozen dessert marketer issignificant on several levels.  Most importantly, a large-scale advertising and promotion campaign by Haagen-Dazs created an awareness of sorbets among masses ofconsumers who were previously unaware that this typeof product even existed.  But the Haagen-Dazs blitz alsofocused attention on the disparity between the marketingpower of the industry's deep-pocketed leaders and theprecarious position of the smaller frozen dessertcompanies that struggle along on a shoe-string tomaintain their hold on hard-won market niches.  Some ofthose smaller companies felt the pinch as soon as theHaagen-Dazs rollout began, losing distribution and shelfspace as retailers opted for the big-name brand.  Butother sorbet marketers argued that the public awarenesscreated for the category by Haagen-Dazs would help allparticipants.  Because of its impact on the market,Haagen-Dazs Sorbet is not only the story of the year for1995 but also the product of the year.Encouraged by the entry of Haagen-Dazs, or at least notdiscouraged by it, was The Mattus Group, whichintroduced a line of sorbets under the Monterey label(ICR 11/95).  Admitting to being encouraged by theHaagen-Dazs entry was International Yogurt, which isnow offering its Sorbet...by Yo Cream to its foodservicecustomers (ICR 10/95).  Looking for a slightly differentniche is Lafayette Foods, which introduced Frubet, anultra-rich sorbet that is being positioned as an upscalecompetitor to single-serve Italian ices rather than goinghead-to-head with the pint-packed sorbets (ICR 12/95).Domestic Moves:  The most important event in thedomestic frozen dessert industry, after the Haagen-Dazssorbet rollout, was the decision by Brice Foods to end itstraditional franchise practice and switch to a royalty-freefranchise plan for is 200-unit I Can't Believe It's Yogurtchain (ICR 11/95).  The progress of the new plan, whichwill have franchisees purchase their goods from thefranchisor on an as-needed basis, is sure to be watchedclosely by other frozen dessert chain operators.Also making franchise news was TCBY, which announcedin December that it was planning to trnansform all itscompany-owned units to franchisees (ICR 12/95).  Themove was part of an overall reorganization of the frozenyogurt marketer.  Increasing its presence in thefoodservice arena was Dannon, which launched a turn-key, modular vending concept under the name YogurtCravings (ICR 4/95).Other major stories on the domestic front included thereturn to the black of Ben & Jerry's, after suffering thefirst loss in the company's history in the 3rd quarter of1994 (ICR 12/95); the agreement by the InternationalDairy Foods Association and the Dairy and FoodIndustries Supply Association to join forces and create anew International Food and Dairy Show (ICR 2/95); andthe elimination of package size restrictions on frozendesserts by the National Conference on Weights andMeasures (ICR 8/95).  Also noteworthy was the decisionby Grand Metropolitan to close Haagen-Dazs' long-termheadquarters in Teaneck, NJ and consolidate thecompany's operations with those of Pillsbury inMinneapolis (ICR 10/95).Product Trends: Following on the flood of coffee-flavoredfrozen desserts that hit the market in 1994 came a slewof tea-flavored products beginning with a line of Iced TeaPops produced by H.P. Hood under a licensing agreementwith the highly popular tea marketer Celestial Seasonings(ICR 3/95).  Also in March was the announcement of aLipton Original Iced Tea Bar from Good Humor-Breyers,with Unilever synergizing two of its most popular brands.Next up was Frozfruit, which joined the tea party with aLemon Iced Tea fruit bar (ICR 4/95).  In another bit ofsynergy, Nestle borrowed from its popular tea brand tocreate the Nestea Iced Tea Bar (ICR 9/95).If three makes a trend, then ice cream pizza became atrend in 1995.  Good Humor-Breyers kicked off themovement with its Freeza Pizza novelty (ICR 3/95), thenDairy Queen upped the ante with a full-sized ice creampie which it called the DQ Treatzza Pizza (ICR 5/95).Baskin-Robbins weighed in a few months later with itsPolar Pizza (ICR 9/95), available in both single slicesand whole pie form.New Products: The Good Humor-Breyers itemsmentioned above were part of a massive 50-productlaunch by the company this past spring (ICR 3/95) whichalso included Romantica, a follow-up to the company'sViennetta ice cream cake, and Reese's Peanut Butter IceCream Cups, made under a licensing agreement withHershey Food Co.Eskimo Pie made several new product announcementsthat involved licensing agreements, beginning with a dealwith Nabisco to create a line of frozen desserts based onthe four most popular cookie brands in the country (ICR1/95).  The next licensing deal called for Eskimo Pie totake over the poduction and marketing of the popularWeight Watchers frozen desserts (ICR 2/95), and a thirdsaw Eskimo Pie entering into a long-term agreement tomanufacture, distribute, and market Realfruit Sorbets(ICR 4/95).In other new product news, Clarke Ice Cream licensed theA&W root beer brand for a line of novelties (ICR 11/95);and Healthy Choice added a superpremium low-fat lineunder Special Creations label (ICR 3/95).  Alsonoteworthy was the launch of Haagen-Dazs Cordials, aline of liqueur-flavored ice creams (ICR 1/95).One other new product of significance announced in 1995,though not due out on the market until 1996, is thecoffee ice cream from Dreyer's and Starbucks (ICR11/95).  This launch caps the coffee ice cream trend thatbegan in 1994 by pairing two market leaders in a jointventure that goes beyond the usual licensing agreement.Pricing Down:    Two other product introductions ofinterest were the Blue Ribbon line of ice cream cakesfrom Carvel (ICR 10/95) and the Chiqui i.i. ice creams andsorbets from Out of a Flower (ICR 11/95).  The twolaunches shared a common importance in that they wereboth lower-priced versions of products the companieswere already marketing.  In the case of Carvel, the lower-priced introduction reflected pressure from competingproducts; while Out of a Flower was looking to broaden itsdistribution to outlets that would not handle its primaryultra-high-priced line.Mergers & Acquisitions:    No deal in 1995 came closeto 1994's story-of-the-year, the acquisition by Nestle of22% of Dreyer's stock.  But among the more interestingmoves in 1995 were the acquisition of Bresler'sIndustries by the Canadian marketer Yogen Fruz World-Wide (ICR 7/95); the acquisition of the rights to theColombo frozen yogurt brand by Integrated Brands(formerly Steve's Homemade) (ICR 9/95); themanagement buyout of Nestle Dairy Sytems, renamedNorse Dairy Systems (ICR 11/95); and Pfizer's sale of itsFood Science Group to the Finnish ingredient companyCultor, Ltd. (ICR 11/95).Following upon its acquisition in 1994 by Kohlberg,Kravis, & Roberts (ICR 9/94), Borden announced that itwas planning to sell its dairies east of the Mississippi inorder to focus on its western dairy operations (ICR 6/95).The first sale took place shortly thereafter, with a Bordenunit in West Virginia going to United Dairy, Inc. (ICR7/95).  Later in the year Borden amended its policyslightly with the sale of one of its key western units, itsHouston frozen dessert plant, to Dreyer's (ICR 12/95).The acquisition helped strengthen Dreyer's expansion intothe Southwest.International News:  U.S. frozen dessert marketerscontinued to find room for expansion overseas in 1995.Bresler's Industries reached two licensing agreements inChina (ICR 1/95 and 5/95), and one in Brazil (ICR 6/95);Baskin-Robbins opened its first shop in Vietnam (ICR2/95) and expanded its existing operations in Russia (ICR12/95); TCBY expanded its franchising into India and theCayman Islands (ICR 10/95) and Russia (ICR 11/95); andBrice Foods licensed manufacturing rights for its productsto companies in Europe, Brazil, and Australia to facilitatesupplying of its overseas ICBIY shops (ICR 12/95).While not contracting in terms of business, Haagen-Dazsdid shrink its overseas operations, closing its Parisheadquarters and consolidating its management into thatof parent Grand Metropolitan (ICR 1/95).  Thisanticipated a similar move noted in the Domestic Movessection above.People in the News:    Among the people making news inthe frozen dessert industry in 1995, the most prominentwas Bob Holland, who won the job of replacing companyfounder Ben Cohen as CEO of Ben & Jerry's following amuch-publicized search and contest (ICR 2/95).  Holland,who was also named president of the company, is givenmuch of the credit for getting Ben & Jerry's back on trackin 1995.Steve Herrell, one of the founding fathers of thesuperpremium movement, was also in the news this pastyear as he began to expand his latest chain of ice creamshops (ICR 3/95).  Making news of a less positive naturewas Robert Peltz, former chairman of Chipwich, who wasaccused of using almost $700,000 in company funds forpersonal expenses (ICR 10/95).BST:    The battle over the use of the synthetically-produced growth hormone bovine somatropin (BST)continued in 1995.  Early on, the pro-BST forces claimed anumber of victories by blocking legislation in statesacross the country (ICR 5/95).  In June, Ben & Jerry's, oneof the most prominent foes of BST use, resigned from theInternational Ice Cream Association in protest against thegroup's pro-BST stance (ICR 6/95).  Later in the year thepro-BST movement suffered a setback when a Vermontjudge rejected a request for an injunction against thestate's mandatory BST labeling law (ICR 8/95).Advertising & Promotions:    With reduced-fat, low-fat,and fat-free frozen desserts claiming a growing share ofthe market in 1995, Unilever introduced a new labelingformat for its Good Humor-Breyers light alternativeproducts, with logos reminding consumers to "EatHealthy, Eat Well" and "Eat Better, Eat Well" (ICR 12/95).Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996 ...And a look at the year aheadAs with many other facets of American life, legislationnow pending in the 104th Congress could have asignificant impact on the frozen dessert industry in 1996.As explained in an article further on in this issue, therecould be a major increase in frozen dessert prices ifCongress makes changes in current dairy policy.  But, asthe article also explains, it is simply too early to knowwhether the changes will be made and, if they are, howbig they will be.An increase in frozen dessert prices could have the effectof making it easier in 1996 for the larger companies inthe industry to use discounting and other forms of pricepromotion as competitive weapons against smallerplayers.  Price competition has been an ongoing factor,albeit to a relatively small degree, in the frozen dessertindustry.  But it would not be surprising to see morecompanies do what Carvel did this past year, i.e.,introduce a lower-priced line in the face of pricecompetition from its rivals.Something that will definitely be lower in 1996 will bethe fat content of more and more frozen dessert products.Sales of light alternative products were up significantly in1995 and the trend will continue into 1996.  More andmore marketers will follow the Good Humor-Breyersexample and add logos or other labeling marks that willmake it easier for consumers to identify these products.The desire for light alternative frozen desserts, coupledwith the rollout of the Haagen-Dazs line of sorbets, our1995 story of the year, should lead to increased sales forthe sorbet category.In last year's look ahead we predicted, for the secondtime, that Unilever would make a bid for Haagen-Dazs.With Grand Metropolitan pulling the reins in on Haagen-Dazs's management this past year, it seems less likelythan ever that the British comglomerate would be willingto let the superpremium marketer go.  So instead, we'llfocus on the Nestle-Dreyer's connection and suggest thatif the frozen novelties marketer does not make anoutright move to acquire the Oakland-based Dreyer's, itwill definitely seek to improve on its 22% holding.  And ifit doesn't go for Dreyer's, Nestle could make a bid onEskimo Pie, perhaps even finding itself in a bidding warwith Unilever for the Virginia-based novelties marketer.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Haagen-Dazs testing cafe conceptTesting of a broader, cafe-type menu concept isunderway in a handful of Haagen-Dazs shops around thecountry.  The shops, all franchise operations, haveexpanded their offerings beyond the traditional line offrozen desserts to include such items as sweet bakedgoods, sandwiches, and salads.  A Haagen-Dazsspokesman told Ice Cream Reporter that Rthe company isinterested in seeing how the extended menu will affectthe shops' business.S  He noted that the test is open-ended, with no specific time-table as to when or whetheradditional units will be converted to the cafe concept,despite some published reports that 25 out of the 250Haagen-Dazs shops in the U.S. would eventually bechanged over to cafe.The testing of the cafe concept began last May with asingle shop in Boulder, CO.  A second franchiseeintroduced the concept in October at a single unit inCoconut Grove, FL.  Conversion of a third unit has justbeen completed in Tysons Corner, VA.The new unit has 1,300 square feet of floor space.  TheHaagen-Dazs spokesman explained that the cafe conceptwould only be introduced in shops that were between1,200 and 1,500 sq. ft.  The aim, he noted, was to create aRcozy environment,S but that any shop smaller than thanthe 1,200 sq. ft. minimum would not be able toacommodate any tables comfortably or provide enoughfloor space for the self-service customer traffic.The responsibility for the menu expansion rests with thefranchisees who are testing the cafe concept.  TheHaagen-Dazs spokesman indicated that the companyconsidered the introduction of baked goods as the toppriority with sandwiches, salads, and other foodssecondary.  He reported that the company has not giventhe franchisees strict guidelines as to what foods they canoffer, but would draw the line if someone tried tointroduce a line of fried chicken, to use one example.RThe main parameter,S he explained, Ris whether itenhances the Haagen-Dazs concept.SBack to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Dairy legislation remains in turmoilThe new year begins with U.S. dairy policy in a state offlux.  Efforts to reach a decision on whether to retain,drop, or in some way alter price supports for dairyproducts remain unresolved as the larger issue of theoverall budget continues to be worked out.  Despite theuncertainty, one strong possibility is that the price ofmilk will be allowed to go up, sending the price of otherdairy products, including frozen desserts, up with it.According to the International Dairy Foods Association(IDFA), a plan proposed by Rep. Steve Gunderson (R-WI),and supported by the National Milk Producers Federation,could Rdramatically increase the prices consumers nowpay for milk and other dairy products by billions ofdollars.S  The Gunderson plan is described as aRcompromiseS because it allows for both an increase anddecrease of government control of dairy at the same time.The plan follows the current political trend of reducinggovernment interference in the marketplace byeliminating price supports for some dairy products.  Butthe IDFA points out that what it takes away with onehand it gives back with interest with the other by lockingin higher minimum price levels to producers for fluidmilk.  These higher prices would be paid by dairyprocessors and food manufacturers and then passed alongto consumers.  The government would also be paying thehigher price when purchasing milk and dairy productsfor needy citizens.  With budget allotments fixed, thiswould result in smaller purchases and fewer peoplehelped.An IDFA representative told Ice Cream Reporter that theGunderson plan is on the table as a result of PresidentClinton having vetoed the budget passed by Congress inNovember.  In that budget, dairy policy was to remainunchanged, a compromise between those conservativeidealogues who wanted to eliminate all governmentagricultural supports, including dairy, andrepresentatives from dairy-producing regions, led byJerry Solomon (R-NY), who were defending the interestsof their constituents.  The presidential veto opened thedoor to further legislative discussion and thedevelopment of the Gunderson plan.The IDFA representative noted that passage of theGunderson plan was far from being a certainty.  For onething, there are strong regional disagreements, chieflybetween producers in the West and the Northeast overwhether the benefits would be distributed equitably.  Inaddition, the loss of price supports might lead to the"dumping" of some U.S. dairy products on world marketswhich could be in violation of U.S. trade agreements.With so many details such as these to be worked out, it ispossible that the budget compromise plan of November,i.e., leaving current dairy policies in place, will once againbe chosen.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Baskin-Robbins continues convenience store expansiondriveBaskin-Robbins has announced that it is expanding itsconvenience store operations through an agreement withH.N. Funkhouser, operator of the Virginia-based HandyMart chain.  The franchise co-branding agreement, whichalso includes Baskin-Robbins' sister company Dunkin'Donuts, calls for Funkhouser to retro-fit seven of its 14units to accomodate the frozen dessert and donutoperations.  The Handy Mart units to be converted arelocated in Frederick, Warren, and Clarke counties.  Thefirst unit is expected to be ready by late February, with a150-square-foot space devoted to the sale of a full line ofBaskin-Robbins ice creams and frozen yogurts, includingpre-packed and hand-packed items, frozen dessert cakes,and the fountain items typically available in a Baskin-Robbins shop.  Table space is included, as well.The Handy Mart deal is the latest in a series reached byBaskin-Robbins with regional gas station/conveniencestore operators over the last two years.  It also continuesthe company's ongoing co-franchising effort with Dunkin'Donuts.  Each of the two companies, owned by the Britishconglomerate Allied Domecq, is the largest franchisorworldwide in its category.  By teaming up, they offerconvenience store operators and other franchisees theopportunity to offer products that complement each otherseasonally.  In addition, operators can cross-trainemployees for both operations.Funkhouser president Robert Claytor explained that hiscompany wants to attract a more diverse clientele to theconvenience stores through the addition of thenationally-known brand name chains.  The Handy Martsstarted out as gas stations when they opened in the1930s, with auto parts sales added in the 1970s, and theconvenience stores in the 1980s.  The inclusion of theBaskin-Robbins and Dunkin' Donuts operations is inkeeping with a national trend that has seen about 2,000gas stations across the country add some type of fast foodoperation in recent years in order to attract moretravelers to stop at their locations.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Pascobel makes U.S. pushLooking to develop a niche in the U.S. market for frozendessert ingredients is the Pascobel Corporation.  Anoffshoot of the Montreal-based Pascobel, Inc., thecompany offers natural, highly functional milk proteinproducts that are designed to replace non-fat dry milkand skim milk powders in a variety of processed dairyproducts including ice creams and frozen yogurts.The products, marketed under the Nollibel and Belcoverlabels, have been used for many years by over 300 foodmanufacturers in Canada and more than a dozenEuropean nations.  The long-term acceptance of theproducts in Europe is due, in part, to the fact that thetechnology for producing the dairy proteins wasdeveloped on the continent over 25 years ago by theFrench dairy company Bel Cheese.Ted Fisch, National Sales Manager for the New Jersey-based Pascobel, explained that the company had launcheda major effort to acquaint American manufacturers withits products through an appearance at the 1995MegaShow in Chicago.  At the show, Pascobel conducted ablind taste test using a 3% low fat vanilla ice cream.  Onesample was made using skim milk powder while inanother, 50% of the skim milk powder was replaced withthe company's Nollibel 1450 functional milk proteinproduct.  According to Fisch, over 65% of those who triedthe ice creams preferred the one with the Nollibel.Fisch noted that the particular variety of Nollibel used inthe taste taste, the least functional in the line, sells forabout half the typical price of skim milk powder.  Thetop-of-the line products offer savings closer to 10% offthe typical price of skim milk powder.  Fisch pointed outthat in addition to being less expensive than non-fat drymilk or skim milk powder, the Pascobel milk proteinproducts, because of their processing, have greaterconsistency and more body and texture than thecompeting products.The company makes a variety of standard productsspecifically intended for use in economy ice creams,premium ice creams, and reduced-fat ice creams andfrozen yogurts.  It also reports that it can customizeproducts at the manufacturer's request to suit them tospecific applications.Back to Headline List CopyrightICE CREAM REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Last Lickso       Borden has released some additional information onthe sale of its Houston ice cream plant to Dreyer's, whichwe reported on in the December ICR.  Under the terms ofthe agreement, which became effective December 31,about 100 hourly workers and 29 salaried employees willbe given severance packages and assistance in findingnew work.  Approximately 35 distribution workers willbe retained by Borden and will continue to be involved indelivering the company's branded frozen desserts whichwill be co-packed by Dreyer's.  Borden also reports that itwill supply the distribution area previously served fromthe Houston plant with products manufactured at otherBorden plants in the region.o       Another item from the December ICR, on theexpansion of Baskin-Robbins operations in Russia,requires amending.  We reported that the company'sproduction facility in Moscow would not be open until thespring.  The day after we went to press, we wereinformed that the plant had become operational onDecember 11th.  In addition, the facility will serve thecompany's Russian stores only, although deliveries toother countries may follow in the future.  ICR hadindicated that the plant would begin serving EastEuropean countries immediately.o       In another follow-up on our December issue, theDecember 4 issue of Crain's Cleveland Business reportsthat Pierre's French Ice Cream has followed its Lysteria-related product recall of late October/early Novemberwith a major coupon campaign intended as a Rthank youSto loyal customers.  The $2-off coupons appeared onNovember 29th in The Plain Dealer, The Beacon-Journal,and some 20 newspapers throughout northern Ohio andwestern Pennsylvania.o       Back in October, ICR reported that Denver-basedMeadow Gold Dairies was scoring big with its ColoradoRockies Ice Cream, named for the city's baseball team.Now it has followed up with another sports-related line,this time named for the local National Hockey Leagueteam, the Colorado Avalanche.  Individual flavors featuresuch rink-related names as Slap Shot Vanilla, Hat TrickSundae, and Chocolate Power Play.o       The December 8 Financial Times reported thatNestle Philippines would be taking a greater role in theoperations of Magnolia Nestle, its ice cream company jointventure with San Miguel, the largest food company in thePhilippines.  Magnolia holds a 56% share of the ice creammarket in the Philippines, but that represents asignificant loss from previous years.o       Catching up on some other overseas news, theSeptember 12 edition of Euromarketing reported thatUnilever subsidiary GB-Glace Sweden is withdrawingfrom the Norwegian market after failing in its efforts totake share away from frozen dessert market leader NorskIskrem.  GB-Glace has accumulated about $8 million inlosses since entering that market in 1991.  Norsk Iskremholds a 49% share of the Norwegian market, with HennigOlsen second at 34%, and Drammens Is third with a 13%share.o       And catching up on some domestic news from thesame month, the September 22 edition of theBirmingham News reported that newly-arrived Blue BellIce Cream had taken the lead in that city's ice creamsales, surpassing Barber Dairies, a hometown favorite for75 years, by garnering a 32.3% market share.  Texas-based Blue Bell had expanded distribution into theBirmingham market only a few months earlier, asreported in the February 1995 ICR.o       Jerseymaid Dairies announced on December 14 thatit was recalling half-gallon containers of the Select brandLight Rocky Road Ice Cream it co-packed for the Safewaysupermarket chain following the discovery of Listeriacontamination during a sampling of the product.  Thecontainers had been distributed from the company's basein City of Commerce, CA to stores in northern California,Arizona, Nevada, and Hawaii.o       Happier news on that same date of December 14cmme from TCBY which  announced that its board ofdirectors had declared a $0.05 per share dividendpayable on January 15 to all shareholders of record as ofDecember 29.o       The Sealright Company has announced third quarterresults for the period ending September 30, 1995 withsales of $76.2 million, down 4.5% from the same period in1994.  Net income was $1.05 million, down almost 77%,with income per share down from $0.41 to $0.09.  CharlesF. Marcy, Sealright's President and CEO, describing theresults as Runacceptable,S explained that they reflectedbelow-plan sales of the company's frozen dessertpackaging business to regional customers who werelosing market share to aggressive national competitors.o       The International Dairy Foods Association will beholding its Ice Cream Technology Conference on February21-23 at the Red Lion's La Posada Resort in Scottsdale,AZ.  Among the topics to be discussed are frozen dessertstandards and composition, production technologies,ingredient selection, product safety, and labeling.  Formore information call the IDFA at 202-737-4332 or faxto 202-331-7820.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-9IA060-000326-B018-86http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb06.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015448 text/html 22370HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:52:55 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:37 GMTContent-length: 22181Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb06.html Sample Issue Copyright KANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES DIETARY GUIDELINES OKAY MODERATE DRINKING; CSPI HEAD CALLS THEM APPROPRIATE (402 words) British Study Okays Moderate Drinking, Sets Higher Limits than U.S. (89 words) Budget Impasse Threatens CSAP, But May Also Imperil Industry Programs (219 words) ATF Proposes Malibu Viti Area (59 words) Sazerac to Rep Chateau Roubine (49 words) Vermont Adopts a Liquor "Fee" (184 words) Pataki Vetos Reciprocal Shipping Bill In New York, Questioning Benefits (190 words) Beer Production Rose in August (43 words) Fazi Battaglia, Fattoria dei Barbi Name Palm Bay U.S. Importer (121 words) * NEW PRODUCTS * Palm Bay Imports (407-362-9642) introduces Marwood, (48 words) Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. introduces its first ale, (36 words) Miller Brewing Co. will introduce a new beer, Miller Beer, that (62 words) * SPIRITS NEWS BRIEFS * Absolut Vodka joined forces with the Country Music Cares (47 words) Black Velvet Canadian Whisky and Jose Cuervo Tradicional (34 words) Goldschlager Cinnamon Schnapps Liqueur (Paddington (57 words) Rumple Minze (Paddington) has turned to the restroom to (64 words) Romana Sambuca (Paddington) is offering consumers a (27 words) * WINE NEWS NOTES * Santa Barbara County Vintners' Festival will be April 20-21 at (35 words) Chandon Club members are being given the opportunity to (47 words) Napa Valley Vintners Association will visit 10 cities in the first (61 words) * BEER AND MALT BEVERAGE NEWS NOTES * Amstel Brewery is marking its 125th anniversary with an "atlas" (57 words) Old Milwaukee (Stroh) is reviving its "Old Milmania" (86 words) * WHO'S WHERE * Buckles Named ATF Deputy Director (34 words) Allied Domecq Sets Development Unit (68 words) CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DIETARY GUIDELINES OKAY MODERATE DRINKING;CSPI HEAD CALLS THEM APPROPRIATE     Last week's release of the 1995 "Dietary Guidelines forAmericans" marked the end of a change in official attitude towardbev/al.  Where a decade ago, bev/al was the target of aneo-Prohibitionist crusade, now moderate consumption is viewed asappropriate.     Indeed, the attitude in Washington had so changed thatMichael Jacobson, executive director of Center for Science in the PublicInterest and a long-time opponent of the bev/al industry, was overheardtelling a Knight-Ridder reporter:  "I think it's okay to mention alcohol.The Guidelines clearly don't encourage excessive drinking.  You'd haveto be inebriated to think the Guidelines encourage excessive drinking."     In a major departure from the 1990 Guidelines, the new versioneliminates previous commentary that alcohol consumption "has no nethealth benefit" and "is not recommended."     They note "current evidence' that suggests moderate drinking is"associated with a lower risk for coronary heart disease."  And in itsadvice section, the Guidelines state:  "If you drink alcoholic beverages,do so in moderation, with meals, and when consumption does not putyou or others at risk."     The significance of the change was emphasized by Dr. PhilipLee, assistant secretary of health:  "In my personal view, wine with mealsis beneficial.  There was a significant bias in the past against drinking.To move from anti-alcohol to health benefits is a big change."     Donna Shalala, secretary of health and human services, addedthat the guidelines acknowledge "what most of us have known all along:food is not just fuel, it is one of life's greatest pleasures."     Needless to say, publication of the Guidelines brought joy toJohn DeLuca, president, Wine Institute, who seven years ago developeda strategy of dealing with anti-alcohol sentiment by researchingscientific information showing health benefits of moderate consumption.     He praised the Guidelines for more clearly distinguishingmoderation from abuse, noting harmful effects when alcohol is"consumed in excess" and listing dangers associated with only "higherlevels of alcohol intake," "too much alcohol" and "heavy drinkers."     Meanwhile, Fred A. Meister, president/ceo, Distilled SpiritsCouncil of the U.S., praised the Federal Government for "recognizingthat distilled spirits plays a role in the lifestyle and diet of adultAmericans."     He said removal of language that drinking has "no net healthbenefit" and inclusion of the potential health benefit of moderatedrinking "of distilled spirits or other bev/al is an importantacknowledgment of the growing body of scientific studies on thesubject."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996British Study Okays Moderate Drinking, Sets Higher Limits than U.S.     Less than three weeks before the new Dietary Guidelines werereleased in Washington, the British Government's Department ofHealth reported that "it is now established that the main specificpathology which benefits from alcohol consumption is coronary heartdisease."  There is, it said, "very likely" a protective effect from alcohol.     The report offers daily, rather than the previous weekly,benchmarks for safe drinking.  The benchmarks are higher than theU.S. version:  eight to 12 ounces of wine for women 12 to 16 ounces aday for men.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Budget Impasse Threatens CSAP,But May Also Imperil Industry Programs     Industry executives are hardly shedding tears that the Centerfor Substance Abuse Prevention has been virtually shut down by thecurrent budget impasse.  Most executives view CSAP, a unit of theSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Administration, as a hotbed ofbiased anti-alcohol activity, an agency many view as playing fast andloose with the facts and the law.     But we talked last week with a highly respected politicaloperative who -- while he certainly was shedding no tears for SAMHA-- warned that the budget battle, which has nearly closed theDepartment of Health and Human Services, could hurt the industry too.     He fears the result will be that every nook and cranny of thefederal budget will be examined, imperiling such things as the MarketPromotion Program, studies on the health effects of alcohol, researchfor viticulture, proposed changes in the Internal Revenue Code dealingwith phylloxera and the industry's quest to roll back that big tax increasefive years ago.     While the House Republicans are widely believed not to want abudget deal -- unless they get everything they want -- the simple fact isthat a lot of rank and file House Democrats don't want a deal, either.They believe the current standoff will bolster their changes of regainingcontrol of the House.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ATF Proposes Malibu Viti Area     Responding to a petition from George Rosenthal, president,Rancho Escondido Inc., the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearmsproposed (60 Federal Register 66535) establishment of theMalibu-Newton Canyon Viticultural Area in Los Angeles County.     Comments due: Feb. 20 to Chief, Wine, Beer and SpiritsRegulations Branch, BATF, PO Box 50221, Washington, DC20091-0221 (Attn: Notice No. 817).Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Sazerac to Rep Chateau Roubine     Chateau Roubine named Sazerac Co. its exclusive distributor,succeeding Carillon Importers.     Peter Bordeaux, Sazerac president, said Chateau Roubine isamong the Cote de Provence vineyards producing wine under the AOCstatus.  Production consists of 60% rose, 30% and 10% white and islargely in the Cru Class.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Vermont Adopts a Liquor "Fee"     Vermont Liquor Control Board imposed a 20 cents a bottle"fee" on four sizes of distilled spirits, effective Jan. 1.     The increase, levied without industry or consumer consultation,applies to 200 ml,  375 ml, 750 ml and 1 liter bottles.     Fred A. Meister, president/ceo, Distilled Spirits COuncil of theU.S., said he was "extremely disappointed and puzzled by this ill-advisedand discriminatory price increase on distilled spirits.  This decision wasmade without the input of the people who will be most affected --Vermont consumers and the producers and suppliers of distilled spirits.We urge them to reconsider."     State and local taxes paid on a typical purchase in Vermont are111% greater than in neighboring New Hampshire.     Monita Fontaine, DISCUS state government relations director,wondered why, if the Board's goal was to raise additional revenue,should it focus on distilled spirits, which represent less than 29% ofalcohol purchased in the state.  The revenue burden on distilled spiritsin Vermont is 108% more than the burden per alcohol gallon on beerand 65% greater than the burden on table wines, Fontaine said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Pataki Vetos Reciprocal Shipping BillIn New York, Questioning Benefits     A bill to permit out-of-state wineries, individuals or licensees toship wine for personal use into New York State was vetoed by Gov.George Pataki.     Pataki noted that supporters had said the bill would encouragethe sale of wine from New York wineries, benefit the tourism industry,and enhance New York's reputation as a wine-producing state.     "I am not convinced the bill would, in fact, benefit New York'sreputation as a wine-producing state.  And I am extremely concernedabout the potentially negative impact this bill, if enacted, would have onexisting, licensed New York State businesses relying on wine sales, aswell as its impact on New York wineries and jobs."     Indeed, Pataki said he thought the result would be increasedmail-order sales of California wines, leading to lower sales for NewYork liquor stores and distributors, a shrunken market share for NewYork wineries within the state.     New York tax authorities estimated the bill would result in theloss of $1 per case in excise tax revenue, $10 per case in sales taxrevenue and local governments would also lose $10 a case in sales taxrevenue.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Beer Production Rose in August     U.S. production of beer in August was 18,819,013 barrels, up1.5% from the like 1994 month, according to the Bureau of Alcohol,Tobacco and Firearms.     Taxable removals in August fell to 16,844,658 barrels, a 1%decline from the like year-earlier month.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Fazi Battaglia, Fattoria dei BarbiName Palm Bay U.S. Importer     Palm Bay Imports, Boca Raton, Fla. (407-362-9642) picked uptwo key distribution assignments.     Fazi Battaglia, the Italian wine producer, named Palm Bay itsexclusive U.S. importer.  Fazi Battaglia is credited with recastingVerdicchi, once an obscure white wine, into a graceful contemporarystyle.     And Fattoria dei Barbi, a leading producer of Brunello diMontalcino, one of Italy's most costly red wines, appointed Palm Bay tohandle its exclusive U.S. marketing and distribution agent.     Michael Petteruti, vp-marketing, said the addition of FaziBattaglia underscores Palm Bay's commitment to be a major importerof Italian wines.     Dennis Delaney, vp-sales, said the firm "looks forward tobringing about a fresh and dynamic approach toward preserving andenhancing the reputation of Fattoria dei Barbi."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Palm Bay Imports (407-362-9642) introduces Marwood,     Palm Bay Imports (407-362-9642) introduces Marwood,sparkling wines which "project the spirit of California elegance andcraftsmanship with an Italian flourish."  Marwood Brut, a crisp dryChardonnay blend, and Marwood Select, with a floral aroma and fruitflavor, will retail for under $9 a bottle.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. introduces  its first ale,     Jacob Leinenkugel Brewing Co. introduces  its first ale,Leinenkugel's Auburn Ale, in 10 select markets.  Brewed with caramelbarley malts, it has a deep auburn color.  It's positioned as anabove-premium, specialty beer.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Miller Brewing Co. will introduce a new beer, Miller Beer, that     Miller Brewing Co. will introduce a new beer, Miller Beer, thatwill meet beer drinkers' desires for "fuller-flavored beers which areeasy-to-drink and not bitter or filling," according to David Ryder, MillerBrewing Co.'s master brewer.     Neil Harrison, vp-marketing, said the premium beer category"is again growing.  This resurgence provides significant opportunity forus in the heart of the beer category."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Absolut Vodka joined forces with the Country Music Cares     Absolut Vodka joined forces with the Country Music CaresConcert '95 to help raise more than $100,000 for Nashville Cares, acomprehensive AIDS/HIV community agency.  Meanwhile, at Aspen,Colo., Absolut sponsored  the first annual Absolut Skiwear DesignerAward to benefit the Aspen Art Museum.                   * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Black Velvet Canadian Whisky and Jose Cuervo Tradicional     Black Velvet Canadian Whisky and Jose Cuervo Tradicionalare co-sponsoring the celebrity ski race at the 1996 Country In theRockies celebrity ski weekend, Jan. 17-21.  Heublein Inc. distributesboth brands.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Goldschlager Cinnamon Schnapps Liqueur (Paddington     Goldschlager Cinnamon Schnapps Liqueur (PaddingtonCorp.) is seeking to build on-premise business with a gear kit thatincludes 12 shot glasses, six hats, six t-shirts and key chains.  MikeGriffin, brand manager, notes that a holusion party kit is also available."No one can resist the eye-catching appeal of 3-D holusion art," he says.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Rumple Minze (Paddington) has turned to the restroom to     Rumple Minze (Paddington) has turned to the restroom toboost sales with the Rumple Minze Primal Real Estate kit.  It includestwo plaques that can be put on restroom doors and a highly polishedmirror for the men's room emblazoned with the Rumple Minze logo inblack and the politically incorrect tag line:  "Don't worry, by 1 a.m. she'llbe beautiful."                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Romana Sambuca (Paddington) is offering consumers a     Romana Sambuca (Paddington) is offering consumers aceramic Deruta Rooster water pitcher.  Retailers will receive a pitcherfor display, a themed casecard with a take-one pad.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Santa Barbara County Vintners' Festival will be April 20-21 at     Santa Barbara County Vintners' Festival will be April 20-21 atFirestone Meadow in the Santa Ynez Valley.  Only 1,500 tickets (at $60each) will be sold for each day.  For info: 800-218-0881.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Chandon Club members are being given the opportunity to     Chandon Club members are being given the opportunity tosubscribe to Appellation: The Magazine of Wine Country for $11.97(regular subscription price: $18).  It's a beautiful book focusing on winecountry heritage and lifestyle.  Appellation is reachable at PO Box 516,Napa, CA  94559.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Napa Valley Vintners Association will visit 10 cities in the first     Napa Valley Vintners Association will visit 10 cities in the firsthalf with innovative seminars and trade and consumer tastings.  LindaReiff, NVVA executive director: "One of our goals is to reach out to anew generation of wine consumers through events such as the one we'replanning at a club with the `Wine Brats' during our Los Angeles visit."Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Amstel Brewery is marking its 125th anniversary with an "atlas"     Amstel Brewery is marking its 125th anniversary with an "atlas"that maps out the "125 best beer miles" in the U.S.  The folder is adescriptive listing of pubs in 20 cities across the U.S.  Send aself-addressed, stamped envelope to:  Amstel Light Beer Atlas, PO Box731, Radio City Station, New York 10101-0731.                  * * *Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996     Old Milwaukee (Stroh) is reviving its "Old Milmania"     Old Milwaukee (Stroh) is reviving its "Old Milmania"promotion for basketball fans with special offers for basketballmerchandise aggressive merchandising.  "Fans nationwide knowFebruary and March is the time to tune in and cheer for their favoritecollege basketball teams," says March Duchovic, director, customermarketing.  "The Old Milmania promotion gives retails a great programto generate incremental beer sales."     In another development, Old Milwaukee is sponsoring the"Race with the Legends" sweepstakes to coincide with the 1995NASCAR racing season, from February through June 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Buckles Named ATF Deputy Director     Bradley A. Buckles was named deputy director of the Bureauof Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, succeeding Daniel R. Black, whoretired Jan. 3.  Buckles was ATF's chief counsel prior to the promotion.Back to Headline List CopyrightKANE'S BEVERAGE WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996Allied Domecq Sets Development Unit     Donald Coe, president, Allied Domecq Spirits & Wine(Americas) Business Development Group, named his managementteam.     Jim Flaherty continues as vp-corporate on-premise.  HaroldHeller continues as vp-special markets, with Larry Guerra, generalmanager, reporting to Heller.  Beth Oliver assumes an expanded role asvp-corporate communications and events. Dennis Stoakes continues asvp-corporate marketing services; Nancy Jessick remains vp-governmentrelations and Patrick Terrail will continue to provide hospitality support.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-10IA060-000326-B018-115http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb15.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015558 text/html 16496HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:53:46 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:42 GMTContent-length: 16307Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb15.html Sample Issue Copyright LEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNet JANUARY 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BEVERAGES ARE FOOD CATEGORY PURCHASED MOST OFTEN BY MASS RETAIL SHOPPERS, SURVEY SHOWS (1050 words) MORE COMBINATION GROCERY/MERCHANDISE STORES OPENED IN 1994, FMI STUDY SHOWS (273 words) COCA-COLA SOLD 3.8 BILLION UNIT CASES IN U.S. LAST YEAR; FOUNTAIN SALES UP, TOO (326 words) * LEGISLATION * MAINE BOTTLE BILL WOULD IMPOSE FEES, PAPERWORK, ON BEVERAGE MAKERS (244 words) * BEVERAGE NEWSBRIEFS * Cascade Clear Water Co. has launched a line of (75 words) Evian Natural Spring Water is running a fitness-themed (102 words) Pepsi-Cola Co. has been awarded the 1995 Clear Choice Award (45 words) CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996BEVERAGES ARE FOOD CATEGORY PURCHASEDMOST OFTEN BY MASS RETAIL SHOPPERS, SURVEY SHOWS     Carbonated soft drinks and juice are the two food itemsconsumers are most likely to buy at mass retail stores, according to anew study published by the International Mass Retail Association(IMRA). The study was prepared by the Gallup Organization forIMRA's membership, which includes discount department stores,warehouse/club stores, specialty discounters, deep discount drug stores,off-price stores, variety stores, and dollar stores, among others.     The study, entitled Consumer Shopping Behavior on FoodMerchandise and In-store Food Services, includes the responses of 1,011adults aged 18 years and older, who were surveyed by telephone inSeptember 1995. Among the findings of the study were the followinghighlights.Profile of Survey Participants     * Nearly one-fourth of all respondents (23 percent) said theyvisited mass retail or discount stores more than once a week in a typicalmonth. Thirty-one percent said they visited such stores twice (16percent) or three times (15 percent) a month. Only seven percent of allrespondents said they never visited mass retail stores.     * Females  were significantly  more likely to be the primaryshopper  in  the  family  for  clothing  and  household goods (92percent), and food (89 percent), than  were males (70 percent).     * Accordingly, females were more frequent visitors to massretail stores than males, with 19 percent of the female respondentssaying they went to mass retail stores at least once a week in a typicalmonth, compared to only 12 percent of males who visited such storesthat often.     * Older respondents appeared slightly less likely to visit massretail stores than were the younger respondents. Only six percent ofthose aged 18 to 34 years said they never visited mass retail stores, whiletwice as many of those 55 years or older (13 percent) never visited thesestores.     * Respondents were most likely (73 percent) to express apreference for shopping at one store that carried a complete selectionof groceries as well as general merchandise.     * Slightly more than one in six (17 percent) of all respondentssaid that they always make some type of packaged food purchase duringa visit to a mass retail store. Another 27 percent said that theyfrequently make such purchases. About three in ten respondents saidthey rarely (20 percent) or never (nine percent) purchase packagedfoods at mass retail stores.     * Older respondents appear less likely to purchase packagedfood at mass retail stores than do younger respondents. One third (32percent) of those respondents age 55 and older said they rarely (21percent) or never (nine percent) purchased packaged foods at massretail stores, compared to only 25 percent of those respondents aged 18to 34 who rarely (18 percent) or never (seven percent) purchased suchfood items.     There were no significant regional or income differences interms of purchase frequency for packaged foods.Soda and Juice Purchases     The survey participants were asked how often they boughtthese particular food items at mass retail stores: soda; juice; canned ordried foods; snack foods; cookies; candy; alcoholic beverages; and babyfood.     * Of all the food products that were specified in the survey,soda and juice were the two products most often reported to be "verylikely" to be purchased at mass retail stores. Each product was ratedby 39 percent of the respondents to be a product they would be "verylikely" to buy at a mass retail store.     * Respondents aged 55 years and older (32 percent) and thoserespondents in the northeast (33 percent) showed a slightly lowertendency to purchase soda.     * Thirty-four percent of the respondents said they would besomewhat likely to purchase soda; 26 percent said they were not at alllikely to purchase soda. One percent responded "don't know."     * Respondents aged 35 to 54 years (36 percent) said they wereslightly less likely to purchase juice at a mass retail store, compared tothose respondents aged 55 years and older (42 percent). Respondents inthe south central region of the U.S. (43 percent), and those withincomes of less than $20,000, were slightly more likely to purchasejuice.The Decision To Purchase     When asked to indicate their typical weekly packaged foodexpenditures at mass retail stores, respondents indicated their averageexpenditure was slightly less than $32 a week. Forty-four percent of allrespondents, however, indicated that they spend $20 or less in a typicalweek for packaged food purchases.     Respondents in the western region of the U.S. had the largestweekly expenditures for packaged foods, while single respondents, those55 years and older, and those in the north central region, spent the leaston average.     Respondents were asked to characterize their food purchasesas either "planned" or "impulse" purchases. In the categories of bothpackaged and prepared food, respondents were more likely to make thedecision to purchase after they were at the stores. Respondents were,however, significantly more likely to view prepared food purchases asimpulse purchases, as opposed to packaged food purchases.     Respondents were asked to rate various factors they considerwhen deciding to buy food at mass retail stores. Quality was rated themost important factor by 71 percent of respondents; price was secondmost important, with 61 percent of participants citing it as a factor.Selection of brands was third, at 38 percent; followed bycoupons/special promotions, 34 percent; advertised specials, 33 percent;availability of specialty foods, 31 percent; and availability of storebrands, 21 percent.     Females (77 percent) and respondents in the northeast (78percent) were most likely to rate quality as very important, while males(64 percent) and those in the west (66 percent) and north central (67percent) regions were least likely to rate quality as very important.     Price  was  most important to  18-to-34  year-olds (67 percent),those with household incomes of less than $20,000 a year (67 percent),and females (65 percent). Respondents aged 55 years  or  older (52percent),  those  with  household  incomes of $60,000 or greater (52percent), and males (56 percent), were least likely to rate the price of anitem as extremely important.     For further information on this study, contact the InternationalMass Retail Association (IMRA), phone (703) 841-2300.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996MORE COMBINATION GROCERY/MERCHANDISESTORES OPENED IN 1994, FMI STUDY SHOWS     Although conventional supermarkets continue to account forthe single largest percentage of food stores in operation, the percentageof combination grocery/merchandise stores rose significantly in 1994,according to a new study by the Food Marketing Institute (FMI). Thestudy, entitled 1995 Facts About Store Development, revealed that in1994, for the first time, conventional stores accounted for less than half(48.9 percent) of all stores. The number of combination stores, bycontrast, rose seven percentage points to a 21 percent share.Superstores continued to represent about 25 percent of food stores,while warehouse and limited assortment stores accounted for less thanfive percent.     Supermarket construction grew at a modest rate during 1994,when 3.3 percent of stores were new and 3.4 percent were closed --figures similar to the previous year. According to FMI, this trendindicates that new stores continue to replace older ones, rather thangaining a greater share of the U.S. supermarket mix.     The median size of new stores was 48,200 square feet in 1994,up from 38,000 square feet the previous year. This increase wasattributed to the growth in construction of larger-sized combinationstores and superstores. More than six percent of stores underwentmajor remodeling during the survey period, with competition cited bythree in 10 survey respondents as the primary reason, and half reportingthat the store needed it. Of the stores that were remodeled, four in 10were also expanded, by an average of about 5,300 square feet.     To order a copy of 1995 Facts About Store Development,contact the FMI Publication and Video Sales Department, phone (202)429-8298. Price: $44 for non-members.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996COCA-COLA SOLD 3.8 BILLION UNIT CASESIN U.S. LAST YEAR; FOUNTAIN SALES UP, TOO     Coca-Cola Co. has reported that 1995 was a record-setting yearfor the company, which sold 3.8 billion unit cases of soft drinks andnon-carbonated beverages in the U.S. In addition, for the first time,Coca-Cola Co. sold one billion unit cases more than any other soft drinkcompetitor in the country.     Jack L. Stahl, president of Coca-Cola USA, commented that"the combined strength of our brand portfolio, our contour packagingand our bottler system has allowed us to grow twice as fast as theindustry in 1995. We intend to build upon that momentum in 1996."     Fountain sales contributed significantly to the company's robustresults. Coca-Cola Fountain added more than 500 new chain accountsand 8,000 net new outlets last year, including the conversion ofcompetitive outlets such as Steak 'N Shake restaurants and Harrah'sEntertainment, as well as the addition of new outlets owned by existingcustomers. According to the company, Coca-Cola products are currentlyavailable in 92 of the top 100 fountain accounts in the U.S., outsellingthe leading competitor by a 3-to-1 margin in the channel.     The company also entered a unique agreement withBlockbuster Entertainment in 1995, which places Coca-Cola products in5,000 retail outlets worldwide.     "We are extremely pleased with our 1995 success, even thoughwe experienced some disappointments -- losing some volume withcustomers like Sbarro's, with some Jack-in-the-Box franchisees or withCircle K, for example," noted Stahl. "We enter 1996 determined tocapture even more of the industry growth and to do all we can to helpour customers profitably build their soft drink businesses."     Coca-Cola products are also widely available at recreationalfacilities across the U.S., including 90 percent of sports venues, themeparks and amphitheaters, and 85 percent of movie theaters and zoos.Entertainment accounts that were added or renewed in 1995 includedthe Sony movie theater chain, the Houston and Cincinnati zoos, and theFremont Street Experience in Las Vegas, Nev.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996MAINE BOTTLE BILL WOULD IMPOSE FEES,PAPERWORK, ON BEVERAGE MAKERS     The International Bottled Water Association (IBWA) hasreported that the Maine Bottle Bill Task Force has proposed legislationthat would require all manufacturers to pay an annual $500 registrationfee to the Maine Department of Agriculture, Food and RuralResources if their products are packaged in beverage containers subjectto the state's deposit system. The purpose of the bill is to reducefraudulent redemption of containers originating in neighboring states.The annual fee would be used to pay for the department's enforcementactivities related to the administration of the bottle bill.     But the proposal goes beyond a mere fee -- it would also createa new paperwork burden. The bill would require manufacturers toreport:     (1) each product brand name that requires a deposit;     (2) the name and address of any distributor the manufactureruses to sell the products;     (3) the number of "filled" beverage containers sold todistributors in Maine;     (4) the names and addresses of the manufacturer's third-party"pick-up agents," which is defined as a person who has assumed thecontainer pick-up responsibility imposed on the deposit initiator; and     (5) the number of beverage containers redeemed by themanufacturer.     To enforce these requirements, the bill provides the agriculturedepartment with broad powers to refuse to issue, revoke or suspend theregistration of a manufacturer, which would limit its ability to sellproducts in Maine. Any manufacturer failing to register would be fined$100 per day.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996     Cascade Clear Water Co. has launched a line of     Cascade Clear Water Co. has launched a line ofnon-carbonated, fruit-flavored waters called Fruit Refreshers, which areavailable in five flavors: kiwi strawberry, lemon, banana raspberry,orange apricot, and wild berry. The line is lightly sweetened withfructose and natural fruit extracts, and packaged in 20-oz. plastic bottleswith pull-up sports caps. Fruit Refreshers are available everywhereCascade Clear bottled waters are distributed: Washington state,Oregon, California, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota andAlaska.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996     Evian Natural Spring Water is running a fitness-themed     Evian Natural Spring Water is running a fitness-themedcross-promotion this month with the Neiman Marcus department storechain. Neiman Marcus shoppers who spend $50 or more will receive asa free gift a 1-liter bottle of Evian, a Neiman Marcus backpack and thenew exercise video Perfectly Fit, which features supermodel ClaudiaSchiffer. In addition, all the Neiman Marcus stores nationwide will serveonly Evian in their restaurants, and Evian kiosks will be locatedthroughout each store. The promotion is supported by in-store windowdisplays and signage, newspaper and radio ads, and direct mail piecessent to 750,000 Neiman Marcus customers.Back to Headline List CopyrightLEISURE BEVERAGE INSIDER via NewsNetJANUARY 8, 1996     Pepsi-Cola Co. has been awarded the 1995 Clear Choice Award     Pepsi-Cola Co. has been awarded the 1995 Clear Choice Awardby the Glass Packaging Institute for its Smooth Moos Smoothies dairydrink. The product's 9.5-oz. glass bottle, which is shaped like anold-fashioned refillable milk bottle, won the award in the "new beverageproduct" category.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-11IA060-000326-B018-156http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb22.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015627 text/html 14860HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:54:41 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 08-Jan-97 21:54:41 GMTContent-length: 14670Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb22.html Sample Issue Copyright US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNet October 28, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - BEANS, PEAS, & LENTILS ORGANIC (103 words) EGYPT: TRADE OPP'TY - CATTLE DAIRY (98 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FROZEN AND IN PARTS; WEIGHT 1-1.2 KG. EACH (101 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FEEDGRAIN (FOR ANIMAL CONSUMPTION) (99 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - CUTTLEFISH & SQUID (102 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FOR CATS, POULTRY & SWINE (103 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SHAR PEI, YORKSHIRETERRIER, MINI SCHNAUTZER, ETC (102 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - HOLSTEIN BREED (98 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SEASONFRUIT (GRAPES, NECTARINES, ETC.) (98 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - PSYLLIUMPLANTAGO, OVATA, HUSK (93 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - IN GRAINS & FLAKES (94 words) MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - EDIBLE (96 words) ECUADOR: TRADE OPP'TY - PADDY RICE, LONG GRAIN, GRADE 2 (95 words) CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - BEANS, PEAS, & LENTILS ORGANICfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning BEANS PEAS AND LENTILS ORGANICIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961026-0005-MX2QUANTITY:    1,000 MT of each variety.QUALITY:     95/96 crop.PACKAGE:     50 kg. Polypropylene bags.DELIVERY:    60 days.OTHER:       Certificates of Origin and Phytosanitary.QUOTE:       CIF MexicoCity.BANK REF:    Banamex, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Carlos A. D.Fuentes, Lafuracolp, S.A., Felipe Angeles 90, Col.             Ampliaci.nPresidencia Mexico City, D.F., 02440 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525)394-8788FAX:         (011-525) 394-0150.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996EGYPT: TRADE OPP'TY - CATTLE DAIRYfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CATTLE DAIRYIssued from EGYPTUSDA Ref: 19961025-0017-MX2QUANTITY:    400 cattles.QUALITY:     withoutregistration.PACKAGE:     live in a trailer.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       Sanitary Certificates; need to choose thempersonally.QUOTE:       CIF Acambaro, Guanajuato.BANK REF:    National Bank of Interior Trade,  Acambaro, Gto.CONTACT:     MVZFernando Lopez, Veterinaria "El  Rancho", J. Aldama             39-B,Acambaro, Guanajuato, 38600 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-417) 2-5476FAX:         (011-52-417) 2-3107.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FROZEN AND IN PARTS; WEIGHT 1-1.2 KG. EACHfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CHICKEN MEAT WHOLEIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0002-MX2QUANTITY:    1,000 MT.QUALITY:     whole and parts.PACKAGE:     Plastic bags.DELIVERY:    Monthly.OTHER:       Labels according to customs.QUOTE:       CIFPrague, Checoslovaquia & some port in Polonia.BANK REF:    BancaSerfin, Inverlat; both in Leon, Gto.CONTACT:     Ing. OldrichVerner, COMERSA, S.A., Paseo de los Insurgentes             1001, Leon,Guanajuato, 37300 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-47) 17-2750FAX:         (011-52-47) 73-0516.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FEEDGRAIN (FOR ANIMAL CONSUMPTION)from U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CORN FIELD YELLOWIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0009-MX2QUANTITY:    50,000 MT.QUALITY:     U.S. 2 or U.S. 3.PACKAGE:     Bulked.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       Required certificates for export to Europe.QUOTE:       CIFStetein, Polonia.BANK REF:    Banca Serfin, Banco Inverlat, Leon,Guanajuato.CONTACT:     Ing. Oldrich Verner, COMERSA, S.A., Paseode los Insurgentes             1001, Leon, Guanajuato, 37300 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-47) 17-2750FAX:         (011-52-47) 73-0516.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - CUTTLEFISH & SQUIDfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning CUTTLEFISH AND SQUIDIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0004-MX2QUANTITY:    2-5 MT.QUALITY:     110 calories,totalfat 2 gr., sodium 50 mg.PACKAGE:     Carton boxes.DELIVERY:    Monthly.OTHER:       Spanish labels, quality factorsavailables.QUOTE:       CIF Mexico City.BANK REF:    Banca Confia,Mexico City.CONTACT:     Lic. Juan Antonio Camarena, Fornos, S.A.de C.V., Rodolfo Gaona             86, Col. Lomas de Sotelo Mexico City,D.F.,11200 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 395-5738FAX:         (011-525)395-5905.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - FOR CATS, POULTRY & SWINEfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning DOG FOODIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0006-MX2QUANTITY:    1,500 boxes or one container.QUALITY:     First quality.PACKAGE:     Canned, cartons or bags.DELIVERY:    Negotiable.OTHER:       Certificates; labels in Spanish.QUOTE:       FOB Laredo, TX.BANK REF:    Banca Serfin, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Ricardo Mondragon, Abarrotes y Semillas Mondragon Nu1ez,Bodega             B-53 B, Interior Central de Abastos Mexico Mexico City,D.F.,             09040 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 694-3584FAX:         (011-525)694-3687.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SHAR PEI, YORKSHIRETERRIER, MINI SCHNAUTZER, ETCfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning DOGSIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961003-0012-MX2QUANTITY:    6 to 10 puppies.QUALITY:     Pedigree from the American Kennel Club.PACKAGE:     Cages.DELIVERY:    Bi-weekly or monthly.OTHER:       SanitaryCertificates from USDA.QUOTE:       CIF Mexico City.BANK REF:    Banamex, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Sylvia Vald(s, Mascotas Leo's,S.A. de C.V., Soles No. 55, Col.             Pe1on de los Ba1os Mexico City,D.F., 15520 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 751-5133FAX:         (011-525)751-3775.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - HOLSTEIN BREEDfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning EMBRYOS CATTLEIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    According to price.QUALITY:     dried.PACKAGE:     Plastic bags orcartons.DELIVERY:    According to availability and price.OTHER:       Phytosanitary certificates.QUOTE:       FOB Mexican border.BANK REF:    Banca Serfin, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Lic. MaximilianoDamm, Globotek, S.A. de C.V., Tepozan 3, Col.             Ampliaci.n TepepanMexico City, D.F., 16020 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 653-1442FAX:         (011-525) 653-1442.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - SEASONFRUIT (GRAPES, NECTARINES, ETC.)from U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning FRUIT ORGANIC FROZENIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0014-MX2QUANTITY:    According to price.QUALITY:     frozen.PACKAGE:     plastic bags or cartons.DELIVERY:    Monthly and according to availability.OTHER:       RequiredCertificates.QUOTE:       FOB Mexican border.BANK REF:    BancaSerfin, Mexico City.CONTACT:     Lic. Maximiliano Damm, Globotek,S.A. de C.V.,  Tepozan 3, Col.             Ampliaci.n Tepepan Mexico City,D.F., 16020 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 653-1442FAX:         (011-525)653-1442.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - PSYLLIUMPLANTAGO, OVATA, HUSKfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning MUSHROOM SPAWNIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref: 19961025-0003-MX2QUANTITY:    2 MT.QUALITY:     U.S.PACKAGE:     Bulked.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       U.S. Certificates.QUOTE:       FOB any border point.BANK REF:    Banamex, Guadalajara,Jalisco.CONTACT:     Dr. Juan Carlos Lizarraga, Importadora yComercializadora de             Uncaria Torment, Hector Berlioz 5472, Col. LaEstancia  Zapopan,             Jalisco, 45030 MexicoPHONE:       (011-523)629-3407FAX:         (011-523) 673-0629.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - IN GRAINS & FLAKESfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning OATSIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    800-1,500 MT.QUALITY:     PBSY.PACKAGE:     Bulked in railroadtanks.DELIVERY:    Monthly.OTHER:       Certificates.QUOTE:       C&FLaredo, TX.BANK REF:    Banamex, Bancomer, Mexico City.CONTACT:     C.P. Gregorio Melendez, Productos de Maxz, S.A.  de C.V.,Av. Rio             Consulado 721, Col. Santa Maria Insurgentes Mexico City,D.F.,             06430 MexicoPHONE:       (011-525) 325-0920FAX:         (011-525)541-0785.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996MEXICO: TRADE OPP'TY - EDIBLEfrom U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning OIL SOYBEANIssued from MEXICOUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    8,000,000 lbs.QUALITY:     fresh.PACKAGE:     Bulked in 50 kg. bags.DELIVERY:    Monthly from Novemberto April.OTHER:       Phytosanitary Certificates.QUOTE:       FOB anyborder point.BANK REF:    Banamex, Culiacan, Sinaloa.CONTACT:     Sr. Jose Abraham Lichter, AGRICOLA LICHTER Y ASOC.,             EpitacioOsuna1202 Pte., Culiacan, Sinaloa, 80200 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-67) 14-9002FAX:         (011-52-67) 14-8700.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightUS DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS via NewsNetOctober 28, 1996ECUADOR: TRADE OPP'TY - PADDY RICE, LONG GRAIN, GRADE 2from U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE TRADE LEADS, October 28, 1996Concerning RICEIssued from ECUADORUSDA Ref:QUANTITY:    500 doses.QUALITY:     High fertility.PACKAGE:     Jarswith liquid nitrogen.DELIVERY:    immediate.OTHER:       Firstpurchase in the U.SQUOTE:       According to place.BANK REF:    National Bank of Internal Trade, Acambaro Guanajuato.CONTACT:     MVZ Fernando L.pez, Veterinaria "El Rancho", J. Aldama             39-B,Acambaro, Guanajuato, 38600 MexicoPHONE:       (011-52-417) 2-5476FAX:         (011-52-417) 2-3107.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-12IA060-000326-B018-195http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fb02.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015705 text/html 11494HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:55:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:36 GMTContent-length: 11305Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/fb02.html Sample Issue Copyright WASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNet January 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 1996 BEVERAGE INDUSTRY LEGISLATIVE AGENDA WILL BE SHAPED BY ELECTIONS (537 words) SUGAR PROGRAM OPPONENTS AWAIT HOUSE ACTION ON FARM BILL (256 words) SUGAR IMPORT QUOTA IS INCREASED 28%, BUT LITTLE AFFECT ON PRICES SEEN (110 words) FDA REQUIRES FAT SUBSTITUTE APPROVED FOR SNACK FOODS TO CARRY WARNING (241 words) CLINTON'S STATE OF THE UNION SPEECH GIVES REPUBLICANS WAKE-UP CALL (153 words) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WIN PLACE IN UNITED STATES' DIETARY GUIDELINES (107 words) CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 19961996 BEVERAGE INDUSTRY LEGISLATIVE AGENDA WILL BE SHAPED BY ELECTIONSAs the government affairs specialists for the soft drink and alcoholicbeverage industries shape up their legislative priorities for 1996, thedominant factor will be the upcoming congressional and presidentialelections.Neither Congress nor the White House will take any action withoutconsidering its November impact, and this is a recipe for continued anddeepening gridlock with even less accomplished legislatively than in1995.Nevertheless, the Washington associations representing the beverageindustry, and industry members active in lobbying, will seekopportunities to advance their causes whenever possible.The soft drink industry's highest priority goal is to amend farmlegislation to eliminate or greatly modify the current sugar program.Opportunities to achieve this goal may be presented in this session ofCongress. (See following story)Other soft drink industry priorities include: reform of the Delaneyclause, streamlining FDA's food additive approval process and achievingnational uniformity in food labeling. NSDA is working with a foodindustry coalition on these objectives.Delaney clause nullification is contained in the dormant balanced budgetlegislation, and its chances for passage grow dimmer. Several bills havebeen introduced to improve FDA's food additive approval process--butnone meeting the food industry coalition's requirements.Action on new legislation to reauthorize the Clean Water Act is possiblein this session, and NSDA is monitoring how it could impact onbottlers' waste water discharge practices and on control of storm waterrunoff.How reauthorization of the Safe Drinking Water Act could affect thequality of water available to soft drink plants and its cost is also beingstudied should this legislation resurface this year.Legislation to replace the dollar bill with a dollar coin suffered a setbackat the end of the previous session, but the effort continues despite itsunlikely chances for passage in an election year.Lesser priorities are given to legislative relief in several tax areasincluding estate taxes, Subchapter S Corporate taxes and retaining thePuerto Rican manufacturing tax credit. National forced depositlegislation did not make the soft drink legislative priority list for the firsttime in decades.The alcoholic beverage industry had a quiet legislative year mostly spentmonitoring developments. Enough industry support could be generatedin Congress to block adverse legislation on taxes and limitations onadvertising, but not enough was available to generate new initiatives.The same can be expected in 1996.With election considerations placing a continuing damper on theprogress of legislation in this Congress, the government affairsspecialists may soon turn their attention to the election campaigns andtheir candidates.This year's elections could be the most decisive for American businessin recent memory. It is a rare opportunity for industry-oriented leadersto control both houses of Congress and the White House.If the opportunity is muffed and the pendulum begins to swing back, thegridlock of 1995-96 may be as close as business will come for a longtime to enacting much needed government reforms.Because of the importance of the 1996 elections, WBI will expand itscoverage during the year beyond beverage industry issues to issues ofimportance to industry in general, particularly as they pertain to theelections.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SUGAR PROGRAM OPPONENTS AWAIT HOUSE ACTION ON FARM BILLRep. Pat Roberts (R-Kan.), House Agriculture Committee Chairman, hasscheduled a meeting on Tuesday to consider farm legislation for Housefloor action on Wednesday. The coalition to kill or amend the sugarprogram is ready to have its amendment offered if the opportunityarises. (See WBI Nov. 10, 1995)Immediate legislation is needed because federal programs for corn,wheat and other grains have expired, and farmers have to know whatprogram they are operating under before they can begin planting.Rep. Roberts introduced a comprehensive farm bill on January 9,incorporating "Freedom to Farm" provisions of the farm bill now stalledin the balanced budget stalemate, but he has no immediate plans to bringit to the floor because it has many opponents who would offer a raft ofamendments to it.With Congress scheduled to recess on Thursday, it is unlikely that anytype of farm legislation could be passed next week. Without legislation,many crop programs will revert to statutes written in 1938 and 1949which provided high price supports but restricted plantings. This isunacceptable to the Administration.Therefore, farm legislation is likely to be considered when Congressbegins work again in March. If Roberts introduces his full-featuredseven-year farm bill, the coalition against the sugar program again willbe poised to act.If, however, he introduces a bill only to solve the grain growers'problems for the next one or two years, he may convince the leadershipto restrict amendments in the interest of passing "emergency" legislation.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996SUGAR IMPORT QUOTA IS INCREASED 28%, BUT LITTLE AFFECT ON PRICESSEENHeeding requests from the Sweetener Users Association, USDA hasincreased the import quota for raw sugar by 400,000 tons to prevent ashortage and higher prices, but sugar farmers charged there was no needfor the increase.U.S. cane sugar refiners, who had complained that the U.S. sugarprogram was driving companies out of business, will be helped by theincrease. They predict the quota will have to be increased again later inthe year after USDA monitors sugar supplies and import requirements.While the current increase is not expected to lower sweetener prices toindustrial sugar users, a further increase in the quota could produce pricereductions.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996FDA REQUIRES FAT SUBSTITUTE APPROVED FOR SNACK FOODS TO CARRYWARNINGDiet soft drinks soon will not be the only snack foods displaying healthwarnings. Olestra, a substitute for conventional fats developed byProcter & Gamble and approved for snack food use this week by FDA,will carry the warning:"This Product Contains Olestra. Olestra may cause abdominal crampingand loose stools. Olestra inhibits the absorption of some vitamins andother nutrients. Vitamins A, D, E, and K have been added."P&G will use the fat substitute in its Pringle potato chips expected to beon the market within nine months, and license it under the name"Olean" to other companies including PepsiCo's Frito-Lay which plansa test marketing.Michael Jacobsen, executive director of the Center for Science in thePublic Interest predicted that olestra "in the short run will certainlycause diarrhea and gastrointestinal problems, and in the long run almostcertainly will cause cancer, heart disease and blindness for many whoconsume it regularly."The Center can be expected to wage a continuing campaign to reverseFDA's approval, which came after three decades of development andtesting by P&G at a cost estimated to be more than $200 million.FDA took the unusual step of requiring the company to conduct moretests of the product's long-term safety. The agency will review itsapproval within 30 months, and could revoke it "if there is no longer areasonable certainty of no harm" from olestra's use.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996CLINTON'S STATE OF THE UNION SPEECH GIVES REPUBLICANS WAKE-UPCALLIf anyone ever bearded the lion in its own den, President Clinton did itto the Republicans in his State of the Union Message delivered Tuesdayin the House of Representatives, den of the "in-your-face" freshmen.The President began the speech sounding like an anti-big-governmentRepublican, ended the speech giving something to everybody like aDemocrat, nailed the Republicans for closing down the government, andwon bi-partisan applause for the job his wife is doing as First Lady.Forced by Republican budget constraints to avoid promises of significantnew government programs, a staple for Democratic messages, headvocated only the popularly-rated issues on which Democrats of allstripes agree.While the President's speech seemed to unite Democrats, RepublicanCandidate Robert Dole's businesslike response to the President drew apoor second in the ratings, raised again the "charisma" issue, and gavehis Republican presidential opponents ammunition to split the party.Back to Headline List CopyrightWASHINGTON BEVERAGE INSIGHT via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WIN PLACE IN UNITED STATES' DIETARYGUIDELINESAfter considering a barrage of scientific data on alcohol consumptionwhich suggests that moderate drinking is associated with a lower risk ofcoronary heart disease, the drafters of the 1995 Dietary Guidelines forAmericans for the first time included a favorable reference to alcoholicbeverages. (See WBI Sept. 8, 1995)The Guidelines advise moderate alcohol consumption--defined as nomore than one drink a day for women and two a day for men. A drinkis defined as 1.5 ounces of hard liquor, 12 ounces of beer and 5 ouncesof wine. The 1990 Guidelines concluded that alcohol consumption hasno net benefit and "is not recommended."Back to Headline List WT03-B40-13IA060-000326-B018-356http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb55.html 205.156.212.5 19970115015954 text/html 442412HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:55:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:48 GMTContent-length: 442222Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb55.html Sample Issue Copyright BUSINESS WEEK via NewsNet January 8, 1996 Number 3457 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INSIDE WALL STREET FAY'S DRUGS: FIT TO BE SWALLOWED? (348 words) THE WAY THE OLD RUBBER CRUMBLES (260 words) CHINA TIRE MAY BE UNDULY DEFLATED (314 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BUSINESS WEEK/HARRIS EXECUTIVE POLL A TOUGH YEAR TO FOLLOW (693 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: AUTOS CRUISE CONTROL? Car sales should remain strong, though high sticker prices are worrisome (1302 words) A SHRINKING SUPPLY OF SUPPLIERS (346 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: MACHINERY THEY'RE HAVING A CAPITAL TIME Savoring solid demand here, machine makers also are expanding abroad (795 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: METALS METALS NEED A FEW SUPPORT BEAMS For steelmakers, falling prices and labor issues loom large in '96 (816 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: DEFENSE READY-ALL JOIN ARMS Cash-Rich and eager to merge, defense companies are thriving (763 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: ENERGY `UNEXCITING MIGHT BE GOOD' Few surprises in the oil patch. but with profits so healthy, who cares? (807 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: AGRICULTURE A TIME TO REAP GLOBAL REWARDS With demand and output growing, the U.S. could again dominate world markets (837 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: BASIC INDUSTRIES: FOREST PRODUCTS IT'S A GOOD YEAR TO GET HITCHED '96 could be tough, so papermakers will continue to merge (813 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: SOFTWARE THE WEB KEEPS SPREADING The new market should grow 100% and create even greater opportunities (1281 words) YOUR DATA SHOULD MEET MY DATA (349 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: COMPUTERS THIS YEAR, SERVERS WILL BE KING PCs are everywhere. Now the spotlight is on machines that can link them (792 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: SEMICONDUCTORS SILICON GOES FROM PEAK TO PEAK In a boom that could last a decade, turning out enough chips is the big problem (792 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS THE NOT-SO-CALM BEFORE THE STORM All hell will break loose when deregulation hits. For now, business is strong (787 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: HIGH TECHNOLOGY: PHARMACEUTICALS ROBUST AND READY TO BRAWL Drugmakers are flush, so more mergers--even hostile ones--may be on the horizon (793 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: MEDIA/ENTERTAINMENT THE MEDIA CIRCUS IS STILL IN TOWN Thrills and chills as global demand keeps the buying frenzy going (1358 words) THE BABY BELLS TAKE THEIR FIRST STEPS IN TINSELTOWN (343 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: HEALTH CARE THE PATIENT IS STABLE-FOR NOW Health-care costs are in check, but the industry's upheaval isn't over (788 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: TRANSPORTATION PICKING UP SPEED Airlines are finally in the clear--and railroads may link up (811 words) PERSONAL BUSINESS: PLANNING WHERE THERE'S A WILL, THERE ARE MISTAKES (1927 words) PERSONAL BUSINESS: REAL ESTATE STEERING CLEAR OF TITLE TROUBLE (966 words) BOOKS A PANGLOSS FOR THE MILLENNIUM (1070 words) BOOKS: BOOK BRIEF INTERNET 101 FOR BUSINESS (332 words) LETTER FROM ALBANIA `I WANT BLOOD FOR BLOOD' (766 words) TECHNOLOGY & YOU IT'S FOR YOU--ON THE PC Voice calling via the Internet is here and it's cheap-but don't toss your phone yet (805 words) ECONOMIC VIEWPOINT WHY IS THE U.S. SETTLING FOR STUNTED GROWTH? (768 words) ECONOMIC TRENDS FED FEAR OF THE JOBLESS RATE It may be a faulty inflation signal (454 words) WHAT'S STALLING MONETARY UNION Europe's economies are out of sync (155 words) A MILESTONE FOR BLACK FAMILIES Fewer out-of-wedlock births (95 words) WHEN LAWYERS ARE LOOKERS Attractiveness boosts earnings (224 words) UP FRONT: READER SURVEY YOU MADE THE CALL (339 words) UP FRONT: TRIVIA QUIZ LET'S PLAY 30 QUESTIONS (498 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: BANKING A FEW NEW BLOTS ON THE LEDGER Delinquent consumer loans and skinny margins may temper an otherwise bully year (839 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: INTRODUCTION JOHN DEWEY, MEET PETER DRUCKER (723 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK (2439 words) UP FRONT TALK SHOW (53 words) TEA LEAVES, ANYONE? (563 words) SMARTEST MOVES OF 1995 (179 words) DUMBEST MOVES OF 1995 (166 words) BUSINESS OUTLOOK: U.S. ECONOMY FROM CHRISTMAS BLAHS TO NEW YEAR'S EASE (1154 words) BUSINESS OUTLOOK: ARGENTINA A HARD-WON VICTORY IN A SOFT ECONOMY (355 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: WASHINGTON HERE COMES GRIDLOCK '96 Dug-in liberals and GOP zealots spell election-year paralysis (1189 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: GERMANY THE ECONOMY THAT FELL TO EARTH Germany's slowdown is scaring its neighbors (793 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS NOW JUPPE HAS TO PICK UP THE PIECES (616 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: PEOPLE FROM BLUEPRINTS TO GRAND DESIGN Ex-engineer John Correnti now must recast Nucor (792 words) SHE IS THE NRA Its first female chief is out to oust Clinton and lure women (456 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TELECOM: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE WALLS FALL Once reform passes, a frenzy of pair-ups is sure to follow (748 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK 1996: SERVICES: FOOD ALL TOGETHER NOW: `MAKE THAT TO GO' Insatiable demand for convenient, ready-to-eat meals has the food biz scrambling (800 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: SERVICES: UTILITIES MIGHTY MORPHIN POWER REARRANGERS Deregulation will transform the industry--and continue to pinch profits (783 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: SERVICES: BUSINESS SERVICES WHO SAYS YOU CAN'T FIND GOOD HELP? Business-service firms boom as companies around the globe retool (770 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: SECURITIES WILL WALL STREET HIT A WALL? It will be tough to match '95, but low rates could keep the market robust (814 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: REAL ESTATE/CONSTRUCTION A YEAR OF HIGH-RISE EXPECTATIONS The office market expects a banner year, while other markets look less robust (816 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK: FINANCE: INSURANCE LOOKING FOR SAFETY IN NUMBERS Consolidation--and competition from other investments--are changing the business (778 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST MANAGERS): INTRODUCTION THE TOP MANAGERS OF 1995 What did it take for an executive to succeed in the past year? (717 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST MANAGERS): THE BEST MANAGERS THE BEST MANAGERS (46 words) BERND PISCHETSRIEDER, BMW's new CEO, surprised everyone by getting BMW's (73 words) GERALD GREENWALD (81 words) PATRICIA Q. STONESIFER put Microsoft's Consumer Div. on the map in 1995. (75 words) STAN SHIH (78 words) MICHAEL D. EISNER, chairman of Walt Disney, showed in 1995 he could do it (86 words) ARTHUR C. MARTINEZ (75 words) SCOTT G. MCNEALY (75 words) ROBERT AYLING, British Airways' managing director, ran one of the world's (93 words) ANA PATRICIA BOTN, 35, is chief executive of Spain's Santander Investment. (72 words) TADASHI SEKIZAWA (66 words) JAN LESCHLY, CEO of Anglo-American drugmaker SmithKline Beecham, spent 1995 (65 words) C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, CEO of GM Hughes Electronics, has led a great new (68 words) WILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG, top-notch managers of Li & Fung, are members of a (93 words) JEAN-PIERRE ROSSO (77 words) PAUL H. O'NEILL (89 words) WILLIAM E.B. SIART of First Interstate Bancorp is such a good manager he's (77 words) ALAIN PRESTAT, CEO of Paris-based Thomson Multimedia, provided the amazing (69 words) ANDREW S. GROVE made 1995 the year Intel moved beyond merely being the (76 words) WILLIAM C. STEERE JR. (84 words) GEORGE M.C. FISHER started to prove in 1995 that Eastman Kodak's core (71 words) JOHN J. MACK (72 words) RALPH S. LARSEN (82 words) GEORGE A. DAVID (76 words) CASEY G. COWELL (82 words) LEWIS E. PLATT (88 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST MANAGERS): MANAGERS TO WATCH MANAGERS TO WATCH IN 1996 (1012 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST ENTREPRENEURS): THE BEST ENTREPRENEURS THE BEST ENTREPRENEURS (52 words) SHIKHAR GHOSH, Open Market's 38-year-old chairman and co-founder, allows (93 words) STEVE JOBS (115 words) JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, AND DAVID GEFFEN. (77 words) JAMES H. CLARK AND MARC L. ANDREESSEN (67 words) DENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUD, both 33, are two French entrepreneurs (82 words) ROBERT PRIDDY (71 words) COVER STORY (THE BEST NEW PRODUCTS): THE BEST NEW PRODUCTS THE BEST NEW PRODUCTS (51 words) A BIKE FOR ALL MOUNTAINS (33 words) FITS IN A TIGHT SPOT (36 words) AN EXEC MARCHES ON HIS SEAT (28 words) FOR THE TROUT IN YOUR LIFE (57 words) ONE FOR THE MONEY (42 words) FLOPPIES MAY BE ENDANGERED (48 words) HARD WORK, BIG FUN (48 words) JOLTIN' JAVA (27 words) A GIANT LEAP FOR MINIVANS (71 words) THE BEST WEB SITES (78 words) A MULTIMEDIA MAC FOR ALL SEASONS (73 words) THE EYE HAS IT (48 words) NET GAINS (85 words) SO WHO NEEDS A PHONE? (85 words) THE LONG, LONG RACKET (100 words) COLOR COPIES FOR A SONG (68 words) HANDS UP, YOU LOUSE! (48 words) MOVE OVER, MR. ANDRETTI (55 words) THE BEST CD-ROMS (78 words) ONE PRETTY PICTURE (43 words) FLEXIBLE FLYER (48 words) SNAPPY SHOTS (45 words) NOTEBOOK NONPAREIL (40 words) DOUBLE-DUTY DRIVER (87 words) BOOMING BOX (49 words) NO TOY BOAT (32 words) PRODUCTS TO WATCH IN 1996 (107 words) RELIVING YESTERDAY'S TRIUMPHS (64 words) READERS REPORT HAS CADDY TURNED THE CORNER? (810 words) `TERRORISTS SHOULD NEVER BE CONFUSED WITH DISSIDENTS' (211 words) EXPORT DIVERSION, MAYBE. DUMPING, ABSOLUTELY (138 words) TRAVELERS DOESN'T TRAFFIC IN HARD SELLING (124 words) CORRECTIONS & CLARIFICATIONS WHERE TO INVEST IN 1996: PHONE NUMBERS (DEC. 25) (26 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: BRITAIN A WINNING NUMBER FOR THE LABORITES? The national lottery flap may further undermine the Tories (736 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: MEXICO TOSSING A LIFELINE TO MEXICO'S BIGGEST BANKS Even Banamex and Bancomer are getting a state bailout (752 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: COMPUTERS APPLE: ANOTHER BOUT OF BAD TIDINGS Profit pressure may bring layoffs and suitors (824 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS: RUSSIA THE COMEBACK KID OF RUSSIA? Yeltsin has no charismatic rival, and the economy looks better (716 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: TOBACCO NO SMOKE, BUT PLENTY OF HEAT Why the smokeless tobacco biz is starting to hack (795 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: DEALS WILL FLIPPER PLAY IN ESTONIA? Why John Kluge is on a buying binge in Hollywood (902 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: CORPORATE GIVING THE NAACP BETS ON A NEW BREADWINNER Kweisi Mfume hopes to show donors the crisis is over (826 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: MARKETING REPACKAGING THE POST OFFICE Facilities are getting face-lifts, clerks are getting friendlier (481 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: RESEARCH A HEAVYWEIGHT CONTENDER This breakthrough may be the key to a fat pill (266 words) IN BUSINESS THIS WEEK: HEADLINER: WHITNEY HOUSTON EXHALE BLOWS 'EM AWAY (188 words) IN BUSINESS THIS WEEK A TRUNKFUL OF PINK SLIPS AT BUDGET (139 words) PIER 1'S $20 MILLION QUESTION (97 words) IS CYRIX LOOKING AT A DEFAULT? (97 words) A DESERT DEAL FOR BRITISH PETROLEUM (117 words) CALLING CORPORATE AMERICA'S BLUFF (110 words) ET CETERA... (65 words) IN BUSINESS THIS WEEK: CLOSING BELL THE JOBS MARKET (98 words) WASHINGTON OUTLOOK ARTHUR LEVITT SPEAKS SOFTLY AND CARRIES A LITTLE STICK (593 words) WASHINGTON OUTLOOK: CAPITAL WRAPUP WHAT'S BUGGING THE FEDS (106 words) BALKANIZED AID PACKAGE (71 words) BUDGET SLOW BOAT (87 words) INTERNATIONAL OUTLOOK JAPAN'S SHADOW KINGMAKER IS BIDDING FOR THE SPOTLIGHT (627 words) INTERNATIONAL OUTLOOK: GLOBAL WRAPUP PRIVATIZING A BRAZILIAN GIANT (262 words) EDITORIALS HOW TO EVALUATE TAX REFORM (486 words) DON'T TREAD ON FREE TRADE (393 words) NEWS: ANALYSIS & COMMENTARY: HEALTH CARE NEWBORN BABIES, BAWLING MOMS They want laws to make insurers pay for longer hospital stays (705 words) BUSINESS WEEK INDEX BUSINESS WEEK INDEX (571 words) THE WEEK AHEAD (294 words) BUSINESS WEEK INTERNATIONAL EDITIONS: SPOTLIGHT ON CHILE HEALING THE SOIL IN A LUSH VALLEY...BUT JUST IN TIME FOR AN URBAN FLOOD? (728 words) INVESTMENT FIGURES OF THE WEEK INVESTMENT FIGURES OF THE WEEK (624 words) INDUSTRY OUTLOOK (SERVICES): RETAILING GLOOMY DAYS ARE HERE AGAIN DEPARTMENT STORES SHOW PROMISE, BUT SLUGGISH SALES COULD SINK MANY MERCHANTS (761 words) CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FAY'S DRUGS: FIT TO BE SWALLOWED?By:BY GENE G. MARCIALThe ``shakeout'' investors--who buy into companies whose industries are inthe throes of consolidation--are convinced that Fay's (FAY), the nation's13th-largest drugstore chain, is ripe for picking. The shares have droppedto 7, down from 9 3/8 in late April, partly because of investors'disappointment that a rumored takeover has not yet materialized. And aflurry of yearend tax-loss sell-offs may be adding to the downwardpressure.But the focus, insists one big investor, should be on what's happening toall drug chains. ``A shakeout in the industry is under way,'' notes analystMaurice Levenson of Value Line. This is being fostered, he explains, by theemergence of managed-health-care plans and stiff competition from giantdiscounters such as Wal-Mart Stores and Target Stores. Analysts note theindustry could also shed a lot of duplication and costs by buyouts ofweaker companies. A recent example is Rite Aid's agreement to acquire Revcofor $1.8 billion.   Fay's--with its sales sluggish, its earnings down, and the stock on theropes--is regarded as one of the industry's weak sisters. ``It's similar tothe Revco situation. The likes of such possible suitors as Walgreen's couldswallow it up just like that,'' says investment manager Mike Kicera of MRKCapital Management.   Kicera figures that Fay's shares are worth 12 to 15 in a buyout--basedon what Rite Aid agreed to pay for Revco. With 276 outlets in NewHampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, and Vermont, Fay's is streamlining itsoperations by getting rid of noncore businesses. It sold off WheelsDiscount Auto Supply Div. to Sears Roebuck's Western Auto Supply for $37million. Management is also expected to unload the 30 Paper Cutterdiscount-office-supply stores.   ``Without Wheels and Paper Cutter, Fay's would be a much more attractivetakeover target,'' says one money manager accumulating shares.   Providing added inducement for Fay's to sell: Management and directorsown about 31% of the stock--including the holdings of the family ofChairman Henry Panasci Jr. Fay's didn't return calls.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: WEAK SISTERERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE WAY THE OLD RUBBER CRUMBLESBy:BY GENE G. MARCIALNot everything in today's hot IPO market is Internet-related. One issuethat some pros like--GreenMan Technologies (GMTI)--is nowhere nearcyberspace: It's in tire recycling. GreenMan went public on Oct. 3 at 5 ashare. On opening day, the stock jumped to more than 8 and stayed there foreight trading days--until profit-taking spoiled some of the fun. But somemoney managers still think it's worth loading up on GreenMan--now at 6.   What's the allure of tire recycling? GreenMan uses a patented cryogenic(low-temperature) technology to make used tires brittle, thus yieldingcrumb-rubber granules. These granules are a low-cost source of rubber andplastic waste, according to one money manager who has a sizable stake.GreenMan's chief product is a proprietary thermoplastic rubber materialthat uses crumbs from discarded tires. GreenMan uses it to produce waterfilters, pumps, stereo components, and computer accessories.   On Dec. 14, Browning-Ferris Industries, a major player in solid-wastecollection and recycling, signed an exclusive contract for GreenMan tobuild and operate a crumb-rubber processing facility on Browning's site inJackson, Ga. It will convert a minimum of 32,000 tons a year of shreddedtires into high quality crumb rubber. Browning-Ferris may buy an equitystake in GreenMan, speculates one analyst.   Revenues for the year ending May 31, 1996, are expected to be $7 millionto $10 million, in part from a $2 million contract with Coca-Cola--forGreenMan to make display racks of recycled rubber. One analyst seesGreenMan going into the black in 1996.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CHINA TIRE MAY BE UNDULY DEFLATEDBy:BY GENE G. MARCIALOn the Big Board, China Tire Holdings (TIR) behaves as if it were aretread. In early summer, shares of this major Chinese tiremaker werearound 12. They're now at 6, and even Morgan Stanley downgraded its ratingin November to ``neutral'' from an earlier ``buy.'' That's quite a blow:Morgan Stanley was one of China Tire's major underwriters when it wentpublic--in July, 1993, at 17 a share. And it owns 5.7% of the stock.Constantly shifting U.S.-China relations are part of the Street's aversionto the stock. And there has been concern about China Tire's earningspredictability.   But not everyone is down on the stock. Investment manager Bill Harnischhas been buying since the stock hit 8 in September--and bought even morewhen it dropped to 6. How come?   ``For a company with an estimated book value of more than $15 a share,the stock is very cheap,'' says Harnisch, president of Forstmann-Leff, aNew York investment firm managing about $3 billion. And in spite of thepoor performance of most other Chinese tire biggies--caused in part by adrop in car sales--China Tire's revenues in most of 1995 jumped by morethan 33%, and its earnings grew by 10%, he notes. Harnisch estimates 1995earnings at 50 cents a share. For 1996, he foresees earnings of 75 cents.   And then, there is the ``bonanza that we expect China Tire could winfrom its lawsuit filed against Goodyear in the U.S.,'' says Harnisch. ChinaTire claims that Goodyear interfered with its contract to buy a radial-tirefactory in China owned by Dalian General Rubber Factory: Goodyear boughtthe factory instead. Some analysts believe Goodyear Tire & Rubber faces a$3 billion penalty if it loses the legal fight.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: A LAWSUIT MAY MEAN A `BONANZA'ERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A TOUGH YEAR TO FOLLOWBy:Edited by Mark N. VamosExecutives at America's largest public companies see the economy cooling abit in the coming year. They're a tad less optimistic than they were thistime last year. Fewer expect growth in gross domestic product to pick up in1996, and the number anticipating rising unemployment has doubled. Butmanagers cheer the Fed: Their inflation fears have all but vanished, andfew worry about rising interest rates. A remarkable 91% give Fed ChairmanAlan Greenspan high marks, compared with the 26% who applaud Clinton'shandling of the economy.Survey of 401 senior executives drawn from the BUSINESS WEEK 1000.Interviews were conducted for BUSINESS WEEK Nov. 30-Dec. 15, 1995 by LouisHarris & Associates Inc. Previous surveys cited were of 400 seniorexecutives on Nov. 28-Dec. 5, 1994 and of 402 senior executives Dec. 10-20,1993.Optimistic VoicesOverall, how would you characterize your outlook for the U.S. economy inthe next 12 months--would you say you are very optimistic, somewhatoptimistic, somewhat pessimistic, or very pessimistic?                       1995    1994    1993Very optimistic          8%     13%      3%Somewhat optimistic     78%     76%     80%Somewhat pessimistic    13%     11%     16%Very pessimistic         0%      0%      1%Not sure                 1%      0%      0%Growth FactorCompared with the last 12 months, do you think the rate of growth of thegross domestic product will go up, go down, or stay the same over the next12 months?                1995    1994    1993Go up           30%     38%    25%Go down         25%     26%     9%Stay the same   45%     36%    65%Not sure         0%      0%     1%What About Inflation?Compared with the last 12 months, do you think the rate of inflation, basedon the CPI, will go up, go down, or stay the same over the next 12 months?               1995    1994    1993Go up           12%     53%    40%Go down         15%      6%     5%Stay the same   73%     40%    55%Not sure         0%      1%     0%Tracking TreasuriesCompared with where it is right now, do you think the 30-year Treasury ratewill go up, go down, or stay the same over the next 12 months?               1995    1994    1993Go up           24%     57%     67%Go down         47%     18%      5%Stay the same   25%     24%     27%Not sure         4%      1%      1%The Jobless RateCompared with the last 12 months, do you think the unemployment rate willgo up, go down, or stay the same over the next 12 months?               1995    1994    1993Go up           35%     17%     21%Go down         15%     33%     34%Stay the same   49%     50%    44%Not sure         1%      0%     1%The Company WayAnd now some questions about your expectations for your company over thenext 12 months. Please give your best estimate. Do you think each of thefollowing will increase or decrease between now and December, 1996?                          INCREASE  DECREASE    SAME  NOT SURESales                        89%       4%        5%     2%Wage and salary rates        85%       3%       10%     2%Investment in plant and equipment               72%      12%       13%     3%Health-care costs per employee                    59%      22%       17%     2%Investment in research & development               58%      14%       21%     7%Exports                      54%       3%       10%    33%Full-time employees          45%      30%       23%     2%Typical prices of standard products or services        40%      21%       37%     2%Prophesizing ProfitsDo you think your company's profitability will improve, stay the same, orget worse in 1996?Improve         79%     Get worse       6%Stay the same   13%     Not sure        2%Crazy For Alan...How would you rate the job Alan Greenspan and the Federal Reserve are doing-- excellent, pretty good, only fair, or poor?               1995    1994Excellent       40%     16%Pretty good     51%     50%Only fair        8%     29%Poor             0%      5%Not sure         1%      0% ...But Less So For BillHow do you rate President Clinton's handling of the economy -- excellent,pretty good, only fair, or poor?Excellent       1%      Poor           18%Pretty good    25%      Not sure        1%Only fair      55%Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CRUISE CONTROL?Car sales should remain strong, though high sticker prices are worrisomeBy:By Kathleen Kerwin and Keith Naughton in DetroitPeter Dirisamer may not drive home a new car in 1996. Dirisamer, 37, anElmhurst (Ill.) technical writer, wants to replace his family's 1988Plymouth Horizon subcompact. But with average new-car prices pushing$20,000, he's not finding much he can afford. ``Detroit expects me to pay$20,000 for the average four-door sedan?'' he sniffs. ``I don't think so.''Instead, he may settle for a used car.   Consumers such as Dirisamer are the reason Detroit is cautious about itsprospects for the new year. ``Price is the issue with customers,'' saysLehman Brothers Inc. analyst Joseph Phillippi. And with a flood of two- andthree-year-old cars and trucks coming back on the market as their leasesexpire--2.3 million in 1996 alone, according to Art Spinella of CNWMarketing/Research in Bandon, Ore.--consumers are finding plenty ofalternatives to pricey new wheels.   So Detroit is prepared to idle along at about the same rate as theoverall economy. Auto executives are looking for only a modest improvementof less than 2% over 1995's U.S. sales of 14.8 million cars and lighttrucks. Says General Motors Corp. Chairman John F. Smith Jr.: ``1996 lookslike a good year, not spectacular.''   Perhaps, too, Detroit is a bit cautious about predicting rosy sales. Ayear ago, its optimism had reached fever pitch. But by mid-January,consumers began to cool on auto buying as they felt the cumulative effectof interest-rate hikes by the Federal Reserve. Sales revived by fits andstarts through 1995, ending about 2.6% behind 1994's pace.GOOD AS IT GETS? Auto sales should be helped in 1996 by low interest rates,which make auto loans and lease terms more attractive. A continuingappetite for American-made trucks, including minivans and sport utilities,also is in Detroit's favor. And the Big Three are introducing a host of newmodels, notably Ford's Escort small car and F-series pickup, GM's newmidsize cars and minivans, and Chrysler's Dodge Dakota pickup.   Still, other worries loom. PaineWebber Inc. analyst Michael Ward fretsabout unsold cars and trucks on dealer lots, which reached a 75-day averagesupply late in 1995, 14% above year-ago levels. Ward predicts little changein sales for 1996: ``This is as good as it's going to get for Detroit.''   While most on Wall Street predict slightly stronger sales ahead, theydon't expect them to flow straight to the bottom line. Customers aredemanding cash rebates and sweet lease terms on all but the hottest-sellingtrucks. Flemington (N.J.) car dealer Steve Kalafer, who owns 23dealerships, says the only thing selling these days is bargains: ``In aworld full of wonderful products, the consumer is buying the deal.''   That squeezes auto makers' profit margins. ``The industry's margins area disaster for an expansion,'' says Paul Ballew, chief economist for J.D.Power & Associates Inc. Adding to the uncertainty, Detroit's contracts withthe United Auto Workers expire in September. A spirited debate is expectedabout the auto makers' shifting jobs to outside suppliers (box). AndJapanese competitors are hard on Detroit's bumper: introducing snazzy newvehicles while keeping price increases small.   Ford's costs of launching its many new vehicles will continue to dragdown profits during the first half of the year, company executives say.Stockholders remain anxious about the company's strategy of loading onfeatures to lure import-loving baby boomers at a time when consumers shunhigher sticker prices. Ford also will expand its ambitious globalreorganization--dubbed Ford 2000--by folding South America, New Zealand,Australia, and Taiwan into its combined North American and Europeanoperations in 1996. J.P. Morgan & Co. analyst David Bradley expects Ford toearn $3.6 billion, unchanged from 1995, on sales of $123 billion.   General Motors Corp., which sat out most of 1995 without new models,launches a series of important vehicles this year. After bungling severalcar launches in recent years, it has been working on debugging itsmanufacturing process to prepare for the launches. GM is counting on suchentries as the new Chevy Venture minivan, Buick Regal, and Pontiac GrandPrix to help it regain its footing in crucial market segments. The companyis hoping its falling market share finally has bottomed. Late in the year,its share edged above 34%, up from lows near 32%. GM will earn $7 billion,up 17%, on $160 billion of sales, Bradley calculates.``IDEAL SITUATION.'' Chrysler Corp. management, which just successfullyintroduced a new generation of its bread-and-butter minivans, is likely tospend plenty of time planning for a spring showdown with billionaireinvestor Kirk Kerkorian. If Chrysler balks at giving Kerkorian aide JeromeB. York a board seat, a nasty proxy battle will ensue. Back on the plantfloor, Chrysler is standardizing manufacturing processes and modernizingolder factories. Bradley estimates 1996 Chrysler earnings of $3.1 billion,up 58% from the depressed 1995 level, on sales of $54 billion.   Even as Detroit rolls out spiffy new models, its Japanese rivals willunveil their own new designs. And while a sky-high yen forced them to booststicker prices, putting them at a $2,000 to $3,000 per-car pricedisadvantage, they've been slashing costs. The 1997 Toyota Camry midsizesedan is expected to cost as much as $1,000 less than the current car.``The Japanese manufacturers have not gone away,'' says GM's Smith. ``Theyare tough competitors, and they will continue to be.''   Japan also is expanding its lower-cost U.S. production--and evenstepping up shipments of American-built cars to Japan. ``We are importing,not only to Japan but to 38 countries, from the U.S.,'' says NobuhikoKawamoto, Honda Motor Co. president and chief executive. ``We intend toreinforce this plan.'' Even softening in the yen last fall isn't likely tocause Japan to back off from cost-cutting. Says Ford Chairman Alexander J.Trotman: ``I doubt very much that they will take their foot off the pedaljust because the yen has slipped back.''   There is a silver lining to the slackening of 1994's breakneck pace.Back then, factories were running at maximum overtime, some key parts ranshort, and demand for raw materials renewed some inflationary pressures.Says Kenneth L. Way, chairman and CEO of Lear Seating Corp. in Southfield,Mich.: ``I think it's an advantage not to have deep troughs and bigpeaks.''   Instead, the industry may be bumping along on a plateau of 14.5 millionto 15.5 million unit sales annually. ``It's actually an ideal situation,''says Chrysler Chairman Robert J. Eaton. ``It allows you to get your plantsrunning at maximum efficiency, get your material flowing nice and evenly,and really focus on costs and quality.''   And when it comes to expansion opportunities, the Big Three are castingtheir eyes toward the Asia-Pacific region, where they can still turn outbasic cars on a shoestring. ``That is where most of our growth focus willbe in the next 20 years,'' says Ford's Trotman. Chrysler, which has laggedits Detroit peers abroad, is likely to make some major international movesthis year. The company is talking with a half-dozen potential partners inIndia, South America, and Southeast Asia. An alliance with a European automaker could also be in the cards.   Overseas horizons may indeed appear the brightest to Detroit. Especiallyif American consumers, such as Illinois car shopper Dirisamer, remainconvinced that new cars cost too much.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Lower interest rates make auto loan and lease payments moreaffordable.   -- A flood of products--Ford's Escort and new pickup and GM's familysedans--should whet consumer appetites.Negatives   -- Cost-cutting and a weaker yen are making the Japanese toughercompetitors than ever.   -- Price-conscious consumers are demanding deals.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Motor VehiclesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Cars/Light TrucksCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A SHRINKING SUPPLY OF SUPPLIERSBy:By Kathleen Kerwin and Bill Vlasic in DetroitAmerican auto makers will rely on fewer parts suppliers in 1996. Ford MotorCo., for example, has reduced its stable from 10,000 to 2,300--and aims for1,150 by decade's end. At the same time, Detroit has suppliers building alarger percentage of the content of its cars than ever.   What gives? The consolidation is driven by auto makers who lean onsuppliers to provide entire systems for vehicles--an entire dashboard, forinstance, instead of just the ashtray that goes into it. Detroit is handingoff more development responsibility to suppliers, too. This favors thosecompanies with plentiful capacity, capital, and skills. Smaller playersmust merge or lose the business. Some become second- or third-tiersuppliers to the remaining giants.   The Big Three want global supply networks. A supplier who aspires toU.S. business in 1996 may have to be able to deliver the same parts tofactories in Germany or Brazil. Among those that analysts say may grow byacquisition in 1996: Borg-Warner Automotive, Dana, and Lear Seating. SaysTRW Inc. Chairman Joseph T. Gorman: ``There will continue to be massive[supplier] consolidation as markets that were once national or regionalbecome global.''   Big suppliers will end up with some extra burdens. ``The cost pressureson suppliers are still tremendous,'' says Kenneth L. Way, chairman of LearSeating Corp. in Southfield, Mich. ``You have to share engineering costsand design costs if you're a tier-one [supplier].'' And auto makers keepdemanding price reductions. The focus of supplier ire for 1996 is Fordpurchasing chief Carlos E. Mazzorin, who wants suppliers to cut theirprices by 5% a year.   Even so, Morgan Stanley & Co. analyst Stephen Volkmann projectssuppliers' earnings will rise 15% to 20% in 1996. Price increases for rawmaterials have eased lately, he notes. Suppliers of car parts may sufferspotty slowdowns, but business in truck components should remain robust.And Japanese car companies' expansion in the U.S. provides new marketopportunities for the best U.S. suppliers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THEY'RE HAVING A CAPITAL TIMESavoring solid demand here, machine makers also are expanding abroadBy:By Zachary Schiller in ClevelandBusiness investment has powered the U.S. economic expansion, and that hasmade machinery executives a bunch of happy campers. Shipments of industrialmachinery and equipment were up 12% through October, 1995, from a yearearlier, according to the U.S. Census, surging toward a likely record.Their plump backlogs almost guarantee another strong year. Says Jeffery T.Grade, chairman of Milwaukee's Harnischfeger Industries Inc., which makesequipment for papermaking and mining: ``1996, when all is said and done,will be a very good year for most industrial manufacturers.''   While growth and profits won't climb much in 1996, the gains come on topof a strong base. That's because U.S. manufacturing is itself in goodshape--and companies are convinced that they must invest to stay that way.``All in all, people are concerned about productivity and being competitiveglobally,'' says Daniel J. Meyer, chairman of Cincinnati Milacron Inc.   A healthy U.S. market should be supplemented by faster market growthabroad. ``Our biggest opportunity for [profit] leverage is the continuedaccelerated growth overseas,'' says Thomas F. McBride, chief financialofficer at Ingersoll-Rand Co. He's especially hopeful for Asia and thePacific. Ingersoll is looking to add three joint ventures in China to thethree it already has there, including one that makes industrial aircompressors and another producing rock drills for mining and road-clearing.ITT Industries Inc.'s Fluid Transfer Div. is putting a warehouse for itspumps in Santiago, Chile. Milacron, which just started making smallinjection-molding machines in a joint venture with an outfit based inIndia, hopes to be producing 600 there annually within a few years.MASS APPEAL. More machinery makers are realizing they have to intensifyglobal activities to keep their U.S. customers happy. ``When a DuPont or aDow says, `I'm building my next plant in China--I need you to step up yourcapabilities,' you've got to have mass to cover the world,'' says WilliamM. Jordan, president of Duriron Co., a Dayton (Ohio) pump and valve maker. Partly with that in mind, Duriron recently bought seal maker DurametallicCorp.   Also fueling mergers--including Ingersoll-Rand's 1995 takeover of ClarkEquipment Co.--is that stronger balance sheets have left more machinerymakers in a position to make purchases. Indeed, there even have been someinitial public offerings in the once beleaguered machine-tool business,such as a 1995 IPO by Hardinge Brothers Inc., a fast-growing Elmira (N.Y.)producer of lathes and machining centers.   Such has been the strength of machine-tool sales that the average age ofU.S. metalworking equipment began falling in 1994 for the first time in 14years. The rejuvenation should continue into 1996.   Even if demand dips next year for a number of machinery makers, existingorders will provide a cushion. For instance, Alton J. Brann, chairman andCEO of Western Atlas Inc., notes that an ``exceptional year'' of bookingsmeans a good outlook for 1996 sales of its Industrial Automation Group. Itsbacklog for machining and other systems is up about 50% from the $415million of a year ago.   There are some streaks of weakness in this rosy-hued picture. The sameglobalization that has U.S. executives rushing to expand abroad meansthey're facing more competition. And the same modernization that makesAmerican manufacturers world-beaters in productivity often has led toincreases in capacity that put a damper on prices.BUYING MOOD. What's more, there are spotty signs of a slowdown in demand.Manufacturers' use of their factory capacity fell from 85.1% a year ago to83.1% in November, 1995. Orders for forklift trucks, industrial aircompressors, and large plastic-molding machines have slowed in recentmonths. Demand from the auto industry may taper off, and 1995's sluggishhousing market will probably mean at best a flat market for constructionequipment this year.   Still, most machinery customers are in a buying mood. Such businesses aschemicals, paper, metals, and food should still spend smartly. Aerospacedemand is finally rebounding. And one of the biggest stars is likely to befarm machinery. ``The underlying fundamentals for farm equipment have neverbeen stronger,'' says Ted French, chief financial officer of Case Corp.,citing strong farm income and the lowest carryover of grain stocks in 30years. For machinery makers, the wheels are turning for a solid 1996.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Outsourcing by big companies means job shops will be buyingequipment.   -- With manufacturers concerned about global competition, they willcontinue placing orders for machinery.Negatives   -- There's still too much worldwide capacity in sectors such as pumpsand machine tools, keeping prices down.   -- Automotive capital spending will flatten out in 1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: MachineryIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Machine ToolsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457METALS NEED A FEW SUPPORT BEAMSFor steelmakers, falling prices and labor issues loom large in '96By:By Stephen Baker in PittsburghAt the dawn of 1995, Matthew Botsford, chairman of World Class Steel, wasconfidently raising money to build a $450 million minimill near Pittsburgh.If anyone epitomized America's resurgence in the steel industry, it wasBotsford, an entrepreneur who had built a successful $20 millionsteel-finishing business and was following in the footsteps of AndrewCarnegie.   These days, Botsford is an ex-executive. He's suing his oldcompany--after being ousted during a November board meeting and whiskedfrom the building by a security guard. His project had the backing ofbanks, suppliers, and the state government. But Botsford had troubleconvincing equity investors--and ultimately his board--that a new minimillcould make money in a climate of falling steel prices.   In the end, Botsford fell with a tumbling steel market. In 1995, asdemand dropped from 114 million to 110 million tons, prices plummeted, too:Flat-rolled steel plunged from $440 to $355 per ton. Other products, suchas structural beams, thrived. But because flat-rolled is widely used incars, appliances, and other products, it accounts for half of steel salesand defined the year. ``When we cut flat-rolled prices, it was on page A1[of the paper],'' laments Nucor Corp. President John D. Correnti. ``When weraised prices of structurals, it was on C4.''WILD CARD. The industry could wind up on page one again this year, witheven worse news. Executives see unchanging demand in 1996. A lower level ofinventories to start the year will help avoid a replay of 1995's heavyprice-cutting. But new steelmaking capacity coming onstream will putfurther downward pressure on prices, especially in the commodity grades ofsteel. ``The low end of the market is going to be tough for a while,'' saysRoy G. Dorrence, vice-president for operations at U.S. Steel Group.   The wild card this year is overseas. U.S. producers hope strong growthin China will translate into a buying binge reminiscent of 1993. But thekey factor for 1996 will be Europe. It was a vital prop under Americansteel during the first half of 1995--but then buckled at midyear. If a weakEuropean economy prompts producers there to step up exports, cheap Europeansteel could undercut U.S. producers' prices and lead to fresh tradesquabbles.   The biggest problem for U.S. producers is homegrown, however. Beforelast year's price drop, a minimill-building boom was well under way. Thenew mills could add 12 million tons of low-cost flat-rolled steel toproduction capacity in 1996 and 1997 combined. That's nearly five times thecapacity added in 1995. If flat-rolled could crash last year in arelatively strong economy, what will happen to the market in a downturn,especially when new mills come onstream? ``That's when we'll have our deathspiral,'' predicts PaineWebber Inc.'s Peter Marcus, who expects lowerprofits in 1996 and an even greater crash later this decade.STRIKE BAN. As if economic prospects weren't intimidating enough, laborquestions loom. Most integrated companies face mid-contractwage-and-benefit negotiations in 1996. Strikes or lockouts are prohibited.But concessions granted by arbitrators could eat into earnings.Job-security clauses in these contracts limit the big mills' power to cutlabor costs. Instead, the producers improve yields by tweaking thetechnology. In the past three years, they have added 4 million tons--theequivalent of Nucor's entire flat-rolled production--through this so-calledcapacity creep. Log one more factor in an eventual glut.   With a world oversupply, steel faces a dilemma just like the one U.S.aluminum makers wrestled with early in the decade. But aluminum companies,swamped with cheap Russian metal, shuttered 30% of production andnegotiated an OPEC-style allotment plan. Prices recovered smartly in 1995,as massive world inventories shrank by 75%. U.S. demand rose 5%, with salesrising to 15.5 billion pounds. Aluminum looks strong again in 1996, led bya recovery in aerospace demand. But can prices remain firm if aluminummakers reopen shuttered smelters? For now, executives don't even mentionthe possibility, for fear of spooking the market.   In the face of such difficult markets, metal industries are more andmore battling to take business away from one another. Auto hoods,tailpipes, and even beer cans are among the contentious areas. And ifunexpectedly slow growth in China, Europe, or the U.S. brings about a steelglut ahead of schedule, the metal wars could grow very nasty.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Demand for steel remains hearty.   -- World inventories of aluminum have fallen 80% in the past 1 1/2years.   -- China may return as a big customer of American steel.Negatives   -- New steel capacity coming onstream is undermining prices.   -- With higher aluminum prices, producers may restart idle smelters.   -- Labor concessions could hurt steel earnings.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Primary MetalsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Finished SteelCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457READY-ALL JOIN ARMSCash-Rich and eager to merge, defense companies are thrivingBy:By Eric Schine in Los AngelesFinancially speaking, small has been beautiful for the defense industry.For two years, defense companies have produced record profits and soaringstock prices while merging into a smaller, more efficient industry withfewer, bigger players. Year three of Operation Consolidation will bringeven more mergers. ``Everybody is talking to everybody,'' says C. MichaelArmstrong, chief executive of GM Hughes Electronics Corp.   Driving the consolidation is a persistent squeeze by the Pentagon. In1996, procurement outlays should shrink an additional 9%, to $49.7billion--a drop of nearly 50% from the 1987 peak spending year. And despiteyears of contraction, the industry must still reduce capacity by as much as40% over the next several years, according to Wolfgang Demisch, an analystwith BT Securities Corp. Arms exports will help, as the industry's share ofthe world market, now about 52%, should grow modestly. But the biggestgains may be logged by companies pushing forward in promising commercialventures, some based on defense technology.   Leading the consolidation charge will be a handful of large contractors.Analysts predict at least one more merger on the scale of last year'sLockheed Martin Corp. marriage, which created a $23 billion giant.Companies have built cash hoards as a result of cutting costs even fasterthan the Pentagon reduced spending, leaving GM Hughes, Litton, Loral, andothers poised to buy.MARRIAGE-MINDED. Makers of missiles, electronics, and airframes are indemand. Raytheon Co. purchased the fast-growing E-Systems last year for$2.3 billion and could easily spend an additional $1 billion in 1996. GMHughes, with some $5 billion in buying power, could swallow the defenseportfolio of a TRW or a Rockwell International, each accounting for about$3 billion in annual sales. But virtually every industry sector willattract shoppers. In 1995, General Dynamics Corp. paid just $300 millionfor Bath Iron Works Corp. and its $2 billion shipbuilding backlog.   One megadeal, sources say, could combine Boeing Co. and McDonnellDouglas Corp. That would be a potent combination: McDonnell's $10.1 billionin government sales with Boeing's 58% stake in the world commercial planemarket. It would solve each company's perennial weakness: Boeing covetsmilitary orders, such as McDonnell's recent $18 billion award for C-17transport planes. And McDonnell needs a commercial partner to counterEurope's Airbus Industrie and a likely threat from upstart Asiancompetitors. Neither company will comment publicly.   While the big companies attract most of the attention, themergers-and-acquisitions market among smaller suppliers is likely to be noless lively. ``The action is moving down the food chain,'' says Jon Kutler,principal of the Los Angeles-based Quarterdeck Investments.HIGH RESOLUTION. Unfortunately for thousands of aerospace and defenseworkers, mergers will mean more layoffs. Even after cutting some 1.3million jobs since the late 1980s, the industry will shrink its workforceby an additional 30% over the next several years, says Robert D. Paulson, aconsultant with McKinsey & Co. Most of the layoffs will come as second-tierplayers bail out or get bought. Two likely candidates: United TechnologiesCorp.'s Sikorsky Aircraft and Textron Inc.'s Bell Helicopter unit.   Conglomerates will take advantage of high defense prices to unloadbusinesses to move in new directions. Westinghouse Electric Corp., forinstance, announced in December that it will sell off its defensebusinesses to help finance its recent $5.4 billion acquisition of CBS Inc.   Entertainment and communications are fueling the defense industry'sgreatest commercial success: After surpassing 1 million subscribers in itsfirst year of operation, Hughes' DirecTV unit has announced plans to expandits satellite-TV service globally. And a consortium that includes LockheedMartin and Raytheon has invested more than $500 million to providehigh-resolution satellite images to real estate agents and farmers,potentially a $2 billion-plus market.   Such reassuring signs, together with the consolidation craze, have WallStreet predicting another year of bulging profits. BT Securities' Demischexpects defense and aerospace profits to rise at least 15% in 1996, toabout $5 billion. Downsizing is painful, but for those who hang on, therewards can be formidable.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Consolidation moves forward: Look for at least one more mega-mergerand continued capacity reduction.   -- Modest growth in the Pentagon's procurement budget is likely, whileoverseas sales could strengthen.Negatives   -- Profit margins will be squeezed as stingier contracts kick in. Thelucrative B-2 bomber and F-22 fighter programs may be stretched or killed.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: prognosis '96: DefenseIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Aircraft, Missiles & PartsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457`UNEXCITING MIGHT BE GOOD'Few surprises in the oil patch. but with profits so healthy, who cares?By:By Gary McWilliams in HoustonThe oil patch has made its peace with low prices. Relentless restructuringand cost-cutting are delivering strong cash flow and higher profits despiteanemic pricing. Even in today's oil market, initial public offerings andsecondary stock sales are letting small independents fund new productionand property acquisitions without incurring debt.   Executives are prepared for more of the same in 1996. ``We don't seemany things out there that look any different to us than 1995,'' saysTimothy C. Headington, chief executive of Headington Oil Co. in Dallas, asmall crude-oil producer that has been steadily expanding with cast-offsfrom Exxon, Texaco, and others.   Most important, there's little evidence that prices will take a spill.Oil averaged $18.40 a barrel in 1995, and many forecasters expect it toremain there. ``I see no reason for the 1996 numbers to change by more than25 cents a barrel,'' insists Robert Gillon, senior analyst at marketwatcher John S. Herold Inc. What little encouragement exists is in U.S.natural-gas prices, which should recover to about $1.80 per thousand cubicfeet--up from $1.48 in 1995. That would put them back around 1994 levels.STEADY AS SHE GOES. The major oil companies should see their earnings risea modest 6% in 1996, thanks to a healthy economy's thirst for more oil,says Frederick P. Leuffer, senior energy analyst at Bear, Stearns & Co. Heforesees demand growing next year by about 2%. While hardly as robust ashigh tech, oils look like a safe haven. ``It's lackluster and sort ofunexciting right now,'' says Leuffer. ``But unexciting might be good'' werethe Dow to reverse course.   There are a couple of iffy assumptions in this steady-as-she-goesoutlook. The biggest is that OPEC, which has suffered a steady loss ofworld oil market share, continues to accept the losses. Some analysts areconcerned that OPEC countries may attempt to regain share by boosting theirproduction. Or that Iraq may return with significant new supplies. For now,neither seems likely.   Even if prices were to drop, restructuring and new technology have madeU.S. oil companies more able to cope. The best are finding fresh ways ofexploring and managing. A money-saving technique pioneered by Amoco Corp.and Royal Dutch/Shell Group: pooling their assets in low-profit productionregions. The two are forming a joint company to merge West Texas and NewMexico operations--and slash overlapping costs.3-D IMAGING. Technology continues to lower costs, too (chart). VastarResources Inc., a 1993 spin-off of Arco's U.S. oil and gas operations, saysits exploratory wells now hit pay dirt 60% of the time--as a result oftechnologies such as three-dimensional seismic imaging--compared with only47% of the time using older techniques. What's more, says CEO Michael E.Wiley, ``I think there will be some creative ways [cost-cutting] cancontinue.''   With expenses falling, prices don't have to rise much for productionincreases to flow straight to the bottom line. Next year's outlook is for asolid 7% rise in crude-oil production--with even higher increases forTexaco, Amoco, and Shell. Texaco, which hasn't boosted production fornearly a decade, predicts a 40% production rise within five years, thanksto rich prospects in the North Sea, Latin America, and China.   While petrochemicals were the big contributor to last year's headyprofits at Phillips Petroleum Co. and Amoco, prices have softened--assupply has caught up with demand. The question now: Will China, a hugebuyer that withdrew from the market in 1995, return in 1996? Bob Gower,chief executive at chemical maker Lyondell Petrochemical Co., predictsChina's return could mean a second leg to the chemical boom. ``All theinformation we have suggests we're not at the end of the cycle, but in atransition period,'' he says.   Retailing should continue to deliver profits, too. Continued reshufflingof gasoline outlets--as companies concentrate on specific markets--hasturned the cyclical business into a reliable profit center. ``We're seeingretail margins better than any time in history,'' says James E. Acridge,CEO of Giant Industries Inc., a Scottsdale (Ariz.) refiner andSouthwest-area retailer. For years, stock analysts urged Giant to quit thebusiness. No longer. ``We're smart guys all of a sudden,'' he says. Stableprices and lower costs are making a lot of people look smart these days.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Firmer gas pricing and savings from corporate restructurings shouldproduce stable profits.   -- Advances in technology are lowering costs for exploration anddrilling.   -- Gasoline retailing profit margins are at historic highs.Negatives   -- Petrochemical profits may soften further, cutting refining margins.   -- OPEC could seek to recoup markets from non-OPEC suppliers.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Energy: Coal, Crude Oil, Gas, PetroleumRefiningIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Oil And Gas ExplorationCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A TIME TO REAP GLOBAL REWARDSWith demand and output growing, the U.S. could again dominate worldmarketsBy:By Greg Burns in ChicagoCorn and soybean farmer Robert Mullins doesn't get excited too easily. Butfrom where he sits on an 1,800-acre spread in rural Shabbona, Ill., theexport outlook is cause for celebration: ``Spectacular,'' he says. ``It'sreally coming alive.''   The next year could bring an export bonanza for Mullins and otherfarmers, as U.S. agriculture begins dominating world markets again. TheU.S. share of agricultural trade will rise to about 21% in 1996 afterfalling as low as 16.7% in 1986. The value of U.S. exports will push up tonearly $60 billion (chart), thanks to booming demand, reduced global tradebarriers, and a more competitive U.S. Farm Belt. U.S. farmers have longconsidered exports the missing link in their pursuit of higher prices: ``IfMother Nature cooperates, and we get a good crop, we could have the fullpackage for a change,'' says Mullins.   In 1995, Mother Nature had other ideas. Heavy rains delayed springplanting through much of the Midwest grain belt. Two months later, a summerheat wave baked the earth rock hard. Then a killing frost in late Septemberput a chill on the autumn harvest. With the crop stunted and plagued bydisease, production of corn plunged from 10 billion bushels in 1994 to 7.3billion in '95, sending U.S. corn stockpiles to 20-year lows. For the year,corn futures prices had soared 51% as of Dec. 14, soybeans 31%, and wheat25%. Big rewards went to farmers who produced decent crops in spite of theweather, then held out for the best prices late in the year. But predictingsuch explosive rallies can be tricky: ``With our reserves of feed grains athistoric lows, it makes the markets more volatile,'' says Patrick H. Arbor,chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade.SHRINKING SET-ASIDES. Still, the near-term trend is positive: Supplies havetightened at a time of heavy demand, especially from Asia. Spending by theJapanese, the largest importers of U.S. agricultural products, will reach$11.3 billion in 1996, up from $10.5 billion in 1995, according toprojections from the U.S. Agriculture Dept. South Korea and China,benefiting from robust economies, will increase imports as well. U.S. redmeat, fruit, and vegetables, along with grain, will be sought-aftercommodities. ``We have tremendous export-market potential,'' says analystDavid C. Nelson of NatWest Securities Corp. in New York.   U.S. farmers will be planting fence post to fence post this year. As ofmid-December, the government appeared to be all for it: Proposed reformswould eliminate annual set-aside programs that support prices by idlingcropland. Instead of paying farmers not to farm, the government wouldprovide fixed payments, shrinking each year, based on how much theyreceived in the past. With this change, the amount of corn, wheat, andsoybean acreage in production should jump by about 10% in the comingseason, analysts estimate. As the reforms stood at the end of '95, theywould have little effect on cotton, rice, sugar, peanut, and dairy farmers,who would retain key subsidies.   The additional land for grain crops will be a modest plus for fertilizercompanies such as IMC Global, Freeport-McMoRan, and Potash. But the biggestpotential for those companies lies overseas. In China, for example, averagegrain yields run about 50% behind those of the U.S. Yet rapid economicgrowth has the huge Chinese population clamoring for a better diet. Thesimplest way to boost yields: more fertilizer. The less developed worldwill be pouring on the potash, says Wendell F. Bueche, chief executiveofficer of IMC. ``There's nothing more dangerous than hungry people. You'vegot to keep your population well-fed,'' he says.   Other nations' efforts to improve farming techniques won't threaten U.S.market share right away. Greater use of fertilizer, pesticide, and hybridseed, as well as increased mechanization, could level the playing fieldsomeday. But the U.S. retains a big advantage in low-cost production. Andthe demand is huge. China's consumption is projected to grow even fasterthan its yields. And the former Soviet Union--a potentially hugecompetitor--has seen its output crash along with the rest of its economyover the past five years, with no comeback in sight.   Even if the U.S. produces a bumper crop in 1996, many bins will remainempty: ``We're not going to be flush with supply for at least severalgrowing seasons,'' predicts Daniel W. Basse of the AgResource consultancyin Chicago. For the rest of this decade, the world will be depending onU.S. farmers.Prognosis '96Positives   -- With world grain supplies at record lows and a farm bill thatencourages greater production, U.S. farmers will plant fence post to fencepost.   -- Export demand for agricultural products will soar.Negatives   -- With less government protection, farmers will be vulnerable to tradeproblems.   -- Uncertainty over the Farm Bill could complicate planting plans.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: AgricultureIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: U.S. Farm ExportsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457IT'S A GOOD YEAR TO GET HITCHED'96 could be tough, so papermakers will continue to mergeBy:By Seanna Browder in SeattleFor a few crazy months early in 1995, making paper was akin to printingmoney. As demand outran supply, prices for white paper took their mostdramatic leap since World War II. The jump of 38% per ton in Dean WitterReynolds Inc.'s paper and paperboard composite index drove up profits anestimated 180% for 1995 at the 19 largest wood and paper companies. Aspaper executives tell it, the temptation to add new capacity was almostunbearable. But remembering a binge that turned to bust earlier in thedecade, they resisted. ``The memories are still fresh of what it feels likein a down cycle with too much capacity,'' says Lynn Michaelis, WeyerhaeuserCo.'s director of marketing and economic research.   Good thing. Fearing ever-higher prices, customers stockpiled paper. Bysummer, the bloated inventories undermined the sky-high prices, and theytumbled an average of 11%. Even without big new investments, the AmericanForest & Paper Assn. expects production capacity for pulp and paper to rise3% in 1996, largely because of efficiency improvements. And that may beenough to push prices down, says Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Sherman Chao.Chao predicts that prices of pulp and paper could decline as much as 19% in1996 on steady volume. This spells lower profits, though nothing resemblingthe industry's dive in the early '90s.   Without any hope for booming demand, expect paper and pulp companies tospend 1996 cleaning up balance sheets or plowing ahead with industryconsolidation. ``In our business, it is more favorable to buy assets thanbuild new plants,'' says John A. Georges, International Paper Co.'s chiefexecutive.ELECTION YEAR. Acquisitions already are rolling. Kimberly-Clark Corp.gobbled up Scott Paper Co. for $9.4 billion in December. Earlier in theyear, International Paper agreed to buy Federal Paper Board for $3.5billion, and paid $1.15 billion for a controlling stake in Carter HoltHarvey, New Zealand's largest timber-plantation owner. Boise Cascade soldits Rainy River Forest Products unit to Canada's Stone-Consolidated andacquired a 6.4% interest in Stone. In 1996, look for plenty more deals, asthe powerhouses buy slices of global markets and extend their reach overraw materials.   As the year begins, demand for white paper is lolling at 7% belowyear-ago levels. Demand should recover smartly in 1996, especially incoated papers used in glossy advertising, which should be bolstered by aPresidential election and the Atlanta Olympics. ``The coated grades areholding their own,'' says Paul C. Latta, an analyst at Ragen MacKenzie inSeattle. Newsprint, though, which climbed 40% in price from 1994 to 1995,could be headed for a fall. Inventories are at record levels, and highprices are dampening demand.   Recycling should continue to attract much of the growth in the pulpindustries. Minimills, which convert old cardboard into pulp, areproliferating as such companies as Weyerhaeuser and Boise Cascade Corp.expand. Recycled materials should jump 26% in 1996, while production ofmarketwood pulp--the product of virgin wood chips--rises just 0.3%,according to the American Forest & Paper Assn. The extra pulp will go intoproducing more linerboard, kraft paper, and corrugated paper, creating aplentiful supply of those products and damping their prices, says LarryKatz of Pacific Crest Securities in Portland, Ore.HOUSEBOUND. The lumber industry, meanwhile, is struggling against competingmaterials and a surge of imports. Canadian lumber now accounts for around35% of the U.S. market, up from 28% in 1989. At the same time, growingnumbers of builders are substituting steel for wood, with steel-framehousing growing from 500 to 80,000 houses in the past four years. And totalhousing starts will rise only modestly in 1996, to around 1.4 million. Allthat should spell a continued slump in lumber prices.   Meanwhile, the wood industry will press ahead with such promisingengineered products as oriented strand board, a cheap new kind offiberboard. By 1998, there should be over 7 billion feet of oriented strandboard capacity, up from zero in 1988, estimates L. Pendleton Siegel, CEO ofPotlatch Corp., based in San Francisco. This should claim fully 50% of thefiberboard capacity, prompting a brawl. ``There's going to be a bloodymarket for the next two years,'' says Siegel. So don't be surprised to seea few of the losers get gobbled up by the industry giants.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Demand for coated paper used in advertising should be bolstered bythe Presidential election and Olympic Games.   -- Producers avoided bringing on fresh capacity when prices soared.Negatives   -- Mills making cheap, new engineered wood products will prompt a brawlin the fiberboard market.   -- The lumber industry faces intense competition from Canadianproducers.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Forest ProductsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Paper And PaperboardCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE WEB KEEPS SPREADINGThe new market should grow 100% and create even greater opportunitiesBy:By Neil Gross, with Amy Cortese, in New YorkNetscape Navigator. Java. Yahoo. These pioneering products and services forusing the World Wide Web--and their creators--stole the headlines in 1995.But Web software is still just a blip on the software radar screen. In1996, Web-related programs--from browsers such as the Navigator to``firewalls'' that protect corporate data--will be worth less than 1% ofthe $100 billion-plus global software market, says Hambrecht & Quist Inc.analyst J. Neil Weintraut (chart).   What the numbers don't show, however, is the subterranean shock wave theWeb has sent across the software industry. Not only is the potentialhuge--with annual growth of 100%, sales of Internet programs could hit $4billion in 2000, Weintraut reckons--but the rush of millions of PC usersinto cyberspace could change every aspect of the software business. Therace to cater to cybernauts has unleashed the biggest epidemic of startupfever seen in years. And companies such as Microsoft, IBM, and Oracle arenow scrambling to make the Internet part of their core strategies.   Once again, the software industry is exuberantly reinventing itself.Indeed, the Internet revolution comes as growth in other softwarecategories is slowing. Sales of mainframe programs have been bumping alongat single-digit growth rates, and Anthony Picardi, a group vice-presidentat International Data Corp., figures the $19.3 billion mainframe softwaremarket will grow less than 2% over the next four years, to $19.6 billion in1999.READY TO JUMP. The huge market for personal computer office``suites''--collections of programs that include spreadsheets, wordprocessing, and presentation graphics programs--is also reachingsaturation. But sales are poised for a 20% cyclical jump in 1996, asmillions of PC users upgrade to Windows 95, predicts Goldman, Sachs & Co.analyst Rick G. Sherlund. The hottest market will remain software forso-called client-server computing--which should grow at 40%, he figures.   All told, says IDC's Picardi, the global market for packagedsoftware--about 75% of it made in America--will grow 10% in 1996, to $102billion. The number would be bigger if not for mainframe software, whichmakes up nearly 20% of worldwide sales. ``Other industries would die for asimilar growth rate,'' Picardi says.   And what about the new ``Webware''? In 1995, businesses set up Web siteslike periscopes, to see what was going on. This year, as they toy with theidea of electronic commerce across the Net, many companies will start usinginternal Web sites as windows into their own networks--creating``intranets.'' Says analyst Rich Edwards at Robertson, Stephens & Co. inSan Francisco: ``Every software company will have to participate.''   No question, intranets are coming. Corporate computer managersincreasingly see Web pages as a means to inexpensively publish and shareinformation internally. This is very much what Lotus Development Corp. hadin mind with Notes, a ``groupware'' program that helps teams of employeesshare documents or business applications simultaneously over a network. Onthe Net, much of this can be done on shared Web ``pages''--for a fractionof what it costs to buy, install, and customize Notes. Lotus, acquired byIBM for $3 billion last summer, is furiously rejiggering Notes for theNet.   Meanwhile, Web software startups--including Netscape CommunicationsCorp.--can cash in. Companies such as Cambridge (Mass.)-based VermeerTechnologies Inc. and OpenMarket Inc. should do a brisk business sellingsoftware that helps companies build and maintain Web sites.   The Web is also driving demand for new programming tools such asobject-oriented software languages. Versant Object Technology in MenloPark, Calif., ParcPlace-Digitalk in Sunnyvale, Calif., and Steven P. Jobs'sNeXT Computer are tailoring their programs--which let programmers buildsoftware from reusable chunks of code--to run across the Internet. Theupshot: Sales of object-oriented programs should double from this year's$300 million, according to IDC.   This explosion of Web activity has forced most software giants torethink their game plans. Microsoft Corp. is building Internet links intoall of its software products, from office suites to operating systems, andthe software giant is licensing Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Java programminglanguage. IBM has also made the Internet a priority: Big Blue has createdan Internet software unit. Oracle is offering a family of Web programs,including a ``browser'' and Web versions of its database software.   One reason industry executives and analysts gush over cyberspace: It isone of the few domains where Microsoft is not dominant. A quick look at thepackaged software market explains why that matters. Most of this year'sgrowth in office suites will go directly to Microsoft, which owns about 90%of the $3 billion market. In addition, a large portion of multimediaCD-ROMs sold this year will be Microsoft titles. Goldman's Sherlund figuresMicrosoft's net will hit $2.2 billion in calendar 1996--up 20% over lastyear--on sales of $8.7 billion, up 16%.SOUPED UP. Another place where Microsoft has not been able to dominate isclient-server computing. In 1996, big corporations will continue todownsize their computer operations from mainframes to networks ofservers--usually souped-up PCs or Unix workstations--and PC ``clients.'' Inthe process, they'll pump billions of dollars into client-server databasesfrom Sybase, Informix, and industry leader Oracle, whose sales will jump40% in 1996, to $4.9 billion, predicts Sherlund.   Microsoft is far from discouraged in client-server software. A serverversion of Windows NT is replacing Unix on many corporate networks and thesoftware giant expects strong sales in 1996 from its long-awaitedrelational database upgrade, called SQL Server 6.0. It is expected to sellfor a fraction of the price of Oracle, Sybase, and Informix programs. And,Microsoft plans to package SQL Server with other server programs, such assystems management packages, and offer the bundles at steep discounts.   Mainframe software vendors have also hopped on the client-serverbandwagon. Take Computer Associates International Inc. The Islandia (N.Y.)software maker's revenue from client-server software grew 79% in the firsthalf of 1995 from a year earlier, while mainframe software sales--still 70%of the company--grew just 18%.   Continued corporate downsizing is another boon to software makers.Having already stripped away layers of middle managers, many largecompanies are trying to squeeze out further efficiencies. One way is tojunk disparate computer systems that run various operating units.``Integrated enterprise software,'' supplied by the likes of SAP, Baan, andOracle, does the job (box). Another way to boost efficiency: automatingcustomer support. Newly public companies such as Vantive, Clarify, andRemedy have software that creates electronic files, or ``cases,'' from eachcustomer query or complaint. Later, anyone in sales, marketing, or customersupport can call up the entire history of the transaction. Hambrecht &Quist's Weintraut figures sales of such ``customer interaction systems,''roughly $400 million in 1995, could grow to $3 billion by 2000.   Merger mania swept through software in 1995 and is likely to continue in1996. Computer Associates bought Legent, IBM bought Lotus and, in December,SoftKey International Inc. pulled off a hostile deal to take over LearningCo. On Dec. 20, Informix Corp. bid for Illustra Information Technologies.But, with the Net spawning new startups every day, for every company thatgets merged out of existence, two new ones are bound to appear.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Windows 95 will spark demand for educational, entertainment, andbusiness software.   -- Businesses are rushing onto the Web, spawning markets such as digitalcommerce.Negatives   -- Diversity in desktop software will shrink as Microsoft's clout growsand Apple's shrinks.   -- Heavy discounting of software suites--and growing developmentcosts--will make life harder for small players.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Software & Data ProcessingIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: World Wide Web SoftwareCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457YOUR DATA SHOULD MEET MY DATABy:By Neil Gross in New York, with Gail Edmondson in ParisHark back to the old days in the computer industry--about two years ago. Asalesperson at Digital Equipment Corp. could drill down in a companydatabase to fish out technical specs for a customer. But the data producedmight not match what a Digital inventory manager kept separately on herdesktop computer, resulting in annoying delays while users cross-checkedtheir information.   That's why Digital and dozens of other companies are hot on so-called``integrated enterprise software.'' The idea is to junk all the old``legacy'' systems that separately handle a large company's customerorders, inventory, shipping, and logistical information, and replace themwith a single set of programs to run the company. That way, all the datalook the same, regardless of who's tapping in or where they work.   Large multinationals already have installed billions of dollars' worthof these systems. This has flooded the coffers of industry leaders SAP inGermany and Baan in Holland. Americans missed the first wave, but nowOracle Corp., Microsoft Corp., and others are plunging in. The sector ispoised to grow 14% worldwide, to $11.1 billion in 1996, according toInternational Data Corp.   The market for related services is a gold mine, too. Deloitte & Touche'sconsulting arm rakes in $200 million a year advising SAP customers. It's``a phenomenal success,'' says Darvis Cormier, a D&T internationaldirector.   Such services don't come cheap: A switchover can cost a largemanufacturer $100 million, making it ``the most expensive systems decisiona company has ever made,'' says Dick J. Fishburn, chief information officerof Digital, which is installing SAP software.    And if your company buys such a system, your integration problemsaren't instantly solved, warns Vinnie Mirchandani, an analyst with GartnerGroup, based in Stamford, Conn. He calls enterprise systems ``a 40%solution masquerading as a 100% solution.'' Still, a 40% solution is betterthan none. And that should put plenty of wind underneath the wings ofsoftware and services companies in this hot niche.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THIS YEAR, SERVERS WILL BE KINGPCs are everywhere. Now the spotlight is on machines that can link themBy:By John W. Verity in New YorkFor more than a decade now, the computer industry has been driven by avision of giving everyone his or her own computer. Large organizations haverushed to put a PC onto every desktop and stopped expanding their budgetsfor mainframes. Engineers switched in droves from sharing minicomputers torunning their own workstations. Families have scooped up millions of PCs,too, for use in home offices and to entertain the kids.   Now, with personal computers seemingly everywhere, the spotlight isshifting back to larger computers--the kind that can do work for manydifferent people at once. Collectively known as network servers--everythingfrom souped-up PCs selling for $10,000 to mainframes andsupercomputer-class systems costing millions--big iron will be in for themost technical change and competitive action during 1996 and the followingfew years. ``Servers are regaining their place as the fulcrum of businesscomputing,'' says Gregory Garry, analyst at Dataquest Inc. ``They're thecenterpiece of the network.''   Servers also remain the sweet spot of the computer market, offeringgross margins of 30% to 50%, vs. the 15% or less seen in PCs. ``Servers areclearly the healthiest segment of the computer industry,'' says LauraConigliaro, computer analyst at Prudential Securities Inc. In corporations,small servers store files and move E-mail for departments. Giant serverscan act as data warehouses--massive libraries of detailed product, sales,and financial information gathered from across an organization's many othercomputers. The World Wide Web, with close to 100,000 servers in place andhundreds more being attached every week, is also a major contributor toserver demand.PRICE-CUTTING. All told, International Data Corp. (IDC) estimates thatshipments of servers based on PCs--machines using Intel chips or souped-upversions of Apple's Macintosh--will grow 35%, to 1.05 million units, from777,000 in 1995. Shipments of servers based on proprietary hardwaredesigns, from companies such as Hewlett-Packard Co. and Sun MicrosystemsInc., will increase about 15% in 1996.   At the same time, PC sales will remain strong. Dataquest estimates thatU.S. consumption of PCs in 1996 will hit 25.6 million units, up 16% from1995 (chart). Worldwide consumption will grow by 19%, to 68.7 millionunits. Price-cutting will stunt growth in dollar terms: IDC reckons totalU.S. spending on PCs will be up only 12.6% over 1995.   The news in other categories is mixed. Workstation shipments areprojected to grow from 847,000 units in 1995 to 982,500 units in 1996.Sales of IBM-compatible mainframes will fall, from $7.5 billion in 1995 to$7.1 billion in 1996, as a line of cheaper machines based onmicroprocessors grows more popular.THE PREFAB FOUR. Although booming, the server market may be in for somejarring changes in 1996, thanks to Intel Corp. Along with its newtop-of-the-line P6, or Pentium Pro, microprocessor, Intel has launched acomplete circuit board containing four P6 chips. This Quad P6 board isdesigned specifically as a building block for low-cost servers. Like theprefabricated motherboards from Intel that helped relatively small PackardBell and Gateway 2000 beat IBM and Compaq to market with the firstPentium-based PCs, the Quad P6 board could put lots of new players into theserver business overnight and change the market's economics. Bottom line:Margins will begin to resemble those of the cookie-cutter desktop-PCmarket.   Intel's Quad P6 won't just affect the low end of the server business.Companies such as Sequent Computer, Chen Systems, and Data General plan togang as many as a dozen of the boards together to produce systems that canoutperform traditional mainframe computers for a fraction of the cost.PaineWebber Inc. computer analyst Stephen K. Smith figures that P6-basedservers will sell for less than half the price of proprietary servers atthe same performance level. It's ``one of the most significant hardwaredevelopments to impact the computer industry since Compaq cloned the IBMPC,'' he says.   Luckily for HP, Sun, and other companies making non-Intel-based servers,Quad P6-based machines won't start shipping in volume until late 1996, andthere will be a lag before software can be readied to take advantage ofthem. But the warning shots have been fired for another major battle in anindustry that seems to thrive on turmoil.Prognosis '96Positives   -- As computers get cheaper, they will become even more central to theeconomy.   -- Electronic commerce is fueling demand for high-capacity Web servers.Negatives   -- Standardized parts and designs will gnawat the profitability ofmidrange and large computers.   -- Personal-computer makers will feel more pressure from Intel's gradualentry into PC manufacturing.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Computer Equipment & PeripheralsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Personal ComputersCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SILICON GOES FROM PEAK TO PEAKIn a boom that could last a decade, turning out enough chips is the bigproblemBy:By Robert D. Hof in San Francisco and Otis Port in New YorkFor the companies that plant those teensy transistors on the silicon chipsfrom which personal computers and other electronic gadgets sprout, 1996shapes up as the fourth consecutive year of 20%-plus growth--26%, accordingto the Semiconductor Industry Assn. That's remarkable. Chipmaking has longgyrated through boom-and-bust cycles every three years or so. And whilegrowth in 1996 won't match 1995's spectacular 40% sales jump, analystsstill look for chipmakers to post per-share earnings gains averaging 29%.   The outlook is for steady growth until 2000, and perhaps beyond.``There's going to be a black hole for computing power for at least adecade,'' says Gordon A. Campbell, chairman of startup 3Dfx InteractiveInc., which makes chips that accelerate onscreen graphics for multimediaPCs. The optimism isn't limited to Silicon Valley entrepreneurs. VladiCatto, chief economist at Texas Instruments Inc., says the industry mightexpand by 20% a year for the next two decades. By comparison, since TI madethe world's first microchip 36 years ago, the industry has averaged 15%annual gains.OFF THE ROLLER COASTER? To be sure, not every sector is booming. The growthrate for multimedia PCs seems to be slowing, for example. No matter. Mostchipmakers won't be able to satisfy demand anyhow unless the whole PCbusiness falters. ``The rate at which semiconductors are going into [awidening profusion of products] has just skyrocketed,'' says G. DanHutcheson, president of chip watcher VLSI Research Inc. This ever-expandingbase of customers means producers are becoming less vulnerable to a hiccupin any one market, adds Jean-Philippe Dauvin, chief economist at Europeanchipmaker SGS-Thomson Microelectronics. That's a key reason why theindustry believes its roller-coaster cycles are a thing of the past. Whilechipmakers can't escape broad economic swings, these ups and downs will bea merry-go-round ride by comparison.   Because PCs remain the main engine boosting silicon's rocket for now,the immediate beneficiaries will be the makers of dynamic random-accessmemory (DRAM) chips and, of course, Intel Corp. New PCs gobble two to fourtimes as much memory as older models, so DRAM shipments could soar 40% thisyear. As for Intel, look for the microprocessor king to sell 25% more``brain'' chips this year than in 1995.   Despite fatter sales, Intel cautions that its incredible 55% grossmargins could shrink, because of its rapidly growing business in PCmotherboards and plug-in boards. On the other hand, some analysts sayIntel's profits could actually improve. Its chip sales are shiftingdramatically from 486 microprocessors to higher-priced Pentium models(chart), and Intel may pare prices less aggressively. That's becauseup-and-coming microprocessor rivals such as Cyrix and NexGen--soon tobecome a division of Advanced Micro Devices--aren't cranking out enoughchips to cramp Intel's style. Advanced Micro Devices Inc. recently said itsfourth-quarter profits would fall short because it isn't grabbing as much486 business from Intel as it hoped.   NexGen Inc. and Cyrix Corp. are hardly the only companies facing acapacity squeeze. In fact, lack of capacity will rob the chip industry ofseveral percentage points of potential growth this year. ``Everybody'sstraining just to get enough fabs out,'' says Ray Stata, chairman of AnalogDevices Inc. ``Fab'' is chip-speak for wafer-fabrication plant, thesqueaky-clean factories that make semiconductors.   Scarce capacity means continuing pain for the fabless companies thatoften design the industry's leapfrog chips. To guarantee production oftheir next wonder circuits, several fabless companies are buying into chipproducers. Cirrus Logic Inc., the biggest fabless company, plans to spend$2 billion over the next five years. Part of the money will go for a 15%stake in United Silicon, a new chip factory in Taiwan.   Wafer fabs now cost as much as $1.3 billion each, and the industry willneed to pour the foundation for a new one every week, figures TI's Catto,if chips are to reach the $331 billion level predicted for 2000 by marketresearcher Dataquest Inc. However, until investors share the industry'snewfound confidence that chips have outgrown their boom-and-bust days, thestock market could gum up Dataquest's long-range timetable. Absent that,the silicon horizon has a bright golden glow.Prognosis '96Positives   -- PCs continue to boom, driving sales of memory chips and Intel'sPentium microprocessors.   -- Use of chips in a growing variety of products will smooth thetraditional boom-and-bust cycles.Negatives   -- Capacity shortages could hurt producers of memory chips andchipmakers that contract out.   -- Investor jitters about possible market slowdowns could sink stocksand limit chipmakers' investing in new plants.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: SemiconductorsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: MicroprocessorsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE NOT-SO-CALM BEFORE THE STORMAll hell will break loose when deregulation hits. For now, business isstrongBy:By Catherine Arnst in New YorkThe telecommunications industry is setting off on a great adventure in1996: The forces of competition are being unleashed in all parts of thebusiness for the first time. However, most of the year will be aprofit-boosting calm before the storm--``the last good year beforecompetition starts in earnest,'' says Simon W. Flannery, an analyst at J.P.Morgan Securities Inc. ``The cable companies rolling out telephones, theBells getting into cable, PCS [wireless] systems being switched on--all thethings we're just guessing at at the moment will start coming into focus in'96.''   Congress had tried for two decades to pass legislation that wouldoverhaul the 1934 rules regulating telecommunications. Finally, at the tailend of 1995, Congress was able to write a sweeping telecom-deregulationbill that allows long-distance carriers, local phone companies, andcable-TV operators to enter one another's markets. And even withoutCongress, about half the states are freeing up local phone markets. By nextJanuary, competition should be busting out all over.   The telecom legislation allows long-distance and cable-TV operators intothe local phone market immediately. Local monopolies can offer longdistance and cable TV outside their regions at once, and in-region as soonas competition is established. If there are no hitches, Bell Atlantic Corp.Vice-Chairman James G. Cullen predicts that consumers in some parts of thecountry will be able to choose a local phone company by the end of 1996.GRAB A PARTNER. As all the industry's players scramble to ready themselvesfor this brave new world, expect to see a flurry of alliances,partnerships, and outright acquisitions. Bell Atlantic Corp. and NynexCorp., which have teamed up in three wireless and entertainmentpartnerships already, are likely to offer long- distance together as well.Analysts say other such pairings are probable. And look for buyouts ofsmall long-distance and alternative-access companies such as WorldCom andMFS Communications.   In the meantime, business is booming. Demand for Internet access, thegrowth of telecommuting, the huge popularity of cellular phones, and asurge in data transmission all make telephony a growth business.Long-distance calling traffic accelerated by 8% in 1995 and is expected togrow another 8% this year. Local phone companies should add access lines ata rate of 3% this year, compared with 1% to 2% earlier in the decade.   The result: Phone companies are bringing in money like never before.Steven R. Yanis of Oppenheimer & Co. expects revenues for the three biggestlong-distance carriers--AT&T, MCI Communications, and Sprint--to grow by8.2% in 1996, to $118 billion, while the seven Baby Bells should see 3.2%growth in revenues, to $96 billion.   Once competition starts, price wars will break out and margins will beunder pressure. Plus, the phone companies have to start getting ready forcompetition now, an expensive task. Market researcher Forrester ResearchInc. in Cambridge, Mass., predicts that the top local and long-distancecarriers will need to spend $30 billion over the next three years tobankroll their competitive strategies. J.P. Morgan estimates that capitalspending is expected to increase to $130 per phone line, from $120 per linein 1995.   The local phone monopolies in particular must develop a competitivemindset. ``They really need to get much more focused on customer service,''says Larry R. Levitan, managing partner for Andersen Consulting'scommunications group. For proof, just look at a new study from Deloitte &Touche: Nearly 40% of corporate telecom managers say they would be likelyto switch from their traditional local-service provider if given a choiceof comparable quality. That's why industry analysts think phone companieswith large rural territories and few corporate customers, such as SBCCommunications Inc. and U S West Inc., are best positioned for thederegulated world, since they are the least likely to face competition.   With the Bells freed to enter new markets such as long distance andcable, deregulation should be a ``win-win'' for everyone in the long run,says Yanis. ``I truly believe that competition will increase the size ofthe whole market. This will not be a zero-sum game. It's a positive-sumgame.'' And the starting gun is about to go off.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Deregulation will unleash a wave of investment and creativity.   -- Demand is booming. Long-distance usage keeps rising, and householdsare adding second lines in record numbers.Negatives   -- While deregulation is in sight, state and federal agencies must workout hundreds of details first.   -- Carriers will have to spend billions of dollars to get into oneanother's markets.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: TelecommunicationsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Long DistanceCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ROBUST AND READY TO BRAWLDrugmakers are flush, so more mergers--even hostile ones--may be on thehorizonBy:By Joseph Weber in PhiladelphiaWith stock prices setting records and earnings climbing at double-digitrates again, pharmaceutical executives are heading for maybe their bestyear since the roaring '80s. More unit sales, more freedom to raise prices,and savings from restructurings are hypercharging growth. ``We're not inthe doldrums of the early '90s anymore,'' says Robert L. Andrews, aDeloitte & Touche managing director.   Heavy margin pressure, sharp staff cuts, and deep discounting are fadingas fast as memories of President Clinton's election-year attacks ondrugmaker price-gouging. For 10 leading U.S. and European drugmakers, netincome this year may rise as much as 12%, to $18.6 billion, while salesclimb 8%, to $106.2 billion, estimates Cowen & Co. analyst Stephen Scala.The healthiest companies could repeat 1995's 20% earnings gains.   Yet execs can't afford to be complacent. Mergers have reshaped theindustry, and more may be on the way. The biggest companies gain an edge infunding research and development, bargaining with managed-care buyers, andcompeting globally. By mid-December, the industry had tallied $41.2 billionin deals, up from 1994's record $36.1 billion, according to Windhover'sdirectory, 1995 Health Care Strategist.TWISTED ARMS. Foreign buyers set the pace in 1995, led by Glaxo Holdings'record-breaking $14 billion purchase of Burroughs Wellcome, Hoechst's $7.1billion acquisition of Marion Merrell Dow, and the stock-for-stock mergerof Upjohn and Pharmacia, valued at $7 billion. Hostile deals, such asJohnson & Johnson's $1.8 billion takeover of Cordis, a maker of cardiologydevices, could bring an unwilling partner or two to the altar this year.Says Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. analyst Neil B. Sweig: ``The whitegloves are off.''   Who's next? Industry titans Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. and Eli Lilly & Co.figure prominently in Wall Street speculation as potential acquirers of themidsize likes of Monsanto Co.'s Searle & Co. unit or perennial mergertarget Warner-Lambert Co. Well-heeled Swiss drugmakers Ciba-Geigy Ltd. andSandoz Ltd. also make likely buyer lists. Japanese drugmakers, whosestockholders are wrestling with tough times generally, could be alluring toglobal buyers.   Acquisitions aren't always the right tonic. Merck, SmithKline Beecham,and Lilly are still chasing a payoff from pharmacy-benefit managers, thedistribution operations for which they together have paid $13 billion since1993. At the same time, Rite Aid Corp. and other drugstore chains arebuilding competing units. After shelling out $6.6 billion in 1993 for MedcoContainment Services Inc., a big benefit manager, Merck & Co. has turnedcool toward all kinds of mergers. Says CEO Raymond V. Gilmartin: ``Majoracquisitions would be a diversion for us.''STICKER SHOCK. Acquisition fever may be tempered, too, by slightly morepricing freedom. ``Companies are less inclined to give discounts and reduceprices,'' says Wayne P. Yetter, chief executive of Astra Merck Inc. Indeed,some prices--chiefly to retail drugstore buyers not covered by insuranceplans--have been climbing faster than inflation.   The industry's financial health conceals a shortfall of novelblockbusters. While drugmakers squeeze ever more sales out of big producerssuch as cholesterol-fighters and antidepressants, few have offered trulynew potential $1 billion sellers recently. One likely exception: theosteoporosis treatment Fosamax, a drug from Italy's Istituto Gentili beingmarketed by Merck in the U.S. Another potential big winner is J&J'sRisperdal, a schizophrenia treatment.   Drugmakers aren't helping their cause by limiting R&D. ThePharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America says the 8% growth inindustry R&D spending in 1995 was the lowest in more than two decades. ``Iworry that by reducing the rate of increase in research, we are going toreduce the opportunities'' for new drugs, says Schering-Plough CEO RichardJ. Kogan. He says his company will outpace its peers in 1996, boosting its$650 million in R&D spending by more than 10%.   R&D cannot be neglected. Pfizer Inc. credits new drugs for boosting itsnet income an estimated 20% last year, to about $1.6 billion, on a 23% risein sales, to $10.2 billion. This year, analysts expect Pfizer to nearlymatch that growth. Luckily for Pfizer's competitors, this won't be the yearthey'll have to pay for underinvestment. There's enough right with the drugbusiness that there will be plenty of gains to go around.Prognosis '96Positives   -- More providers are using medicine instead of surgery orpsychotherapy.   -- Pressure against price hikes is easing, helping broaden profitmargins.   -- Wider uses are being found for big sellers such ascholesterol-reducers.Negatives   -- With few new blockbusters, drugmakers will battle to sell more ofwhat's already in the medicine cabinet.   -- Merging companies are jeopardizing their futures by cutting R&D.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: PharmaceuticalsIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Drug ProfitsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE MEDIA CIRCUS IS STILL IN TOWNThrills and chills as global demand keeps the buying frenzy goingBy:By Ronald Grover in Los AngelesIt has been more than a decade since television host Monty Hall lookedbehind that curtain for the last time. But in the frenzied media world,every day seems to be a rerun of Let's Make a Deal. Walt Disney Co. plunkeddown $19 billion in stock and cash to buy Capital Cities/ABC Inc.Westinghouse Electric Corp. bought CBS Inc. News Corp. Chairman RupertMurdoch jumped on the Internet, launched a sports channel to rival ESPN,and then made plans to beam TV signals to Latin America. And in cable? Lastyear, a staggering $25 billion in deals were struck, as nearly one in fivesubscribers saw their cable companies change hands.   In 1996, the media dealmaking won't be confined to the TV and moviebusinesses. USA Today publisher Gannett Co. is still on the prowl aftercompleting its $1.7 billion purchase of Multimedia Inc. Other publishingdeals may be in the offing. Spurring on the activity is an unquenchableworldwide thirst for American-made movies and TV programs--and a surprisingrebound in Americans' appetite for the printed word.   Programming and distribution entities will keep getting married in1996--programmers to ensure an outlet for their works, distributors to filltheir pipelines. General Electric Co. is likely to go shopping for partnersagain this year, after failing in 1995 to persuade Disney to buy ahalf-interest in its NBC Inc. unit. Possible candidates: Seagram's MCAsubsidiary, which includes Universal Pictures, or Sony's Hollywood-basedstudios. Microsoft Corp., a partner with NBC in an on-line news channel,could also be a bidder. After buying CBS, Westinghouse is still looking tobolster its programming and could strike an alliance with a Hollywoodstudio as well. ``The idea is to protect yourself from being shut out asthe big get bigger,'' says Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Jessica Reif.NET GAINS. Propelling the movement toward bigness in 1996 is the expectedpassage of the long-awaited federal telecommunications bill. Among otherthings, the legislation would immediately allow cable and telephonecompanies to compete in one another's markets and gradually raise ceilingson the number of radio and TV stations a company can own. That shouldprompt a new wave of acquisitions, says Gene F. Jankowski, managingdirector at Veronis, Suhler & Associates Inc., a New York investment bank.Among those rumored ready to sell is billionaire Ronald O. Perelman, whoseNew World Entertainment Inc. broadcast and production company is loadedwith debt.   Media companies will benefit in 1996 from a robust advertising marketthat for the third year running should outperform the overall economy.Boosted by the Olympic Games in Atlanta and U.S. political campaigns,domestic advertising in all media should grow by 7.8%, to $174 billion,predicts Robert J. Coen, a senior vice-president at ad agencyMcCann-Erickson Worldwide. The four major broadcast networks will be amongthe biggest winners, with a projected 12.5% increase, to $13 billion.NEW SYSTEMS. The ad increase isn't the only good news for networktelevision. After losing audiences to cable and syndicated programming foryears, the number of sets tuned into the networks will stabilize in 1996 atroughly 64% of those viewing TV, predicts Veronis Suhler. But not everynetwork will survive. Time Warner Inc.'s struggling Warner Bros. networkwill likely seek a merger with startup UPN, a joint venture of UnitedBroadcasting and Viacom Inc.'s Paramount Pictures Corp.   Cable television, meanwhile, will seek growth by adding services ratherthan subscribers. After adding 9 million subscribers over the previous fiveyears, the industry's customer base will grow by roughly 1 million in 1996,according to Veronis Suhler. To maintain the cash-flow growth, cablecompanies will need to build systems to battle the telcos, and many cablecompanies will introduce modem services for high-speed data transfer laterin 1996. Other companies, such as Tele-Communications Inc., will moveaggressively overseas into markets with greater potential to addsubscribers.   Foreign companies--which have sat on the sidelines since the disastrousforay of Japanese companies in Hollywood--will also reemerge on theAmerican media scene. The sale of Tur-ner Broadcasting System Inc. to TimeWarner alerted many of them to the dwindling number of companies availableto fill the Information Superhighway with films and TV shows. Dutchelectronics giant Philips' PolyGram entertainment unit will aggressivelyseek an acquisition. So might German media powerhouse Bertelsmann, whichrecently opened a flashy Los Angeles headquarters. One likely target isMGM/UA, which is rising from the ashes with such films as GoldenEye and GetShorty. The studio's owner, French bank Credit Lyonnais, recently hiredinvestment bankers Lazard Freres & Co. to sell off the studio.PAPER PROFITS. Other bidding wars will feature Sony Corp.'s Los Angelesfilm unit and Thorn EMI's record division. Murdoch is a possible bidder forEMI. So is Disney, which has a small record company with few stars. Thebiggest bidding war, however, could center on Sony. After parting ways withU.S. CEO Michael P. Schulhof, Sony is likely to try unloading a piece ofits film company. Sony insiders say Murdoch has expressed interest.Investment bankers say GE is eager to line up more content forbroadcasting. And, despite his frequent denials, Microsoft Chairman WilliamH. Gates III may also be interested.   Hollywood production will increase in 1996 to satisfy the boomingforeign market and domestic cable operators. The year will feature morethan the usual numbers of retreaded oldies. Universal Pictures, with freshcapital from new owner Seagram, will churn out films based on old TV showsMcHale's Navy, Flipper, and Sergeant Bilko. Tom Cruise will headline a filmversion of Mission: Impossible from Viacom's Paramount Pictures unit.   The newspaper business lacks Hollywood's glitz but had a marquee year in1995, with earnings gains of 14.8% at 11 big newspaper publishingcompanies, according to Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette (DLJ) Securities Corp.McCann-Erickson's Coen says that in 1996, advertising revenue will increaseby a modest 5.5%, to $4.25 billion, down from an 11% rise through the firstnine months of 1995. That will dampen industry earnings growth to anaverage of 6.5% in 1996, DLJ says.   Those kinds of returns don't satisfy many newspaper publishers, who saythey need to make drastic cost reductions to ensure their long-term health.``We're starting to see a little breathing room, but not an awful lot,''says Mark H. Willes, Times Mirror Co.'s new CEO. In 1995, Willes cuthundreds of jobs at the flagship Los Angeles Times and closed the New YorkCity edition of Long Island-based Newsday.   Still, newspaper companies are hardly turning their backs on theirprinting presses--high paper prices and the Info Highway notwithstanding.Evidence of that is Gannett's purchase of Multimedia. Also, in 1996, TheNew York Times will launch a Northeastern edition, while the Los AngelesTimes will revive plans to distribute its paper in Washington, D.C.   Why the newfound optimism? For one thing, readership of newspapers is upas the number of Americans 35 and over expands. Those demographics willalso help book and magazine publishers. In 1996, a slew of new specialtymagazines will likely hit the newsstands. Century 21 Real Estate Corp., forinstance, will launch a new home magazine with Hachette FilipacchiMagazines Inc. Book publishers intend to expand their lines to fill theshelves of book superstores and discount chains. Hearst Corp. will soonlaunch its first hardcover line for adults. Even MTV will have its own bookline, geared to the under-35 crowd.   Which media companies will strike the audience's fancy in 1996? That'shard to say. But these days, if you can't produce a hit you can always buythe hitmaker.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The Olympics, the election, and a revived economy should increase TVad revenue by about 8%.   -- Telecom deregulation will spur a burst of investment by phonecompanies in cable TV.   -- Foreign demand for U.S. entertainment remains strong.Negatives   -- Technology disappointments will slow adoption of interactive TV.   -- Smaller players may be shunted aside.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Media/EntertainmentIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Media SpendingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BABY BELLS TAKE THEIR FIRST STEPS IN TINSELTOWNBy:By Ronald Grover in Los AngelesAs he stood before his shareholders at Ameritech Corp.'s annual meeting,chatting via a video hookup with Mickey Mouse, Chief Executive Richard C.Notebaert left little doubt that the telephone companies' pin-striped worldhad definitely gone Hollywood. In 1996, in a wide swath of head-to-headconfrontations from San Diego to Chicago, the Baby Bells intend finally tolaunch their attack on the cable-television industry.   The sweeping telecommunications bill in Congress would allow phonecompanies to challenge cable operators outside their home marketsimmediately, and within their regions once they prove their phone businessfaces competition. At first, phone-company offerings won't look all thatdifferent from what TV viewers get now by handing over $40 to $50 eachmonth to their local cable companies. Down the road, however, the phonecompanies hope to beat the cable companies to the interactive market withsuch features as home shopping and games. ``The idea is to outdo the cablecompanies, not just match them,'' says Howard Stringer, chairman of theTele-TV venture that includes three of the seven Baby Bells.   First off, the telcos plan to offer more channels. In Glendale Heights,Ill., Ameritech's network of optical fiber and copper cable will offer 90channels, compared with the local cable operator's current 60. InRiverside, Calif., where the 90 channels will be delivered over the airthrough a system called wireless cable, the reception is expected to besharper. With only 15% of Riverside County receiving cable, Pacific TelesisGroup expects to make inroads by stuffing marketing literature into theweekly phone bills it sends in the area.   The telcos won't lack programming firepower, either. Walt Disney Co., apartner with three of the Baby Bells and GTE Corp. in another jointventure, has assigned top animators to work on tailor-made programming,including a souped-up on-screen guide. As for Tele-TV, Stringer says it hasa production facility ready for action. For phone companies, Hollywood willbe quite a change from selling call-waiting service.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE PATIENT IS STABLE-FOR NOWHealth-care costs are in check, but the industry's upheaval isn't overBy:By Keith H. Hammonds in New YorkA deceptive peace has descended on the nation's $750 billion health-careindustry. There has been no word of a major health-maintenance organizationmerger for months. Hospital giant Columbia/HCA appears too occupieddigesting the acquisitions of years past to indulge its unrelentingappetite. And once again, reform sits deadlocked on Capitol Hill.   But just wait: Beneath the surface, a revolution rages on. ``The pace ofchange is stunning,'' says Dr. W. Allen Schaffer, head of managed care atCIGNA Healthcare Inc. ``We have to reevaluate our strategic assumptionsevery six months.'' Managed-care plans snatched some 5 million Americansfrom their traditional health insurers in 1995, bringing total enrollmentin HMOs to 56 million. Those are powerful numbers, and managed care nowcalls the shots. This year, it likely will force more consolidation thanever.   The industry, still fragmented and unwieldy, remains eminently ripe forrestructuring. Even though health-care inflation has slowed, spendingcontinues to edge upward as a share of the nation's economy (chart).Massive overhead associated with excess capacity remains, and ``the onlyway to slow growth in health-care spending is to debloat the system,'' saysJohn F. Hindelong, an analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette SecuritiesCorp.   That process is under way. Indeed, employers saw their health-care costsdrop in 1994 and remain flat in 1995 as millions of workers moved intocheaper managed-care plans. Employers' costs will probably rise slightly onaverage in 1996 as fewer additional employees switch to managed care,according to Foster & Higgins consultant John Erb.TEAMING UP. The cost squeeze means more upheaval for doctors and hospitals.``The market works, but it is very painful,'' says Robert L. Montgomery,chief executive at Alta Bates Health System in Berkeley, Calif. Alta Bates,forced to hold managed-care charges flat for a third straight year, hasjoined a hospital consortium to amass a total of 600,000 managed-carepatients--the better to negotiate with ever-larger HMOs. Even big,for-profit chains are looking at admissions increases of only 1% to 3% in1996, says DLJ's Hindelong, though consolidation will help the sector liftearnings by 15% to 20% next year.   The motivation is irresistible: As of Dec. 15, 1995, the industry hadseen a record 433 mergers and acquisitions, according to Securities DataCo. Increasingly, those mergers are crossing industry boundaries--producingnew ``integrated delivery systems'' that put hospitals, doctors, nursinghomes, and others under the same corporate roof. The object: one-stopshopping for managed-care companies, who require access to a broad array ofservices, says Coopers & Lybrand consultant Glenn A. Shively.CRAWLING REFORM. At the same time, HMOs are themselves driving for size,market penetration, and efficiency. Growth certainly won't come from ratehikes: Even the better HMOs will win premium increases of just 1% to 2%this year, says analyst Kenneth Abramowitz of Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.Rather, the HMOs need new bodies. Many will see big revenue gains this yearas more Medicare recipients move into managed-care plans--a shift thatwould accelerate if health-care reform succeeds.   And what of reform? Republicans and Democrats alike want to cut back onpayments to Medicare service providers. And doctors and hospitals face anenormous hit from a proposed provision requiring payment reductions iftotal Medicare spending exceeds budget. The outlook for Medicaid isparticularly cloudy--one reason many insurers are staying away from thebusiness.   In any case, governmental change will prove, as always, far lesspowerful than the market-driven charge for critical mass and market muscle.The resulting shakeout will be dramatic. Industry executives suspect thatAetna Life & Casualty and CIGNA, both on the verge of shedding hunks oftheir property-and-casualty businesses, could spend huge sums to turn theirmiddling health businesses into national HMOs.   Such new players, if well-conceived and adequately funded, couldtransform a compartmentalized industry that until now has fought itsbattles largely within cities or regions. ``By the end of the decade, wewill begin to see the endgame appear,'' says Gennaro J. Vasile, a longtimehospital executive who recently became head of Gemini Consulting Inc.'sNorth American health-care practice. And some fair hints should come evensooner.Prognosis '96Positives   -- For-profit hospitals should continue to gain market share and seeadmissions rise modestly.   -- Well-managed nursing homes will pick up business as hospital stayscontinue to shrink.Negatives   -- Rising cost pressure from managed care, plus lower Medicare andMedicaid rates, will keep a squeeze on margins.   -- Health-care reform hasn't addressed the uninsured, who will put aneven greater strain on the system.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Health-Care ServicesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Health-Care SpendingCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PICKING UP SPEEDAirlines are finally in the clear--and railroads may link upBy:By Wendy Zellner in DallasTransportation services expect modest growth in 1996, with airlines andrailroads faring best and truckers bringing up the rear. All three sectorsare focusing on improving productivity--and keeping a close eye on themerger scene.   Airline executives are happiest: After five years of losses andretrenchment, the industry has finally recovered. Net profits in 1995totaled about $2 billion, vs. a $279 million loss in 1994. In a sentimentwidely echoed by his peers, Continental Airlines Chief Executive Gordon M.Bethune says: ``It's a pretty rosy-looking '96.''   With traffic expected to grow only about 3% in 1996, airline profitswill hinge on keeping costs in check and capacity usage up. That won't beeasy. Unit costs will rise 1.5% to 2% for the major carriers, after holdingsteady in 1995, says analyst Samuel Buttrick of PaineWebber Inc. ``We'vepicked the low-hanging fruit,'' agrees Delta Air Lines Inc. CEO Ronald W.Allen. ``It's going to get tougher from here on out.''   The good news for airlines is that capacity should grow more slowly thantraffic, meaning fuller planes and higher fares. Systemwide capacity forU.S. airlines grew about 2.5% last year, and it's likely to show a similarincrease in '96, estimates David A. Swierenga, chief economist for the AirTransport Assn. That bodes well for fares. True, the rapid expansion ofsuch low-cost carriers as Southwest Airlines Co. and ValuJet Airlines Inc.will help to hold fares down. But Edward P. Gilligan, executivevice-president for American Express Co.'s Travel Management Services,predicts that airfares will rise an average of 3% to 4% this year, withonly limited and carefully targeted discounting.BOLD COMBINATIONS. The airlines' discipline is expected to translate intohigher profits. A bullish Steve Lewins of Gruntal & Co. figures majorairlines' earnings will soar 56% from 1995's modest level. The risingprofits complicate carriers' efforts to wrest major concessions from theirpilots so they can better compete with lower-cost carriers. Still, pilotsat American and Delta have recently announced a willingness to considerwage and work-rule changes on short-haul routes that airlines have beenfarming out to other carriers.   There's still one unsettling question as the industry reaches cruisingaltitude: Will airline mergers mar the flight plan? A new round ofdealmaking could distract execs from rebuilding balance sheets andimproving service. United Airlines Inc. decided last year not to pursue amarriage with USAir Inc. And American says it won't strike first. Still, noone rules out a new wave of merger mania in 1996.   Railroads, in contrast, are already pursuing bold combinations. UnionPacific Corp. is seeking government approval for its $3.9 billionacquisition of Southern Pacific Rail Corp. Its deal comes in response toBurlington Northern Inc.'s $4 billion purchase last year of Santa FePacific Corp., creating, at least for now, the nation's largest railroad.And takeover rumors continue to swirl around companies such as Conrail Inc.Meanwhile, U.S. railroads are expected to be bidders this year in theprivatization of Mexico's railroads.   Even without such deals, investors have much to cheer about. MerrillLynch & Co. analyst Michael H. Lloyd expects modest revenue gains of 4% to5% this year for the major railroads, but operating profits should grow atdouble that pace, thanks to productivity increases and cost-cutting. Thenew Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp., for example, has already slashedjobs and has also identified almost $1 billion in operating cost savingsover the next few years.   Labor remains a wild card as the railroad industry bargains with about adozen unions to reach new contracts. But bargaining is off to a strongstart with a tentative accord with the United Transportation Union,representing 25% of workers.   Truckers are hoping simply to bounce back from a bleak 1995. Theindustry has been hammered by a slowing of U.S. economic growth, a downturnin exports to Mexico, and excess capacity. After a banner 1994, bullishtrucking companies rapidly expanded their fleets with bigger trucks. Now,with softer demand and lackluster earnings, analysts expect a shakeout.Swift Transportation Co., for one, is hoping to benefit: The company hasmade four acquisitions since 1991 and is prowling for more. Truckers willhave to satisfy themselves with such hardscrabbling while railroads andairlines enjoy a relatively smooth ride.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Airline capacity should grow more slowly than traffic, meaning fullerplanes and higher fares.   -- Railroads are boosting productivity with computerization and fasterlocomotives.Negatives   -- Airlines will be hard-pressed to win cost reductions from labor whenprofits are soaring.   -- The trucking industry is suffering from excess capacity.   -- Railroads have yet to sign contracts with about a dozen unions.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Transportation ServicesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: U.S. AirlinesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHERE THERE'S A WILL, THERE ARE MISTAKESBy:EDITED BY AMY DUNKINGrace WeinsteinJacqueline Kennedy Onassis made the right moves when it came to estateplanning. Many people do not, deterred either by the thought of dying or bythe seeming complexity of well-made plans.   Don't be put off. After all, you can't take it with you. If you're notcareful, however, you can sure make a mess of leaving it behind, makingUncle Sam richer and your family poorer in the process. ``It'' is yourhard-earned property. The mess is what happens if you make one of theseall-too-common estate planning mistakes:-- Ignoring the whole thing. Seven out of 10 Americans reportedly diewithout making a will. ``The single most important thing you can do,'' saysStephan Leimberg, professor of taxation and estate planning at The AmericanCollege in Bryn Mawr, Pa., ``is get your papers in order and figure outwhat you want to do.''   Then, follow through. Remember, if you die without a will, you'releaving it up to your state to decide who gets what. If you're married,your assets may be split among your spouse and children. If your childrenare minors, your spouse would then have to get permission from the court tospend ``their'' money on their behalf. If you're not married, your closestblood relatives would inherit your worldly possessions--even if you have aclose friend you would prefer.   Living trusts, pushed in some quarters as a probate-free substitute fora will, have advantages and disadvantages. A living trust, which isrevocable and takes assets out of your name, can be helpful if you live inone of the few states, such as California, with high probate fees or if youwant backup should you become incapacitated. A living trust is a good``standby vehicle,'' says Bill Knox, a trust attorney with Neuberger &Berman in New York, because the trustees you have named can manage youraffairs if you cannot. But you won't save on income taxes with a livingtrust. And, unless all of your assets are owned by the trust, you won'tavoid probate. You'll still need a will to take care of any assets notsheltered by the trust at the time of your death.   You can prepare a legal will yourself, using software programs such asNolo's WillMaker (about $40, 800 992-6656). But if your affairs arecomplicated--if you have remarried or own investment real estate--you wouldbe better off consulting an attorney experienced in estate planning.   Once you draft it, don't file your will and forget it. Make a list ofall your assets and liabilities, so that your family won't flounder inignorance when you're gone. Then keep this list current and review yourwill every few years, more often if there are changes in tax law or yourown family circumstances. Marriage, divorce, newborn children orgrandchildren, or a move to another state should all be triggers forupdating your will.-- Using the $600,000 exemption from federal estate taxes only once. Jointownership can undermine good estate planning by wasting the second $600,000estate exemption otherwise available to the surviving spouse. So can usingwhat Ralph Engel, an attorney with Rosen & Reade in New York, calls a``sweetheart will,'' in which you leave everything to your spouse.Solution: Divide assets so that each spouse separately owns at least$600,000, then leave the first $600,000 in each estate in a bypass orcredit shelter trust. The survivor can receive income from the trust, andtap principal, but after the second spouse dies the remainder goes to thechildren or other designated beneficiaries free from estate tax.-- Failing to plan specifically for substantial retirement assets.Accumulated retirement funds--individual retirement account, 401(k), orprofit-sharing--make up a large portion of the estate for manymiddle-income Americans. In fact, it can be difficult for some couples todivvy up asset ownership if one spouse has a sizable retirement plan. Ifyou don't recognize the potential tax bite on large plan accumulations, youcould wind up losing as much as 85% of your retirement money to acombination of estate, income, and excise taxes.   Estate taxes start at 37% and go up to as much as 60%. An excise tax of15% applies to so-called excess accumulations at death of $1.5 million orso as well as to excess distributions during life of more than about$150,000 a year (the specific amount is a moving target because it dependson your age at the time of death and current Internal Revenue Serviceinterest rate assumptions). Income tax kicks in if your beneficiaries mustpull money out of your ira to pay any estate taxes that may be due.   You won't solve the problem by putting retirement money in trust. Engelcites an instance in which a trust was named beneficiary of a six-figureretirement plan. Because of that setup, the surviving wife, who couldotherwise have left the money untouched until she reached retirement age,couldn't do an ira rollover, so the money was immediately subject to incomeand estate tax.   One approach is to begin withdrawing your own retirement money early.Don't wait until the mandated withdrawal age of 70 1/2 if you will beaccumulating so much money that you'll be subject to excise tax. StevenLockwood, president of Lockwood Pension Services in New York, suggests thatif you have other assets you can pass to your heirs, you should ``plan todeplete your ira by age 90'' rather than leaving it in your taxableestate.-- Holding on to more money than you need. Successful people sometimesdon't realize until late in life that the government may get half of whatthey leave behind. By then, says Knox, ``it's too late to make much of adent in the looming tax losses.''   There are multiple solutions here. Start by making what Knox calls``invisible lifetime gifts.'' These are grants of up to $10,000 per personper year, as well as direct payments of tuition or medical bills, that arenot subject to gift tax. Giving these gifts to your family members whileyou're alive removes the money--and its subsequent appreciation--from yourtaxable estate. By helping your children buy a house or your grandchildrenattend summer camp, such gifts also let you enjoy the fruits of yourgenerosity along with the recipients.   If your estate is sizable, you may want to consider making larger giftsas well. Giving appreciating assets is the idea here, so that future growthis removed from your taxable estate. The cost basis for determining capitalgains on inherited assets is fixed at the time of death, or ``stepped up''from the original purchase price, while the cost basis of assets you giveduring your life is what you paid. Hold on to assets that have alreadyappreciated significantly, otherwise your heirs will lose the benefit ofthis stepped-up basis at death and owe capital gains when they sell on theentire appreciation from your date of purchase.   Gifts of up to $10,000 per year ($20,000 for a married couple) are neversubject to tax. On larger gifts, a gift tax return will have to be filed,but the tax itself will not be due until your death. That's when theunified gift and estate tax kicks in on amounts (whether given during lifeor after death) in excess of approximately $600,000.   Charitable gifts can also reap large rewards. The American College'sLeimberg makes reference to Jacqueline Onassis, who may have sheltered asmuch as $90 million out of a $100 million estate by setting up a charitablelead trust. No one knows exactly how much was in the Onassis estate, butattorneys recognize the astute estate planning.   With a charitable lead trust, a specific sum is set aside. The charitiesof your choice receive a fixed amount each year, typically based on apercentage of the original amount, for the period of time you specify. Atthe end of that period, your children or other beneficiaries receive theprincipal. Because the gift to the children has been deferred, Knoxexplains, it is discounted for tax purposes. Furthermore, if the trust'sreturn on investments is higher than anticipated, the excess goes to thechildren without tax.   Charitable lead trusts are most often used by the very wealthy. Theirmirror image, charitable remainder trusts, are more common. With a crt, youreceive both an immediate tax deduction and income during your lifetime(and, if you wish, that of your spouse), with the principal then going tocharity. No estate taxes are due on amounts left to charity through thetrust.-- Insisting on simplicity, at the expense of what could be significant taxsavings. Knox points out that people who have built successful businessesor professional practices are often ``impatient with, or even distrustfulof, estate planning techniques they can't easily understand.'' Used tomaking and controlling their destiny, ``they can't bring themselves to dosomething complicated that doesn't make complete sense to them, no matterhow great the tax savings for their families,'' he says.   One approach is to search out good advisers and then rely on theirrecommendations. You don't have to understand the technicalities, so longas you understand the consequences in terms of tax savings and your controlover your assets.-- Failing to read documents. No matter how good the recommendations fromyour advisers, you really do need to peruse all the documents and have yourattorney answer any questions that you may have. Mistakes can creep in ifyou're not paying close attention. Michael Allmon, chairman of theCalifornia Society of cpa's estate planning committee in Los Angeles, citesa client who made several specific bequests of property, but never noticedthat their addresses were incorrectly listed. ``We think we can take careof his intent,'' Allmon says, ``but we will have to get the court involvedto do so.''-- Thinking that estate planning is only for the rich. If anything, saysLeimberg, preparing your will is much more critical for the middleclass--or those people with estates under $1 million. ``If a wealthy personloses $100,000 because of poor or no estate planning, the world won't cometo an end,'' he says. ``But it's tough when you have a smaller estate.'' Inother words, most of us can't afford to make any mistakes.Five Rules of Estate PlanningMAKE A WILLThis might seem obvious, yet 7 of 10 Americans die without one. If youneglect this important piece of business, you're essentially granting yourstate the right to decide who gets what.USE A BYPASS TRUST IF MARRIEDFor sizable estates, the couple divides the assets and each spouse puts upto $600,000 in a trust. This ensures that both get to use a $600,000federal estate tax exemption.WATCH RETIREMENT ACCUMULATIONSIf your IRA or qualified plan amounts to more than $1.5 million, you maywant to start withdrawals early so you don't bump up against the excise taxon excess accumulations.FIND EXPERT HELPRefer to self-help software and books. But if your affairs are at allcomplicated, use an attorney experienced in estate planning. Readeverything and ask questions--even experts make mistakes.START ``GIFTING'' EARLYIf you have enough to live comfortably, giving up to $10,000 a year($20,000 for a married couple) to each child and grandchild can greatlyreduce your taxable estate.DATA: BUSINESS WEEKCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457STEERING CLEAR OF TITLE TROUBLEBy:Richard KormanWhen stage great Helen Hayes died in 1993, her son, James MacArthur,inherited her Victorian mansion overlooking the Hudson River in Nyack, N.Y.MacArthur arranged to sell the house for $730,000 to Christopher andGeorgine Chalsen, who planned to live there with their five children. A fewweeks before the scheduled closing last June, a title researcher foundburied in the public records a 29-year-old right of first refusal thatHayes had granted to a neighbor. After much frustration and weighing oflegal options, MacArthur honored the agreement, and the neighbors boughtthe house. They removed a strip of land connecting the Hayes property andtheir own to the river bank and put the house back on the market at$849,000. With the river access gone, the Chalsens declined to pursue adeal.   The fiasco over the Hayes mansion, known as Pretty Penny, is an exampleof how a defective title can kill a real estate deal that both partiesbadly want to complete. No matter how much you feel that you've finallyfound your dream home, don't get in too deep unless you're sure the houseclearly belongs to the seller or that you won't get involved in abottomless legal pit. Refusal rights, liens, easements, or boundarydisputes are the type of problems to watch out for.   But even the seller doesn't always know. MacArthur was unaware that therefusal right existed, much less that it had passed to the couple next doorwhen they bought their house from his mother's original neighbors a fewyears ago. Hayes had granted an unlimited right to all ``heirs, executors,administrators, successors, and assigns'' of the neighbors. Says AlanWayte, a Los Angeles attorney: ``That's a mistake, and a very common one.''What Hayes should have done is restrict the refusal right to her originalneighbors or limit its duration.   The broader issue is that title searches are often left until it's toolate to prevent both parties from spending a lot of money and effortgetting ready to close. A title is evidence that an owner has the right topossession. Mortgage lenders require a search to assure that the property'stitle is free and clear of claims or any other problems. The search mayshow that the seller has a former spouse who is a co-owner but knowsnothing of the sale; a trucking company has an easement that allows it todrive through the property during the night; or that the toolshed was builttwo feet over the boundary of a neighbor's lot and the problem needs to beresolved. It should also show any liens for unpaid taxes or mortgages.EARLY REQUEST. The key is not to let the title check wait until after youhave completed other aspects of the deal, such as mortgage approval andarranging to move. If possible, obtain a pre-approved mortgage before goingout to shop for a house, suggests Gary W. Eldred, author of The 106 CommonMistakes Homebuyers Make (And How to Avoid Them) (John Wiley & Sons,$14.95). Getting mortgage approval out of the way allows everyone involvedto concentrate on the title and other matters, he says.   The minute your bid on a house is accepted, start researching the title.Ask the seller's lawyer or broker to send a copy of the title report fromthe property's most recent sale and the proposed contract, says EricGonchar, MacArthur's attorney. Also ask for the most recent property surveyand certificate of occupancy.   Before the contracts are signed, make sure you or your bank orders thesearch from the company that will issue your title insurance. Also get acopy of the summary report. It shouldn't take longer than two weeks. Don'twait until the property is appraised or until your loan is approved. Ifpossible, have the abstract of the title and property survey before yourclosing or moving dates are made. That way, if there are problems that willtake weeks or months to resolve, you won't have to undo preparations tomove from your current residence and inconvenience your buyer or tenant.   Title searches and reports cost $150 to $500 and, if the deal closes,that cost is rolled into the title-insurance bill. If the title reportturns up information that makes closing impossible, most home-salecontracts require the seller to pay the buyer's title-search fee andrelated title-examination costs.   Although MacArthur picked up the tab for $1,000 of title-research costs,Christopher Chalsen says he still spent $700 on the inspection. Chalsenrecalls that he told his lawyer to hurry to get the title information, buthe and his wife signed the contract before the data were in hand. Luckily,the Chalsens eventually found another house. It hadn't belonged to a famousactress, but its title was free of anything that could have turned thepurchase of the home into a tragedy.Before You Seal the Deal...-- Get the title search done as early as possible, well in advance ofclosing and arranging to move. Press lenders, real estate agents, andattorneys not to neglect this part of the deal. Try to get a mortgageapproved early so you can concentrate on the title.-- Seek the title data from previous sales and refinancings prior tosigning a contract. Ask for copies of the survey and certificate ofoccupancy as a tip-off to trouble involving boundaries or illegalstructures.-- Always buy title insurance. Be sure the policy covers the owner, notjust the mortgage lender. Try for a policy that insures the full equity inaddition to the mortgage amount.DATA: THE 106 COMMON MISTAKES HOMEBUYERS MAKE (AND HOW TO AVOID THEM),CHICAGO TITLE INSURANCE CO., ERIC GONCHARCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A PANGLOSS FOR THE MILLENNIUMBy:BY MICHAEL J. MANDELTHE STATE OF HUMANITYEdited by Julian L. SimonBlackwell 694pp $54.95No one can accuse Julian L. Simon of thinking small. In his new book, hetackles nothing less than the fate of all mankind. The State of Humanity, amassive new volume of essays assembled and edited by Simon, is an attack onthe fashionable notion that human progress has stalled. ``Just about everyimportant long-run measure of human welfare shows improvement over thedecades and centuries, in the United States as well as in the rest of theworld,'' claims Simon in his introductory essay. ``There is no persuasivereason to believe that these trends will not continue indefinitely.''   This happy assessment is no surprise. In previous books, Simon, aneconomist at the University of Maryland, has argued the benefits ofpopulation growth and immigration, giving him a well-deserved reputation asperhaps the most optimistic economist alive. His argument that humanity isstill on an upward trend is backed up by almost 700 pages of hard data andnumerous charts and graphs. Simon and his co-authors, including Nobelprize-winning economist Robert W. Fogel, have put together what is probablythe single most concentrated mass of upbeat statistics ever assembled,covering virtually every aspect of the human condition, from childmortality to air pollution, from housing and food to natural resources andozone depletion.   For the most part, the arguments are convincing. We have been warnedthat the world is about to run out of oil. Not so, Simon points out: Globalcrude-oil reserves have soared over the past 15 years, as higher priceshave stimulated exploration and new technology for exploiting existingfields. In 1980, the world had about a 30-year supply of crude oil atcurrent rates of consumption. By the early 1990s, though, the world hadabout 45 years' worth. Notes Simon: ``Metals, foods, and other naturalresources have become more available rather than more scarce.''   The perspective of Simon and his co-authors is decidedly global. Whiledeveloped economies such as the U.S. have struggled in recent years,developing countries such as China, Taiwan, and Malaysia have seenexplosive income growth, making this the greatest period of wealth creationin history. These economic gains have been accompanied by other advances,as well. Over the past 30 years, life expectancy in poor countries hassoared, from 46 to 63 years. The spread of education in developingcountries has been equally spectacular: The proportion of children aged 6to 11 enrolled in school has risen from less than 50% in 1960 to about 70%today.   Interestingly, Simon's upbeat view does not depend on new technology.The State of Humanity barely takes notice of computers. There is no mentionof the Internet, virtual reality, gene splicing, cellular telephones, orany of the other marvels that are supposed to be boosting productivity andimproving the modern standard of living.   Instead, Simon bases his forecasts on a simple principle: Assume thatlong-term trends will continue, in the absence of convincing evidence tothe contrary. So if the steady accumulation of knowledge has produced arising standard of living for the past 200 years, there's no reason tobelieve that things will suddenly change.   Of course, many would consider Simon's view of the world to be naive.The conventional wisdom is that global overpopulation is inexorably leadingto ecological and economic disaster--a modern version of Malthusian misery.``For those who think the future may be a simple extrapolation of the past,there may be some surprises ahead,'' observes Lester R. Brown, president ofWorldwatch Institute, in the forthcoming book State of the World 1996(Norton). Brown, as committed a pessimist as Simon is an optimist, arguesthat the ``spiraling human demands for resources are beginning to outgrowthe capacity of the earth's natural systems.''   Food, especially, will be in short supply, in part because the people ofChina and other growing nations will demand better diets as they becomericher. Notes Brown: ``Oil can be replaced with other energy sources, butthere is no replacement for food.''   The State of Humanity tries to answer each of these negative arguments.Despite the fears, Simon cites statistics from the Environmental ProtectionAgency to assert that ``the air in the U.S. and in other rich countries isirrefutably safer to breathe now than in decades past.'' Moreover, there isno sign of any widespread food shortages yet. Crop yields have risen asfast as world population. The price of food, like that of other naturalresources, is still falling compared with other goods and services.   Simon points out that in every era, there have been doomsayers who seethe imminent end of civilization. For example, in the mid-1800s, theBritish began to worry about running out of coal. Writes Simon: ``The greatEnglish economist, Stanley Jevons, calculated that a shortage of coal wouldbring England's industry to a standstill by 1900; he carefully assessedthat oil could never make a decisive difference.''   Despite the power of its arguments, The State of Humanity does have someflaws. The essays are of uneven quality--Simon's own contributions,especially the introduction, are pointed and well-written, but some of theother chapters are confusing and less than helpful. The book also suffersfrom overkill. One grows weary of being told over and over how everythingis getting better all the time.   Moreover, while whining about how the pessimists get more attention thanhe does, Simon does not acknowledge that scaremongers are often responsiblefor much of the improvement he cites. The death rate from all accidents,for example, dropped by more than 20% over the past 10 years--thanks in nosmall part to the consumer-safety advocates Simon professes to deplore.Indeed, it may very well be that alarmism is the only way to stimulate aneffective response to large-scale problems, such as global warming andozone depletion, that require concerted multinational action.   Still, The State of Humanity will become essential reading for anyonewho wants to put today's policy debates into a larger context. At a timewhen politicians are locked in a bloody stalemate in Washington and manyAmericans are disappointed with their lot, it's worth remembering theprogress that the human species has already made--and pondering thepotential for gains to come.About the Author(s):Mandel is a BUSINESS WEEK economics editor.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457INTERNET 101 FOR BUSINESSBy:BY IRA SAGERTHE DIGITAL ECONOMYPromise and Peril in the Age of Networked IntelligenceBy Don TapscottMcGraw-Hill 342pp $24.95Surf the Net these days and you'll soon find, alongside the obscure 'zinesand hip cyber hangouts, some of the biggest names in business. Kodak,Aetna, AT&T, Eli Lilly, IBM--each has a home page on the World Wide Web.They and scores of other companies hope online networks can provide adirect link to the customer and a whole new realm of electronic commerce.   Today, however, most are sputtering along the Information Highway,offering little more than electronic brochures. To get beyond that, arguesDon Tapscott in The Digital Economy, businesses must build fundamentallynew strategies for competing in the electronic marketplace. ``Wheninformation becomes digital and networked, walls fall and no business issafe,'' Tapscott writes. On the other hand, companies that understand theNet will blossom.   Tapscott's mission is not to tell executives how to craft I-waystrategies but to help them grasp the changes the Net will bring so theycan start planning. This isn't uncharted territory: Tapscott, a consultantwho has written often on information technology, follows countless magazineand book writers in predicting how the computing, telecommunications, andmedia industries will converge. While he points out the possibilities, heoffers few fresh insights. He cites other consultants and quotes liberallyfrom business publications. Also, many of the companies Tapscott hails aspioneers--Federal Express, Wal-Mart, Levi Strauss--are already well knownfor their online strategies.   Tapscott does well weaving into one tome the business, social, andeducational implications of networks. He lays out privacy and censorshipissues, and explores the Net's potential to change the way people interactwith the government. He also raises important questions about inequalityand the need to extend the Net to a broad base of citizens. The DigitalEconomy doesn't offer solutions, but it can help executives contemplatingcyberspace to ask the right questions.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457`I WANT BLOOD FOR BLOOD'By:JAMES DRAKEIn the north Albanian village of Bluji, deep in the Dukagjin highlands,women and children do most of the work. Grandmothers scrub laundry on thedoorsteps of stone cottages. Young wives--some heavily pregnant--lug pailsof water along the rutted cart track from the communal well. Five-year-oldsspend long days in the fields tending scrawny livestock.   Bluji's menfolk hold antiquated notions of gender roles, but it's fearthat keeps most of them from showing their faces: This is the land of theblood feud, a centuries-old tradition. Kept in check during the communists'rule, it reemerged three years ago, forcing some 10,000 able-bodiedbreadwinners, out of a population of 3 million, into hiding.SHAMEFUL. ``I want blood for blood,'' spits Nasi Gjini, polishing thepre-1914 Lee Enfield rifle that has been his constant companion since histwo sons were shot to death by a neighbor in February. The deaths followedan exchange of drunken insults. Now, the teenage assassin, his threebrothers, and his father stay indoors, thwarting Gjini's quest for revenge.A murderer's male kin are fair game, but gunning them down in their ownhouse is more shameful than the original offense. ``Here I am safe,'' saysthe Gjinis' killer, peering through the bars on his window. ``But this isno kind of life. Only Allah knows how long I'll have to stay here.'' Hespends his days smoking, sleeping, and playing cards.   The blood feud goes back to the 12th century and was a means of metingout summary justice. After World War II, under dictator Enver Hoxha, thepractice was suppressed, with murderers executed and their familiesostracized. But with the fall of the regime, old ways quickly returned.   The circle of violence is taking an economic toll among the hot-temperedsubsistence farmers. When Albania opened its doors for business, somemultinationals came courting the highlanders, bringing hard currency.Leisure giants such as Club Med talked of opening ski resorts and hikinglodges on the country's game-packed slopes and sending whitewater raftsdown its salmon rivers.   ``But even if they had found local partners they could trust, therewould be no guarantee those partners would be alive the next morning,''says Adnan Rama of the Albanian Tourist Ministry. Potential investorsbacked off, taking their dollars and Deutschemarks with them. Most folksrun livestock on land too poor for farming. Some make a better livingsmuggling oil, weapons, liquor and cigarettes to Serbia and Bosnia. But theaverage income is just $30 per month.   The Dukagjin district has seen some 350 revenge killings since 1993, andthe problem is spreading: Hill people who migrate to the cities in searchof work take their quarrels with them. ``I'd say around 20% of our murdersthis year were connected to the feuds,'' estimates Shkelqim Merdani, policechief in Tirana, the capital.   In a bid to stop the madness, Islamic cleric Ndrek Pjetri formed theMissionaries of Reconciliation, a group of holy men dedicated to endingfeuds. Its members act as go-betweens, often persuading the aggrieved partyto accept cash in place of blood. The mullah has even traveled to Turkeyand Germany to settle quarrels between expatriate Albanians, and in 1994,he successfully petitioned the U.S. Embassy in Tirana to cancel a visagranted to a man bound for New York to carry out a killing.   For many here, honor means more than anything. Last year, on his 16thbirthday, a boy traveled to nearby Kopliku to avenge the killing of hisgrandfather 40 years ago by a brutal police captain. Reaching Kopliku, hefound the killer had died. So he called out the captain's cousin, bade himgreet the grandfather, and dispatched him with a single bullet, therebyremoving a stain on his family's honor. The boy himself was killed beforehe turned 17.   The 68-year-old Pjetri claims to have resolved more than 170 disputes,but new ones crop up too fast for the pack mules he uses to travel toisolated villages. By the time he arrives, another murder may have takenplace. So he has applied for a government grant to buy a four-wheel-drivevehicle. ``They say there isn't money,'' he says. ``I've told them theyshould see it as an investment.''Illustration(s):Illustration: Map: AlbaniaMAP BY ALAN BASEDENPhotograph(s):Photograph: OLD WAYSFeuds have helped keep rural Albanians mired in deep poverty, with manymigrating to the cities--and taking the feuds with themPHOTOGRAPH BY NICOLE BENGIVENO/MATRIXAbout the Author(s):Drake is based in Prague.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457IT'S FOR YOU--ON THE PCVoice calling via the Internet is here and it's cheap-but don't toss yourphone yetBy:BY JOHN W. VERITYThere's little, it seems, that the Internet doesn't provide: low-costelectronic publishing, global E-mail delivery, instant access to every kindof digital information and service. Now, it's promising ``free'' phonecalls between any two Net computers, more or less, and for no more moneythan the usual connection fee.   As it turns out, this is another one of those Internet concepts thatseem to offer exciting potential if not high-quality results just yet. It'ssort of like the idea of finding whatever information you need on the Net.Sure, its computers are crammed with information, but as all Web surferssoon discover, much of it is trivial.MEETING PLACE. Likewise, the Internet can transmit speech cheaply, but notin a satisfying or easy way. Right now, an Internet voice call has littleof the tone or intimacy of a regular phone call. It's more like talkingover CB radio. Still, it costs little to try, and when they work well,Internet voice calls can be entertaining and useful. Besides saving moneyon long-distance communications--even across oceans--Internet phoning canenhance computer games. Eventually, phoning via the Internet may serve asan inexpensive method for training and conference calls.   How to get started? First, you'll need basic Internet knowhow and somepatience. For hardware, you'll need a Windows-compatible computer with a50-megahertz 486 processor, a sound card, a speaker, and a microphone.(Most Internet phone-software packages work only with Microsoft Corp.'sWindows, but there are programs available for Apple Computer Inc.'sMacintoshes and for Unix computers.) A 28.8-kilobits-per-second modem isbest, though some packages can work with 14.4-kbs models. Also required isa SLIP/PPP connection to the Internet.   There's already a choice of software. Trial versions are available at nocharge directly from the Web sites of several suppliers (table). Even incompressed form, these lengthy programs can take 15 minutes or more todownload into your machine. Also, each is programmed to work only for alimited time. VocalTec Inc.'s Internet Phone allows just 60 seconds ofcalling time, for instance. You're free to take more than one copy--or pay$49.95 for a limitless version. Internet Telephone Co.'s WebPhone program,which was available free prior to Jan. 1, 1996, now costs $49.95.   Each program does essentially the same thing--make your PC's sound cardconvert the microphone's analog signals into a string of digital packets ofdata that move separately across the Net like envelopes in a postal system.Depending on the Net's traffic conditions at any given moment, consecutivepackets may take different routes through the Net and arrive out of order.At the receiving end, telephony software will try to compensate, but it'soften impossible for the program to reconstruct the original signalcompletely.   None of this software is simple to install or use. There are numerousnetwork and computer parameters to set, and you'll need to plug inspecifics about your Internet addressing, for instance. It took me and afriend more than an hour to get VocalTec's package to work. For WebPhone, Isought the supplier's assistance.TOUGH TALK. Once we had the software installed, we found out just howdifferent from conventional telephone calling Internet phone setups are.The sound is choppy, syllables drop out of words, and it can take severalseconds for voices to traverse the Net. Each party must take turnsspeaking--and they must be using the same brand of software. You musteither arrange a time to converse or scan your supplier's online directoryto find others around the world who are online and looking forconversation. Directories often list people's preferred topics ofconversation, which range from the personal to lofty technical matters.   Which software to choose? As the first to market, VocalTec's package hasbecome the most popular. Internet Telephone's WebPhone looks the best--likea futuristic telephone with lots of point-and-click buttons. QuarterdeckCorp. plans to enhance its WebTalk with a variety of multimedia tools tohelp people collaborate over the Internet. You can keep up with thetechnology's rapid evolution by seeing what enthusiasts post to theindependently run Voice on the Net E-mail list: Send the message,``subscribe von-digest,'' to majordomo@pulver.com.   For now, Internet telephony reminds me of the dancing elephant in acircus: One is more impressed that it can dance at all than with the danceitself. But at this stage, teaching the Internet new dances is really whatit's all about.NETPHONE SOFTWAREINTERNET PHONEVocalTec. Street price: $49.95Trial copies available at http://www.vocaltec.com.WEBTALKQuarterdeck. Street price: under $50, including two copies, microphone, andWeb browser.Trial copies available at http://www.qdeck.com.INTERCOMTelescape Communications.Available free at http://www.telescape.com.WEBPHONEInternet Telephone. Price: $49.95.Trial copies available at http:///www.itelco.com.DATA: BUSINESS WEEKCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHY IS THE U.S. SETTLING FOR STUNTED GROWTH?By:BY PAUL CRAIG ROBERTSEconomic growth has fallen on hard times. The budget struggle betweenCongress and the Clinton Administration has been partly over whether theeconomy will grow 2.3% annually or 2.5%. Federal Reserve Board ChairmanAlan Greenspan has hinted that even this slow growth might not be possiblewithout a balanced budget.   It was not always so. In the postwar era, growth was a liberal mantra.Not even inflation-shy Republican Administrations could withstand itsimperative. The Ford Administration, for example, forecast a growth rate of5.98% in average annual real gross national product for the 1976-80 period.The Carter Administration brought us into the 1980s with a 4.7% averageannual real GNP growth projection for 1979-83.   The attitude toward growth changed remarkably in 1981, when the ReaganAdministration forecast a 3.8% annual rate of real GNP growth from 1981 to1985. The forecast was paltry compared with those for earlier periods andwas no higher than what the economy achieved from 1976 to 1980. But thehyperbole flew fast. Reagan's forecast was denounced as a ``rosy scenario''that ``lies far beyond the limits of any past experience in this country orany other industrial democracy'' (The Washington Post, Mar. 9, 1981).COOLED PASSION. What happened in such a short time span to make modesteconomic-growth projections unwelcome? Environmental hysteria connectinggrowth with pollution took a toll, as did the rising inflation that hadaccompanied growth in the 1970s. But among macroeconomists themselves, thecooled passion for growth may have reflected the change in the way it wasbeing pursued.   In the postwar era, prosperity-peddling Keynesians connected economicgrowth with the growth of government. True, in the Keynesian model, a taxcut that increased the deficit would raise aggregate demand and economicgrowth, but the tax cut multiplier was less than the government-spendingmultiplier. That is, if economic growth was the goal, more governmentspending was the efficient way to achieve it. Keynesian economics was apolitical success because it merged economic growth with liberal compassionand the propensity of politicians to build spending constituencies.Moreover, the Keynesian model relied on a proactive government to manageaggregate demand and produce full employment. Policymakers found this to bea more gratifying approach than laissez-faire.   Reagan's growth program was unpopular with macroeconomists because itwas not premised on the growth of government. Indeed, Reagan wanted tocurtail the growth of government, while increasing economic incentives toindividuals. This cut to the emotional core, and liberals who couldn't getenough ``Keynesian'' growth were horrified at the prospect of``supply-side'' growth.   For many, supply-side economics has an even worse strike against it. Itmaintains that fiscal policy works not by increasing aggregate demand, butby raising aftertax rewards for work and investment. Supply-side economicsnot only tolerates market-based income differences--it also links taxpolicy with productivity growth and shows the high cost of using taxes tolevel incomes.   Liberal economists have responded not by resurrecting Keynesian demandmanagement--an impossible task--but by deemphasizing growth. One way ofdoing this is to argue that regardless of policy, the economy cannot growany faster than its long-term average of 2.5% annually. Liberals thennarrowly limit economics to ``fairness'' issues. For example, Paul R.Krugman, an economist at Stanford University, says that with a long-termgrowth potential of 2.5%, it is pointless to increase incentives when theonly effect is more economic inequality.   A downsizing of growth ambitions requires harsher cutbacks in welfareand entitlements in order to contain the deficit or balance the budget. Italso means that policymakers cannot rely on income growth to compensate forthe slower growth in government programs or on job growth to absorb theinflow of legal and illegal immigrants. The social and politicalimplications of slow growth may well prove more unpalatable than``greed.''   From 1982 to 1989, the U.S. economy grew at an average annual rate of3.7%. The new ``2.5% inevitable growth school'' may argue either that theseseven years of above-inevitable growth occurred at the expense of futuregrowth or compensated for below-inevitable growth in the past. But the factremains that people experienced 3.7%, not the long-run average. Theelectorate liked it, and the Washington policymakers who took it away arehistory.Photograph(s):Photograph: ANATHEMA: Liberals would rather put the brakes on growth thanhave a fast expansion based on supply-side principlesKATHERINE LAMBERTAbout the Author(s):Paul Craig Roberts is John M. Olin Fellow of the Institute for PoliticalEconomy and Distinguished Fellow of the Cato Institute in Washington, D.C.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FED FEAR OF THE JOBLESS RATEIt may be a faulty inflation signalBy:BY GENE KORETZThough they welcome the Federal Reserve's latest cut in short-term interestrates, economists Mickey D. Levy of NationsBanc Capital Markets Inc. andJoseph Carson of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. both believe that Fed policyremains far too restrictive in the face of growing economic weakness. Asthey see it, the largest roadblock to a substantial easing of monetarypolicy may well be the Fed's unjustified concern regarding the lowunemployment rate.   Fed officials, says Levy, tend to believe in a so-called natural rate ofunemployment--that is, a rate at which labor markets are so tight thatfurther declines would spark rising inflation. Though estimates of thatrate have varied from 4% in the 1960s to 6.5% in the 1970s, the currentlevel is presumed to be just below 6%--placing November's 5.6% jobless ratein the danger zone.   Levy argues, however, that productivity progress by U.S. businesscombined with the Fed's enhanced inflation-fighting credibility haveeffectively lowered the natural rate of unemployment well below the5.5%-to-6% range. By reaping productivity gains from restructuring and moreflexible use of labor (including contingent workers), as well as fromincreased investment in technology, says Levy, business has improved itsresiliency in labor markets and boosted its leverage in wage bargaining.   Meanwhile, growing job insecurity has made employees more docile. Andthe Fed's tough anti-inflation stance has curbed employers' ability to payfor wage hikes by raising prices. All of which, says Levy, suggests thattoday's 5.6% jobless rate is far from a danger signal of impendinginflation.   For his part, Carson notes that the meager 607,000 rise in employmentover the past 12 months (as measured by the Labor Dept.'s survey ofhouseholds) was matched by unusually sluggish labor force growth of just724,000 people. This is only half of the 1.1% growth in the labor force in1994 (chart), which was right in line with Labor Dept. projections.   Carson attributes this sharp drop in labor force growth to declines inlabor force participation by 20-to-24-year-old and 55-to-64-year-old males.He speculates that poor job prospects in 1995 inspired more young workersto stay in school, while continued downsizing eroded the ranks of olderworkers. In any case, he says, ``the thing to remember is that theunemployment rate would be a half a percentage point higher if the laborforce had expanded at its trend rate.''   Either Levy's or Carson's analysis may explain why inflation has stayedso low with 5.6% unemployment. If, as seems likely, they are both right,the Fed has more than ample room to ease aggressively in the months ahead.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: A Puzzling Slowdown In Labor Force GrowthERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHAT'S STALLING MONETARY UNIONEurope's economies are out of syncBy:BY GENE KORETZAt first blush, the wave of European interest-rate cuts touched off by theBundesbank's latest move would seem to suggest that economic convergence isgrowing. Christopher Widness of Chemical Securities Inc. points out,however, that despite the synchronous rate cuts, the differences betweeninflation rates (and interest rates) have actually widened. A year ago, forexample, French inflation was nearly a percentage point lower than Germaninflation. Today it is higher. And the gaps between German inflation andinflation in Spain and Italy have grown (chart).   The irony, says Widness, is that in many countries, such as Italy andSpain, fiscal restraint could boost inflation as sales tax hikes feed intothe price indexes and inspire wage pressures. And that spells increasedpolitical strains that could short-circuit progress toward economicconvergence and monetary union.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Europe's Diverging Inflation RatesERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A MILESTONE FOR BLACK FAMILIESFewer out-of-wedlock birthsBy:BY GENE KORETZAs reported by The Numbers News newsletter, black families in America havemade significant progress in at least one key area in recent years:Birthrates among unmarried black women--including teenagers--declined in1993 for the fourth year in a row. The birthrate fell from 90.7 per 1,000unmarried black women age 15 to 44 in 1989 to 84.0 in 1993. By contrast,the birthrate among unmarried white women, though far below that of blacks,continues to rise sharply--from 30.2 in 1989 to 35.9 in 1993.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHEN LAWYERS ARE LOOKERSAttractiveness boosts earningsBy:BY GENE KORETZOther things being equal, better-looking lawyers make more money than theirunattractive colleagues. That's the implication of a new study that looksat how law school graduates of the 1970s fared in labor markets insubsequent years. In the study, economists Jeff E. Biddle of Michigan StateUniversity and Daniel S. Hamermesh of the University of Texas developedattractiveness ratings based on class photos of students of a top lawschool and then used survey data to gauge their career progress five and 15years after graduation.   The results indicated that attractive male attorneys (there were fewwomen in the group studied) made more money than plain or homely attorneysafter five years of practice, and the gap widened over time. Further, moreof the attractive group tended to become litigators, a specialty where goodlooks are a likely asset, and to work in the higher-paying private sector,where client relationships have a larger effect on earnings.   Interestingly enough, the researchers found little payoff toattractiveness among law school graduates of the 1980s. And while goodlooks boosted the chances of males grads of both the 1970s and 1980s beingoffered a law firm partnership after only five years of practice, theyactually lowered the chances of early partnership for young femalelawyers.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457YOU MADE THE CALLBy:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENGTHE THIRD ANNUAL UP FRONT Reader Survey is gleaned from 288 responses toour questionnaire, almost half via E-mail. It shows a sober group that'scautiously optimistic and doesn't expect miracles.   We asked about job security for the second year in a row. And theanswers were pretty close to last year's. In a time of corporatedownsizing, the share of those feeling less secure at work rose slightly,from 32% to 36%, while people who are more secure was virtually unchanged.Yet, despite all the gloom and doom we hear about how too few are savingenough for old age, two-thirds project their old-age standard of living toremain as is or get better.   About the stock market, the consensus is for continued good times, withan average prediction of 5754 for the Dow's 1996 high. Mostprognostications clustered in the 5251-6000 range. There's no consensus ona favorite stock, though, with names scattered all over. The No.1 pick is atie between Microsoft and Intel, with 14 responses each.   On matters not affecting them directly, namely the federal budget,readers go for the conventional wisdom. Most name 2002 as the best targetdate to balance the budget. Newt Gingrich wants to do the deed by then.Now, so does Bill Clinton. There's a tempered optimism on the muchballyhooed Information Highway. While a majority sees the Infobahn as thedriving force of tomorrow's economy, skeptics abound: To more than 40%,it's just hype.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: How do you feel about personal job security, comparedwith your situation last year?Illustration: Chart: When you retire, your standard of living will...Illustration: Chart: The best target date to balance the federal budgetis...Illustration: Chart: The Information Superhighway is...Illustration: Chart: The high point for the Dow Jones industrial averagefor 1996 will be...Photograph(s):Photograph: SURF CITY: So much hype?PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW LICHTENSTEIN/JB PICTURESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457LET'S PLAY 30 QUESTIONSBy:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENGNow, let's just see if you've been paying attention. Our pop quiz (no fairpeeking at the answers) will reveal the real business-news buffs.1. What natural event helped ruin rogue trader Nick Leeson's investingstrategy?2. What is Lou Gerstner's vision for IBM called?3. What two jobs did Michael Fuchs have at Time Warner?4. How many parts is ITT splitting into?5. Name the new CEO of DuPont.6. Which American company had a major power project canceled by Indianauthorities?7. Who is the recently departed chief of Sony's U.S. arm?8. What does Steve Forbes want to do to the dollar?9. Who is the highest-level exec to quit Apple so far?10. What is former IBMer James Cannavino's new job?11. Name IPO darling Netscape's chairman.12. What is the Prowler?13. Former Simon & Schuster honcho Richard Snyder tried to buy what?14. What is dethroning Citicorp as the nation's largest bank?15. Ron Perelman wants to do what with Revlon?16. Which bank has spurned Wells Fargo's buyout overtures?17. Name Bob Packwood's replacement as Senate Finance Committee chairman.18. Who wants to sell MGM/UA?19. Why did CBS's 60 Minutes yank a segment critical of the tobaccoindustry?20. Which newspaper did Times Mirror CEO Mark Willes close?21. Name Salomon's embattled chief.22. What is the first U.S. TV series to run on Japanese prime time in eightyears?23. Who is threatening a proxy fight against RJR Nabisco?24. What company did William Agee last head?25. Name the theme song for the Windows 95 ad campaign.26. Who is Michael Eisner's new No.2 at Disney?27. Whom did the Grace family oust as CEO of W.R. Grace?28. Name Leon Hess's chosen successor to head Amerada Hess.29. Converse bought a sports-apparel maker, then shut it down after 85 daysof deteriorating results. Name it.30. What's the price tag for Bill Gates's new high-tech house on LakeWashington?ANSWERS:1) The Kobe earthquake.2) Network-centric computing.3) Head of Home Box Office and Warner Music Group.4) Three.5) John Krol.6) Enron.7) Michael Schulhof.8) Link it to gold.9) CFO Joseph Graziano.10) President of Perot Systems.11) James Clark.12) Chrysler's new hot-rod-style car.13) Western Publishing.14) The merger of Chemical and Chase Manhattan.15) Take it public.16) First Interstate.17) Republican William Roth of Delaware.18) Owner Credit Lyonnais.19) Fear of litigation.20) New York Newsday.21) Deryck Maughan.22) The X-Files.23) Bennett LeBow and Carl Icahn.24) Morrison Knudsen.25) Start Me Up by the Rolling Stones.26) Michael Ovitz.27) J.P. Bolduc.28) His son, John.29) Apex One.30)$30 million.Photograph(s):Photograph: BIG IDEA: GerstnerPHOTOGRAPH BY NAJLAH FEANNY/SABAPhotograph: BIG SHOES: FuchsPHOTOGRAPH BY JIM LEYNSE/SABAPhotograph: BIG BUST: LeesonPHOTOGRAPH BY REUTERCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A FEW NEW BLOTS ON THE LEDGERDelinquent consumer loans and skinny margins may temper an otherwise bullyyearBy:By Kelley Holland in New York, with Amy Barrett in WashingtonIt was beginning to look as if the good times would never end for U.S.banks. Since 1991, profits have set record after record, asset quality hassharply improved, and bank stocks have seemed headed for the moon. But now,a few clouds are dotting the horizon. Consumers are beginning to havetrouble with heavy debt burdens. And the narrow gap between short- andlong-term rates bodes ill for banks' profit margins on loans andinvestments. Although Merrill Lynch & Co. predicts that profits for 56 topbanks should grow 9.8% in 1996 (chart), pan in for a closeup and thepicture is murkier.   The biggest potential problem is related to the ongoing growth inlending. Consumer installment credit grew roughly 14% in 1995, according toDRI/McGraw-Hill. While banks profit initially by providing that credit,heavy consumer debt burdens mean more loan delinquencies down the road.Indeed, the American Bankers Assn. says that late payments on bank-cardaccounts have risen for four quarters in a row and are currently at theirsecond-highest level in 10 years. ``Consumer credit quality is, I think, avery big short-term issue, potentially a big minefield,'' says JudahKraushaar, a banking analyst at Merrill Lynch.HARD TO FUDGE. Corporate lending is also expanding rapidly, raisingadditional concerns about loan quality in 1996. James B. Lee, vice-chairmanat Chemical Banking Corp., the top bank in loan syndications, sayscorporate lending will increase through 1996, but ``certain [industry]sectors will continue to deteriorate.'' That will prompt some borrowers tofall behind on payments or default. Lee says lending standards are farhigher than they were in the late 1980s. However, the intense competitionto make many loans suggests that some banks are willing to offer loan termsthat leave little room for error.   Then there is the problem of profit margins. Today, there's less thanone percentage point between the short-term rates at which banks borrow andthe longer-term rates at which they typically lend. That means room forprofits is scarce. A 1995 study by Merrill Lynch shows that bank stockshave been poor performers nearly every year following periods when short-and long-term interest rates are close together. ``This is a hard yieldcurve to work with,'' says Jeffrey C. Keil, president of Republic New YorkCorp.   Luckily, banks still have plenty of wind at their backs. While loandelinquencies are rising, they are still relatively scarce, and banks needto use only small portions of their earnings as reserves for bad credits.Moreover, new businesses are expanding for some of the biggest banks. AtJ.P. Morgan & Co., Thomas B. Ketchum, head of investment banking for theAmericas, expects corporate-finance fees for services such as advising onmergers to increase 40% in 1996.   Expect many banks to be intensely cost-conscious in the coming year.Bank mergers will likely continue at gale force: Gerard Smith, managingdirector in the financial institutions group of UBS Securities Inc.,predicts that by 2000, the top 50 banks will control 80% of the assets inthe U.S. banking industry, up from 56% today. And many deals will bepredicated on massive cost savings.REFORM DELAY. Spending on technology will grow in 1996. Most bankers, eagerto see their customers reduce their use of high-cost branches and step upuse of electronic banking outlets, are placing large bets on systems forbanking by phone or personal computer. Edward E. Crutchfield Jr., chairmanand CEO of First Union Corp. and one of the country's most acquisitivebankers, plans to stop buying banks for five years while he invests inelectronic retail banking. ``As soon as we really do have a choice for thecustomer to make that's realistic, then he will move away from branches,''he says.   Changes will be harder to come by on the regulatory front. Banks havebeen stymied on the big revisions they sought in 1995, such as an end tothe barriers between commercial and investment banking, and they could wellbe frustrated again. Banks and insurance agents need to agree on provisionsto limit the forays of banks into the insurance business before suchbanking law reform can move forward.   Having waited this long for deregulation, bank executives aren't holdingtheir breath. However, for those who keep a sharp eye on operations, payclose attention to the creditworthiness of borrowers, and plan forelectronic banking, 1996 could be a very good year indeed.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The financial condition of banks is excellent and leaves them wellprepared to weather any economic slowdown.   -- Managed properly, the ongoing consolidation in the industry will makeit more efficient.Negatives   -- Consumers have been loading up on debt, and consumer loandelinquencies are rising.   -- Profit margins on consumer and corporate loans could decline, hurtingbank earnings.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: BankingIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Big BanksCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JOHN DEWEY, MEET PETER DRUCKERBy:By Paul Magnusson in WashingtonYour revenues are rising, but not as fast as the cost of serving customers.Labor costs are climbing, but antiquated work rules and poor morale limityour flexibility. Your overseas competitors pay more, spend lavishly ontraining, and get far better results. Your physical plant is crumbling.Computers are scarce. And your customers are dissatisfied.   Welcome to America's public school system. Its problems are so profoundand its disorganization so pervasive that it would be a challenge to thesavviest of America's business managers. Just for starters: There is nocentral management--only 16,000 local school districts run by amateurboards pursuing their own agendas: football, creationism, condomdistribution.   The school-board situation isn't going to change anytime soon, sincelocal control is considered an inalienable right in America. But some helpfor what ails the schools is on the way, thanks to contemporary managementtheory. Two related movements--toward school choice and schoolstandards--have far more to do with Peter F. Drucker than with John Dewey.SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST. School-choice advocates hope to foster competitionamong schools. That way, the weakest schools will lose students and eitherimprove or fold. The strongest schools will prosper and expand. One planwould offer vouchers for purchasing education from existing private andpublic schools. Vouchers are strongly opposed by teachers' unions and theClinton Administration. They argue that some kids will be left in badschools and some schools will use the wrong lures--such as lavish spendingon sports. Still, Republicans will give school choice a boost if theirnumbers increase in state legislatures this year.   Other reformers favor charter schools that contract to provide educationto willing public-school students. Often operating out of storefronts orunderused public buildings and free of bureaucracy, charter schools aregenerally cost-effective. These schools must demonstrate results or losetheir charters. There are some 245 of them in 19 states. ``This is justapplying America's entrepreneurial spirit to the school,'' says JosephNathan, director of the Center for School Change, a research group inMinnesota that is tracking the trend.   Curriculum reform based on setting universal standards of knowledge isprogressing much faster. It is based on sound business principles: Firstyou decide what students should learn, and then you hold teachers andadministrators accountable. ``In states where they take standardsseriously, they have seemed to make a difference,'' says Marc Tucker,president of the National Center on Education and the Economy, which helpsschools in the standards effort. Critics complain that teachers willconcentrate on drilling students to pass tests instead of pursuing broadereducational objectives. Still, parents seem to like the results. In theirsecond year of a standards-based curriculum, Maryland students boostedtheir scores by 25%.   Pressure for schools to become more efficient is intense. Immigration isswelling enrollments. The number of students with limited proficiency inEnglish jumped by 26% during the 1980s. And children who require specialeducation increased by 15% over the past decade. ``We've got a whole influxof kids who have been exposed to alcohol and drugs, hurt by environmentalcontaminants, or diagnosed with learning difficulties,'' says KathyChristie, a Denver-area school board member and an analyst at the EducationCommission of the States.FALLING BEHIND. All this is happening as an unpaid bill for neglect ofschool buildings is coming due. One-third of America's schools, servingsome 14 million students, require extensive repair or replacement,according to a 1995 report by the General Accounting Office. A quarter ofall public schools lack sufficient computers, and 42% have inadequatescience laboratories, says the GAO.   That is a lot for local school boards to deal with. Without a clearfocus on educational goals, they tend to ``pay too much attention toasbestos and not enough to training teachers and developing curriculum,''says Bruce Alberts, president of the National Academy of Sciences. Americanscience scholarship in grade school is falling behind because much of theindustrialized world pays ``enormously more attention to teacher refreshercourses and to professional development,'' says Alberts.   America's management gurus may not have the whole solution. But thenotion that schools must measure and improve their output--graduates whocan read and do math--can only help.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: K-12 Spending Per Pupil Keeps RisingRAY VELLA/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457INDUSTRY OUTLOOKBy:By Mike McNamee in Washington, with Richard A. Melcher in Chicago,Elisabeth Malkin in Mexico City, Wendy Zellner in Dallas, and bureaureportsOn medieval maps, the terra incognita around the borders was festooned withwhirlpools, dragons, and dire warnings: ``Here there be monsters!'' In1996, as the U.S. economy sails into uncharted waters, its map might wellbe decorated with cherubs and zephyrs. Refreshed after 1995's slowdown andwafted along by falling interest rates, American business should glide into1996, leaving in its wake steady if not sparkling growth through the sixthyear of expansion.   Favorable portents abound. Congress and the White House seem certain todeliver a plan to whack hundreds of billions out of federal deficits overthe last half of the '90s. Even with the budget unresolved, the FederalReserve cut short-term interest rates on Dec. 19 from 5.75% to 5.5%--thefirst of three 25-basis-point cuts that Fed-watchers expect by the end of1996. That's welcome news: ``We'll see growth in '96, but I think we'll seemore of it if the Fed keeps lowering rates,'' says Ross J. Centanni,president of air-compressor maker Gardner Denver Machinery Inc.   Coupled with continued low inflation, the Fed's easing will ratify theremarkable rally in bond prices, keeping crucial long-term rates down. Thatwill provide a lift to housing and commercial real estate. And America'stop trading partners should struggle out of their 1995 doldrums and buymore from U.S. manufacturers.SCROOGES GALORE. That's not to say that business will sail effortlesslythrough the year. The 23 industries profiled by BUSINESS WEEK in thisyear's Industry Outlook will need skillful navigation to steer throughshifting currents. The sectors that will lead the way through 1996 willeither enjoy continuing strong demand--such as semiconductor makers or WallStreet's securities houses--or, like defense manufacturers, will continueto squeeze more profits out of shrinking sales.   Laggards will find themselves on the wrong side of 1996's negativetrends: slower growth in capital spending, pressure on pricing, andtight-fisted consumers. After a three-year modernization binge with12%-plus growth rates in capital spending, investment in producers' durableequipment will rise only 6% in 1996, after adjustment for inflation. Evencomputer makers will lose some altitude, with inflation-adjusted salesrising 18% in 1996, vs. 27.1% growth in 1995, according to forecasts byDRI/McGraw-Hill.   The '90s efficiency boom will spell trouble for any producer trying toraise prices in 1996. In a BUSINESS WEEK/Harris Executive Poll in December(page 76), only 40% of the executives surveyed predict they will raiseprices in 1996, down from the 63% who were confident of price hikes before1995 began. ``We're in a buyer's market,'' says Bradford W. Hildebrandt, amanagement consultant to law firms. And carmakers, restaurateurs,retailers, and other businesses catering to consumers will find they'redealing with wary customers, thanks to debt burdens that have hit a record19% of disposable income. ``Debt is putting a lot of pressure onhouseholds, particularly the under-$50,000 families'' who are the core ofthe mass market, says economist Mark M. Zandi of forecasters RegionalFinancial Associates.   But even careful consumers will spend enough to keep the economygrowing. Jobs and income will keep rising, and inflation will stay low,with consumer prices up about 2.9%. That will help keep long-term interestrates near their low 1995 levels, with yields on the 30-year Treasury bondaveraging 6.3% for 1996. All told, BUSINESS WEEK expects the economy toturn in a better performance in 1996 than 1995: The gross domestic productwill grow about 2.3%, after inflation, from the fourth quarter of 1995 tothe end of 1996. That's up from the 2% expected when the books are closedon 1995 (charts, pages 74, 74A).   That 2.3% growth may not sound like much, but, remember, the scale formeasuring the economy is changing. The Commerce Dept. is adjusting the wayit calculates growth in GDP--in particular, how much of growth represents areal increase in output vs. how much results from inflation. The old systemtended to overemphasize growth in surging industries with falling prices,primarily computers, thus ballooning the economy's overall growth rate.   The new ``chain-weighted'' measures will reflect price changes morequickly, resulting in less exaggeration of fast-growing sectors. So whilethe old scale measured GDP growing at a respectable 2.8% in 1995, theCommerce Dept. will probably report a 2% gain by the new measures--forcingbusiness and economists to recalibrate notions of what constitutes a``weak'' or ``strong'' economy. BUSINESS WEEK uses the chain-weightedsystem in this report.GROWING SEASON. However you measure it, the 1996 economy will feature somefamiliar trends, such as downsizing. Outplacement specialists ChallengerGray & Christmas Inc. predict that corporate layoffs will total 420,000 in1996, matching 1995's level. Payroll-shedding will be most common inindustries where the government's role, either as a purchaser or aregulator, is shrinking: defense, aerospace, telecommunications, banking,and utilities.   Slash-and-burn alone, however, will no longer dominate strategysessions. ``Very few companies have created sustainable advantages throughshrinking,'' says Thomas J. Tierney, managing director of consultants Bain& Co. More companies say they're focusing on growth strategies designed toincrease sales, boost market share, and expand overseas. In a Septembersurvey of senior planning executives at 100 large U.S. corporations, 73%said that boosting revenues would be more important than cutting costs overthe next three years, according to the Futures Group Inc., strategicplanning consultants. Only 18% of the executives surveyed emphasizedbelt-tightening.   One of the fastest routes to growth is acquisition. The 1995 merger boomwill keep rolling--whether it's telephone and media giants scrambling forstronger positions in explosive communications markets or doctors bandingtogether for clout to deal with insurers. Defense contractors, electricutilities, drugmakers, and banks are all feeling the heat. ``People realizethey need scale to compete--and it's easier to buy than to build,'' saysmergers and acquisitions expert Kim Fennebresque, managing director ofUnion Bank of Switzerland. ``If you have scale, you can reduce costs.''   Take Union Pacific Corp., awaiting government approval for its $3.9billion purchase of Southern Pacific Rail Corp. Ronald J. Burns, CEO ofUnion Pacific Railroad Co., figures the combined lines will reap nearly$700 million a year in cost savings and increased revenues when the deal isdigested. With economies like that within reach, Securities Data Co.expects 1996's M&A activity to top the record $442 billion in 1995 dealsreported as of Dec. 18.   Internal investment will remain heavy, too. For some industries, even athree-year boom in capital spending hasn't satisfied the need for moreproduction capacity: Semiconductor makers are scrambling to build enoughclean rooms to keep up with 20%-plus growth in chip demand. Even sectorswith plenty of new facilities must upgrade for global competition. ``Whenyou're in a harsh, competitive environment, you can't stop modernizing,''says Roger E. Brinner, DRI chief economist. Pharmaceutical firms, whichboosted research spending by a relatively low 8% in 1995, plan to beef upbudgets in search of blockbuster drugs.   Steel is an example of the modernization drive. Despite 1995's collapsein prices, steelmakers are rushing to build minimills. While each newminimill wreaks havoc on existing producers, cheaper production gives steelan edge over other materials: Builders, for example, are using more steeland less concrete. ``People say steel demand is inelastic,'' says NucorCorp. Chairman F. Kenneth Iverson. ``But when you drop the price, youexpand the market.''   Many industries will be looking abroad to expand their markets in 1996.``We're not planning on the U.S. economy to carry us in 1996,'' says DanielJ. Meyer, CEO of Cincinnati Milacron Inc. Outfits such as Milacron lookingto expand sales abroad can count two strong pluses in 1996: Americanindustry is now ranked the world's most competitive, according to theSwiss-based World Economic Forum. And America's top trading partners, aftera poor-to-disastrous 1995, see better economies ahead.   The biggest surprise may be Japan. After a 33% surge in the Nikkei stockindex, coupled with the Bank of Japan's success at stabilizing the yen ataround 100 to the dollar, Tokyo pundits are hopeful that economicstagnation will finally end after four flat years. Forecasters expectJapan's GDP to grow by 1.2% or more in 1996, after inflation.   That growth should open up possibilities for U.S. exporters. Americanbrands are increasingly popular in Tokyo's Ginza, where Gap Inc. recentlyopened a store to push its low-key apparel. U.S. computer makers hold about30% of Japan's $9 billion PC market, with Compaq Computer Corp. and IBMexpecting to reap even more sales from the recent rollout of a Japaneseversion of Windows 95. Even American carmakers are pushing at the gates inhopes of capitalizing on last summer's U.S.-Japan trade deal: Ford MotorCo. and Chrysler Corp. unveiled right-hand-drive models of the Taurus andNeon at this fall's Tokyo auto show.RECOVERING PESO. The other sick economy of 1995--Mexico--will also showsigns of health. Following last winter's peso crisis, the Mexican economyhas shrunk by at least 7%. U.S. exports to Mexico fell by 9% in 1995, whilethe cheap peso powered a sharp 30% rise in Mexican sales to El Norte. Now,Mexico seems set for a slow recovery, with 1.5% to 2% growth in 1996followed by 4% or more in 1997. That won't ignite a boom in U.S. exportsales, but pressure on the trade imbalance could ease if the peso gainsstrength against the dollar.   U.S. companies account for the bulk of the $6.3 billion in directinvestments in Mexico pledged for 1996. AT&T, MCI Communications, and BellAtlantic are spending heavily to prepare for the 1997 opening oftelecommunications. Privatization will spread to petrochemical plants andrailroads in 1996, and Mexico is encouraging foreigners to invest innatural-gas distribution and power plants. U.S. corporations increasinglysee Mexico as an attractive production base for sales to the rest of LatinAmerica. ``We can tie together manufacturing in the U.S. and Mexico and goafter markets in South America,'' says Kenneth C. Brown, president of GE deMexico.   Forecasters don't expect much help with the trade balance from Canada'srebounding economy, which the Bank of Montreal predicts will grow 3.5% in1996. With the weak Canadian dollar (trading at around U.S. 73 cents) andwith shaky Canadian consumers holding on to their wallets, Canada'ssouthbound exports may grow faster than the flow of goods northward. Thatcould push Canada's merchandise trade surplus with the U.S. to a record $27billion in 1996, says Sherry Cooper, chief economist at Toronto brokerageNesbitt Burns.   Europe may not do much for the U.S. trade balance in 1996, either. Whilemembers of the European Union recently unveiled their proposed unifiedcurrency, the Euro, the recent French strikes to protest budget-cutting inParis highlight the difficulty that EU members will have in meeting thestringent fiscal requirements for monetary union. French forecasters expectgrowth of only 1% in 1996. Germany is healthier, but business there isstruggling to remain competitive in the face of high wages and taxes.``Europe still has the pain and agony of downsizing and restructuring aheadof it,'' says Nariman Behravesh, DRI's chief international economist, whopredicts 2.3% growth for the EU in 1996.   For fast growth, U.S. exporters will once again have to turn to Asia.The economies of China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan,and Thailand will grow at rates between 5% and 9% in 1996, down justslightly from 1995. Texas Instruments Inc., for instance, has an Asianexport winner in its high-end digital-signal processing chips, made inAmerica and sold for use in interactive toys, telecom gear, and videodevices. TI's Asian sales rose 50% in 1996, says Victor Koh, managingdirector for Hong Kong and China, in part because Asians are buying moreelectronics for their own use. ``We're benefiting from the higher affluencein Asia,'' he says.   Global crosscurrents will make 1996 the third strong year for Americanexports, which should grow a further 9% after adjustment for inflation. Atthe same time, subdued U.S. consumers may cut down on their purchases ofgoods made abroad. So while the U.S. will still run a trade deficit, theimproved trade balance should add some $18 billion to GDP in 1996, saysAllen Sinai, chief economist at Lehman Brothers Inc., marking ``the firsttime this decade that net exports have been a plus for U.S. growth ratherthan a drag.''BETTER THINGS TO DO. Export gains, continued capital spending, lowinflation, and falling interest rates--what could go wrong with thispicture? The biggest threat to the serene economy of 1996 may lie inWashington. In their struggle over balancing the budget, President Clintonand congressional Republicans have already shut down major portions of thefederal government twice and spooked the markets.   Still, neither the White House nor Capitol Hill has much to gain from abudget stalemate. For both sides, the best course is to strike a deal andmove on to matters closer to politicians' hearts--such as campaigning forNovember's elections. If Washington's dragons and sea serpents will justget out of the way, the U.S. economy could enjoy fair winds in 1996.LeadersHigh-tech and service industries will set the pace in 1996SEMICONDUCTORS: Good-bye to boom-and-bust cycles as chips becomeall-pervasiveSECURITIES: Continued low interest rates will fuel Wall StreetBUSINESS SERVICES: The world wants American services, from advertising toconsultingSOFTWARE: With the Internet, the software industry once again reinventsitselfDEFENSE: Revenue keeps shrinking, but the sector is profiting fromconsolidationLaggardsBasic industries and others serving strapped consumers will trudge alongAUTOS: Sales may rise a bit, but affordability remains a nagging problemINSURANCE: Look for more mergers--and more competition for householdsavingsRETAILING: Heavy discounting will squeeze profits as the weak disappearMETALS: New steelmaking capacity will drag prices downFOOD: Supermarkets will lose ``share of stomach'' to take-out jointsIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: The 1996 EconomyCHARTS BY ALAN BASEDENIllustration: Chart: World GrowthCHARTS BY ALAN BASEDENPhotograph(s):Photograph: PUSH COMES TO...COOPERATION: With depressingly stable prices,how do you turn a buck these days in the oil patch? Talk rivals intoteaming up on production (page 87)PHOTOGRAPHS BY DOUG MILNERPhotograph: WHOPPERS AND WOOFERS TO GO: If you can sell burgers in ahome-electronics store, why not? Here, too, the name of the game is reducedoverhead (page 105)NINA BERMAN/SIPACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TALK SHOWBy:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENG``The world is full of people whose notion of a satisfactory future is, infact, a return to an idealized past.''-- Robertson Davies, the Canadian author of The Cunning Man, who died at 82on Dec. 2Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TEA LEAVES, ANYONE?By:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENGOnce again, Up Front bravely predicts the future. We undertake thisfoolhardy venture on the basis of what we know about the past. That oftencan lead one astray, but it's the best we've got.THE '96 ELECTION. It's Bill Clinton, the Comeback Kid, for four more years.Vilified for much of his first term, he still will outshine his dour GOPchallenger, Bob Dole. Right-wing Republicans, uneasy about deal-cutterDole, will stay home. Ross Perot will mount a third-party foray and skimoff more GOP voters. Public dismay over Gingrichian harshness will give theDems back the House but not the Senate.STOCK MARKET. Funny thing how the economy and the market usually go up inan election year. Aided by lowering interest rates and ebbing inflation,the Dow should rise moderately, to 5600, by Election Day. Nothing like1995's performance, however, since that's hard to top.INTEREST RATES. An eventual federal budget accord--neither party wants tobe accused of gridlock--should give the Federal Reserve all the ammo itneeds to lower rates some more. Look for the Fed, satisfied that inflationis under control, to reduce the federal-funds rate by a half-point, to 5%,by spring. Then it will lay off, so as not to get tangled up in electoralpolitics.MONETARY UNION. The much heralded European Monetary Union will be shelvedduring a summit this summer. Other than Germany, no European country isclose to hitting fiscal targets set up by the Maastricht Treaty for asingle currency. These require cutting budget deficits and debt by 1997. Asthe strikes in France show, the necessary austerity is not popular. Plus,Europe's economies are weakening, which will make achieving the treaty'sgoals even harder.APPLE. Woebegone Apple Computer will sell off chunks of its business, sinceno buyer wants the whole thing. Look for Oracle's Larry Ellison, SunMicrosystems, or IBM to acquire software. Japan's Canon could be a buyerfor the hardware.DISNEY. Mickey's run of smash animated films will end with this summer'srelease of The Hunchback of Notre Dame. While not a bust, this flick willdo nowhere near the box office of The Lion King blockbuster or even themoderate hit Pocahontas. In a bid to lure boys and teens, Disney choseQuasimodo's unlovely tale. This downbeat story, though, will turn offtraditional Disney fans. Plus, the movie has few of the soaring musicalnumbers that punctuated earlier efforts.CHRYSLER. A nasty proxy fight erupts as Kirk Kerkorian challenges Chrysler.His goal is to name his lieutenant Jerome York to the board, launch a hugestock buyback, and double the dividend. Result: CEO Robert Eaton fends offthe billionaire. Eaton shunts some of the company's $6.4 billion in sparecash--which Kerkorian wanted to use for dividends and buybacks--into themore productive pursuit of a joint venture with a foreign auto maker.THE INTERNET. Net fever will cool off a notch or two. With scads ofcompanies already on the Net but profits scarce, new offerings will taperoff. Look for consolidation among the companies providing Net services.Most likely winners: America Online, Netscape, Microsoft.Illustration(s):Illustration: SLICE AND DICE: ApplePhotograph(s):Photograph: FEARLESS FORECASTSPHOTOGRAPH BY GAMMA-LIAISON (CLINTON)Photograph: FRANCE: On strike against austerityPHOTOGRAPH BY BUU SIMON/GAMMA-LIAISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SMARTEST MOVES OF 1995By:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENG1. AT&T focused its energies on the booming telecom market by forging plansto spin off its manufacturing arm and its problem-plagued computer unit(the former NCR). The stock has soared since, wiping out all the NCRlosses.2. Early investors in the Netscape public offering profited outrageously.Since going public at 28 last summer, it topped 150 by early December.3. Colin Powell adroitly managed his public persona with his book tour. Bythen ruling out a Presidential bid, he avoids the mud of the 1996primaries. So he's free to be crowned the GOP Vice-Presidential nominee.4. Kirk Kerkorian advanced his battle to win more influence at Chrysler byhiring its former CFO, Jerome York. York's baleful analyses of thecarmaker's finances grabbed investor attention.5. Caterpillar hung tough and got the United Auto Workers to come back fromtheir 18-month strike, accepting terms they rejected at the outset.Photograph(s):Photograph: NICE HIRE: KirkPHOTOGRAPH BY WAYNE KODEY/LAS VEGAS REVIEW (KIRK)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DUMBEST MOVES OF 1995By:EDITED BY LARRY LIGHT, WITH PAUL ENG1. Daiwa Bank let a U.S.-based trader run up $1.1 billion in losses. A keyregulator at Japan's Ministry of Finance knew about the mess but let itslide.2. Barings collapsed because it didn't know until too late thatSingapore-based trader Nick Leeson ran up $1.4 billion in losses.3. Newt Gingrich's abrasiveness and vainglory blunted his message. Bigexample: He said he favored shutting down the government in November partlyout of pique that Bill Clinton made him sit in the back of Air Force One.4. Calvin Klein was forced to withdraw his jeans ads, which used teenmodels in suggestive poses. Critics accused him of purveying kiddie porn.5. ABC knuckled under to Philip Morris' $10 billion libel suit over aprogram about cigarettes' nicotine content that contained one defensibleerror.Photograph(s):Photograph: BAD BOY: A Calvin adPhotograph: TOUCHY: NewtPHOTOGRAPH BY GAMMA-LIAISON (NEWT)Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FROM CHRISTMAS BLAHS TO NEW YEAR'S EASEBy:BY JAMES C. COOPER & KATHLEEN MADIGANWhile Congress and the White House play their political games over thebudget, they seem oblivious to the dangers of testing the patience of thefinancial markets. With so much anticipation for deficit reduction alreadypriced into the markets, Wall Street had better get some good news fromWashington fast, or another 102-point tumble in stock prices and a sharpsell-off in bonds like those of Dec. 18 could be in the making.   For now, at least, the markets have taken solace from elsewhere inWashington: the Federal Reserve. The Fed's Dec. 19 quarter-point cut inshort-term interest rates has soothed the markets' edginess, not so muchbecause of that one snip but because it now looks as though more policyeasing is on the way.   The strongest hint of that is the reason given by the Fed for its latestcut. Chairman Alan Greenspan cited not a soft economy but inflation thatwas ``somewhat more favorable than anticipated.'' More important, he noted``an associated moderation in inflation expectations.'' The two-point dropduring the past year in long-term bond yields, which incorporateanticipated inflation, bears that out.   If such expectations are indeed down, the Fed cannot justify holding itsovernight federal funds rate nearly three full points above the rate ofinflation, in light of an historical average of only about 1 3/4%. WhatGreenspan is saying is this: Against a more sanguine attitude toward futureinflation, real short-term rates are simply too high.   Moreover, these expectations of lower inflation are not fleeting. Theyare set to stay down amid continued modest economic growth, an eventualbudget deal, a stronger dollar, and a new order of technology-drivencompetitiveness in Corporate America.THE IMPACT of these structural forces is clear in the November consumerprice index, which was flat for the first time since the end of the lastrecession in March, 1991. The core index, which excludes the volatileenergy and food sectors, rose a scant 0.1%.   Through November, annual CPI inflation was running at 2.6%, the same asin 1994, and it seems likely to have ended 1995 very near that pace. Backin July, the Fed's own forecast projected that inflation for the year wouldbe much higher, between 3.1% and 3.4%.   Even service inflation, widely anticipated to be the first area toregister a speedup, has remained modest, at about 3.4% for most of theyear. Meanwhile, goods inflation, at 1.5% in November, is hardly on theradar (chart). However, that low rate is the result of deep discounting bymany retailers, which threatens their profits--and for some, their veryexistence.   Retailers' dreary little Christmas provides additional support for awinter rate cut. Despite the expected last-minute surge, stores stillreported pretty dismal sales in December. Rampant price promotions to lureshoppers subtracted from dollar revenues. The early winter weather in someparts of the nation only added to the problem. The Johnson Redbook Reportsaid December sales at department and discount stores through Dec. 23 were2.4% below November sales.   Lifeless sales mean that yearend profits will be a disaster for manyretailers, and the consolidation process already wracking the industry willaccelerate. More chains, especially regional discounters and apparelstores, are likely to seek bankruptcy protection.   The resulting liquidations could well lead to further downward pressureon goods prices. If so, an actual decline in the monthly CPI in any of thecoming months cannot be ruled out.   This lack of price pressure should bolster the strong low-inflationsentiment in the bond market. And given the Fed's statement on inflationaryexpectations, low long-term rates will give the central bank even more roomfor another rate cut.DO THE RETAIL WOES mean that the economy is tanking? Not necessarily. Muchof the profits decline stemmed from price cutting, so sales on aninflation-adjusted basis should look somewhat better. Also, consumerconfidence, while down slightly in December, remains at the level it hasheld for most of 1995 (chart).   Moreover, according to one top Fed official, the central bank is awarethat the reports from individual retailers do not match the data used tocalculate the Commerce Dept.'s retail sales figures. And those retailnumbers do not include service purchases, which have remained healthy inrecent months.   But while consumer buying is not as dramatically weak as the dourreports from retailers would suggest, demand will still be no better thanmodest. One reason is that in early 1996 consumers will have to contendwith their holiday credit-card bills.THE RESULT WILL BE continued pressure on industrial output and employment,as businesses adjust their inventories to more desirable levels. Thatscenario should translate into unexciting economic growth in the newyear--another reason the Fed will have room to ease policy further.   In October, inventories held by manufacturers, wholesalers, andretailers rose 0.6%, but sales tumbled 0.4%. During the past year, theannual growth rates of both inventories and sales have been slowing, butthe pace of sales has slowed faster (chart).   That disparity is the chief reason for the continued sluggishness in theindustrial sector. Industrial production in November rose a tepid 0.2%,following a decline in October. Output for the fourth quarter is on trackto rise even more slowly than the lackluster 3.2% annual rate posted in thethird quarter.   The international economic climate is also conducive to rate cutting.Even before the Fed's Dec. 19 move, the British Treasury and the GermanBundesbank had trimmed rates in the face of slower economic growth. Andfollowing the Fed, the Bank of Canada eased monetary policy as well.   Other European central banks followed the German lead, as growththroughout Europe appears to be slowing, leading most private forecastersto cut their projections for 1996 European growth. Almost allindustrialized nations reported weak holiday sales.   Consequently, the dollar should be able to maintain its recent trend ofappreciation against the German mark and the Japanese yen, even in the faceof further rate reductions by the Fed. The greenback will get some addedsupport when a budget deal rolls in from Washington--whenever that may takeplace.   That delay, however, will not hamstring monetary policy. In the recentlyreleased minutes of the Fed's Nov. 15 meeting, the central bankers agreedthat the Fed ``could not freeze its policy options while it awaited theoutcome of a prolonged federal budget debate.''   Now that Shutdown II has stretched to record length, the Fed's refusalto be tied to the political wrangling means that economic and inflationaryforces will set the course of monetary policy in early 1996. And right now,those forces point to further easing ahead.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Goods Prices Hold Down InflationERIC HOFFMANN/BWIllustration: Chart: Households Remain UpbeatERIC HOFFMANN/BWIllustration: Chart: Stock Levels Are Outpacing SalesERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A HARD-WON VICTORY IN A SOFT ECONOMYBy:BY JAMES C. COOPER & KATHLEEN MADIGANAfter a dismal 1995, Argentina is poised for an expansionary 1996. And thatgrowth will pave the way for fiscal improvement and a stable currency.   The latest sign that Argentina is coming out of recession came from theLatin America Research Fund. The private agency reported that demand forindustrial goods rose again in November. Purchases have been increasingsince hitting a three-year low in August, with capital goods leading thegain. In addition, in its semiannual survey the government said that theunemployment rate slipped to 16.4% in October, from a record high of 18.4%in May. However, only part of the drop is the result of job growth of40,000 new slots. The rest came from workers dropping out of the laborforce.   Argentina's economy likely fell by 2.5% in 1995, but the government isforecasting growth of 5% in 1996. Private economists expect a morerealistic 3% advance this year. Economic growth should be fueled by lowerinterest rates, a stronger peso--thanks to its link to the rising U.S.dollar and low inflation--and inflows of foreign funds. Already, prospectsof better corporate profits have lifted the stock market in recent weeks.   Economic growth will keep the markets rising. And it will help thegovernment balance the budget in 1996, after Argentina's $2.4 billiondeficit in 1995. To raise revenues, Congress hiked the cigarette tax by 7%on Dec. 21.   Argentina's slump was the result of an austerity program to fighthyperinflation--a battle that has succeeded so far. Consumer prices were up1.7% from a year ago in November (chart). Inflation is on track to risebetween 1.5% and 1.7% for 1995, the lowest rate on record. In 1989,Argentine inflation ran at a stunning 5,000%.   The International Monetary Fund has blessed Argentina's economic andfiscal progress, saying it would lend Argentina $380 million this year.That influx of funds--along with private money attracted by the risingstock market--is added insurance that Argentina's economy will grow in1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Argentina's Headway Against InflationERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HERE COMES GRIDLOCK '96Dug-in liberals and GOP zealots spell election-year paralysisBy:By Richard S. Dunham, with Lee Walczak, in WashingtonCiting irreconcilable differences with his Republican foes, PresidentClinton vetoes appropriations bill after appropriations bill, leaving largechunks of the government to run on fumes. A bitter budget impasse shuttersthe federal bureaucracy for the longest stretch in history, forcing theTreasury to resort to creative accounting to fund essential arms ofgovernment. Voters increasingly dismiss the capital caterwauling as thelatest example of Washington's childishness. Actually, there's another wayto describe the capital's escalating political brawl: dress rehearsal.   As the 1995 legislative season draws to a rancorous close with the fateof a budget-balancing accord, welfare reform, and other key legislationunresolved, the tone is being set for next year's policy struggles. In thebest of times, an election-year Congress can be expected to elevatepolitical theatrics over substance. But the ideological differences betweendug-in Democratic liberals, GOP hardliners, and a President obsessed byreelection will ensure that next year's Congress--and any chance businesshad for advancing the solid legislative gains of '95--will be stymied byparalyzing political gamesmanship.   Even as GOP and Administration budget negotiators warily convened for around of post-Christmas talks, the realization was growing that aftermonths of Republican dominance, Washington has once again become GridlockCity. ``We're ready to kill each other already,'' laments a Democraticleadership aide. ``It can't get any worse--can it?''   Actually, it can, and it will. Bolstered by his success at using theMedicare debate to paint Republicans as extremists, President Clinton plansto continue his political jiu-jitsu in 1996. The new target: a GOP flat-taxproposal that the Administration will cast as a boondoggle for wealthyinvestors. Says a Clinton adviser: ``Medicare was just a dress rehearsalfor what Republicans are in for when Democrats start in on the `taxgiveaway for the rich.'''HANGING TOUGH. If Clinton is spoiling for another fight along class lines,he's sure to find one with a combative group of Hill conservatives who arenot letting House Speaker Newt Gingrich's plunging popularity cool theirfervor. The freshmen have hardened GOP resistance to a budget-balancingaccord and promise to make more trouble next year by redoubling attacks onthe welfare state.   The hang-tough tactics ``haven't been marching orders from NewtGingrich,'' says rookie Representative Steve Largent (R-Okla.). ``We camein here with our name on the dotted line.'' Adds freshman RepresentativeZach Wamp (R-Tenn.): ``We've been called radical and extreme, but I thinkwe're right out of the heart of America.'' Still, business leaders worrythat the freshmen's all-or-nothing approach is overly antagonistic. ``Thewar is worth fighting,'' says Amway President Dick DeVos. ``But itshouldn't be done stupidly.''   To appreciate just how complicated 1996's legislative equation will be,take a short stroll across the Capitol from the foxholes of House GOPguerrillas to the placid quarters of Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole. TheRepublican front-runner will pursue his own agenda--and none of it includesriling potential voters, Gingrich-style. Dole plans a light Senate schedulefor the first three months of '96, which will give him lots of time to wrapup the nomination. Concedes one senior House staffer: ``All we're going toget done around here is the minimum must-pass agenda.''   Even a minimal Hill agenda could fall victim to gridlock. Aside frommonitoring preliminary hearings on radical simplification of the tax code,business is keenest on winning regulatory relief from nuisance lawsuits,environmental mandates, and overeager regulators who don't weigh thepotential economic impact of new rules. The outlook for sweeping change iseven gloomier. For starters, Dems will continue to score political pointsby portraying GOP reformers as too cozy with polluters and overly beholdento corporate benefactors. And House and Senate Republican moderates willcontinue to line up with Dems against GOP radicals. The bottom line forbusiness: little progress in '96.   On another front of interest to business lobbyists--politicalreform--bipartisan attempts to limit the role of organized giving inpolitical campaigns seem likely to be thwarted by the leaders of bothparties. Newly triumphant Republican leaders are shaking the corporatemoney tree hard and don't want to give up their advantage. Democrats,meanwhile, remain hooked on reforms that include taxpayer subsidiesvehemently opposed by Republicans. The prospect: Look for superficialreforms, at best, and torrents of pious rhetoric.DEEP BELIEFS. GOP plans to dismantle New Deal social programs by returningresponsibility to the states will face tough sledding, too. Already, GOPmoderates have quashed reformers' efforts to turn food stamps and theschool lunch program into state-run block grants. And Clinton's attack onGOP schemes to shift Medicaid to state capitals is just a preview of a '96Democratic assault that charges Republicans aim to shred the social safetynet. The outlook: Although Clinton may yet cut a deal on a proposal to endthe federal guarantee of open-ended welfare benefits, other GOP``devolution'' initiatives will languish.   At bottom, deeply held partisan beliefs frame this running debate aboutthe role of government. But the tactics of the combatants are disturbingthe American electorate. In December, the Harris Poll's annual ``alienationindex'' hit a 30-year high. And an Associated Press poll released on Dec.26 found that 29% of those surveyed said neither political party addressestheir top concerns. That's why the return of Washington gridlock will spurdemands for new political options--whether it's Ross Perot's infant ReformParty or another movement.   ``People are concerned by all the posturing and shifting of blame,''says New Hampshire pollster Richard Bennett. ``All politicians are going topay the price.'' Perhaps. But until a resurgent Bill Clinton, unrepentantGingrichites, and comeback-minded Democratic liberals pause to assess thelong-term costs of their scorched-earth tactics, don't look for any breakfrom gridlock politics. All sides are having too much fun gumming up thegears of the American political machinery to stop now.If you liked the partisan battles of '95, you'll love what's in store for'96TAX REFORMExpect early skirmishing over GOP plans to overhaul taxes. Republicans willpush competing plans for a flatter income tax. The Democrats want reformthat retains progressive tax rates and closes corporate loopholes.REG-SLASHINGRepublicans will renew calls for legislation that gives companies relieffrom lawsuits and environmental mandates. The Democrats, allied withRepublican moderates, will again attack reform proposals as extreme.WELFARE REFORMClinton's likely veto of the GOP welfare bill will send everyone back tothe table. In '96, Republicans hope to cast Clinton as a defender ofwelfare deadbeats. Democrats will hold out for better work incentives and asafety net for mothers.POWER TO THE STATESRepublicans who failed in '95 to end entitlements for food stamps and otherprograms will try to shift the programs to states. Democrats will arguethat states lack the resources to fund income-support plans during economicdownturns.THE RIGHT'S AGENDAUnder heavy pressure from conservative freshmen, House Speaker NewtGingrich will allow votes on new abortion restrictions and a repeal of theassault-weapons ban. Democrats will try to thwart both measures.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE ECONOMY THAT FELL TO EARTHGermany's slowdown is scaring its neighborsBy:By John Templeman in Bonn, with Heidi Dawley in London, Silvia Sansoni inRome, and bureau reportsGermany is supposed to be Europe's locomotive. But thanks in part to recentFrench strikes holding up shipments of German goods, gross domestic productprobably will show no growth in the fourth quarter, the second stagnantquarter in a row. Unemployment, rising since last spring, is now at 9.3%.Exports are weakening. Capital spending is slumping. And corporate profitsare falling. Says Ian Harwood, head of strategy and economics at London'sKleinwort Benson Group PLC: ``Fears of a hard landing are growing.''   Indeed, while a tax cut, a recent Bundesbank interest-rate reduction,and a widely expected decline in the German mark may produce a briefrebound in the first half, the year ahead looks grim. Unless consumersunzip their pocketbooks in a hurry--and that looks doubtful--Germany willhave a hard time even reaching the anemic 2% growth rate it achieved in1995 (chart).   Such downbeat forecasts scare Germany's neighbors. ``If Germany slowsdown, everyone else winds down with it,'' says Sergio De Nardis, senioreconomist at Confindustria, the Italian industrialists' federation. Thatcould spell the end of Europe's grand plans for a single currency andmonetary union by the start of 1999. European Union nations, led by France(box), already are struggling to cut budget deficits and cap governmentdebt levels to bring them in line with the Maastricht Treaty. But a seriousgrowth setback starting from Germany would lower tax revenues, raisegovernment borrowing, and bloat deficits across the EU, putting monetaryunion out of reach and blowing further European unification out of thewater.   To a great degree, Germans have themselves to blame for theirpredicament. Economics Minister Gunter Rexrodt blames the current slowdownon a high mark, big wage hikes, and rising taxes. Add overregulation ofbusiness and rigid work rules, and it's no surprise that German companiesmade some $26 billion in direct investments outside the country in thefirst nine months of 1995, double the 1994 rate. The money is flowing toEastern Europe, Asia, and even Britain, whose manufacturing costs are 40%lower than Germany's.   The huge gap prompted Siemens, for example, to choose Britain as thesite for a $1.7 billion semiconductor plant. Consumer-products makerProcter & Gamble Co., meanwhile, has stopped making new investments inGermany. Its high business costs, warns Harald Einsmann, P&G regionalpresident, risk turning the country into the ``hole in the doughnut'' inEurope's industrial landscape.   As manufacturers rethink their commitment to Germany, hollowing out isbecoming a growth business. Two-thirds of management consultant McKinsey &Co.'s German trade now consists of helping manufacturers expand productionin other parts of the world. Says Senior Partner Herbert Henzler:``Germany's present export model--design it, make it, and export it fromhere--is no longer viable.''WARY CONSUMERS. With more companies adopting that mantra, workforce cutswill continue. Germany has already lost 1 million jobs since 1992, mostlyin manufacturing. But employers' organizations warn that another 500,000 to1 million jobs are at risk unless wage costs, particularly welfare taxes,fall. Little wonder that in one recent poll, two-thirds of easternGermans--and half of those in the west--told the Allensbach-basedDemoskopie Institut that the risk of losing their jobs is now their biggestworry.   That's bad news for policymakers who are counting on a revival ofconsumer demand. Many expect further Bundesbank rate cuts, and an $11billion income tax reduction kicks in on Jan. 1. Will that money find itsway into stores? Some analysts are skeptical, noting that after months ofbelt-tightening to pay higher taxes, many consumers aren't about to loosenup with the economy slowing. ``We went without so much this year, that wemight consider spending [the tax rebate],'' says Gabi Lewin, a mother oftwo whose husband works in an accountant's office. ``But if things getworse over the short term, we might just sock it away and wait.''   Reflecting that caution, retail sales fell 2.5% in 1995, the thirdstraight decline, and a hoped-for late spurt in Christmas buying failed tomaterialize. And forget about 1996. Walter Deuss, chief executive officerof the Karstadt department-store chain, notes that recent surveys ``don'tpoint to any durable improvement in consumer confidence.''   While Germany waits for consumer spending to revive, the economycontinues to flag. If the U.S. is any guide, German restructuring effortscould start bearing fruit around the time the EU plans to get its monetaryunion into motion. That could leave Germany stronger and more competitivethan ever. Until then, expect anxiety levels to keep rising--in Germany andacross Europe.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Signs Of German StagnationCHARTS BY ERIC HOFFMANN/BWCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NOW JUPPE HAS TO PICK UP THE PIECESBy:By Bill Javetski in ParisAs Paris buses and subways began running again in late December afterFrance's worst strikes in three decades, drivers and token-booth clerkscheerfully welcomed commuters back by letting them ride free of charge. Itwas a smart public-relations move--but it was also unauthorized, showingjust how feisty France's public-sector unions are feeling after paralyzingthe country for 24 days. In forcing Prime Minister Alain Juppe to back awayfrom several key reforms, labor leaders have set the stage for a perilousNew Year as France tries to curb spending, revive growth, and prepare formonetary union. Without a strong government in charge, achieving any ofthose goals may be impossible.   It is true that Juppe did not lose everything in his struggle with theunions. In late December, a ``social summit'' with labor and industry leftintact a core plan to eliminate France's $12 billion health-care deficit.But the realization is sinking in that ``Juppe is storing up problems forthe future,'' figures Christopher Potts, economist at Paris brokerageChevreux De Virieu.BATTERED ECONOMY. For starters, Juppe's health-care plan probably marks thelimits of the reforms that his government will achieve. Tackling the costsof France's civil service now seems impossible, since to end the strikes,Juppe caved on the key points of reforming the loss-ridden nationalrailroad and aligning public-sector pensions with more restrictiveprivate-sector ones. And with his autocratic style, Juppe has failed tobuild any kind of consensus for further cuts, even though governmentspending is fast pushing up debt levels to dangerous heights (chart).   Yet Germany, France's key European partner, is insisting on even deeperFrench budgetary austerity for a possible monetary union. For a singlecurrency to work, France must meet the German demands. Even a vigorouseconomic upturn won't be enough to keep Juppe from needing additionalspending cuts to shrink the deficit from its current 5% of gross domesticproduct to 3% by the end of 1997. That's when France and other aspiringcandidates must prove they qualify for the currency union.   France's economy enters 1996 badly battered from the strikes, which mayresume at the end of January. Estimates of the strikes' costs in losteconomic activity range as high as $4 billion. The crippling job action,which dried up holiday shopping, put some 50,000 small businesses at riskof failing, according to Conseil National du Patronat Francais, the Frenchemployers' association. ``We're in recession now, and we'll enter 1996slowing down further,'' says CNPF Vice-President Denis Kessler.Unemployment, which recently began rising again, will top 12% by June, thenational statistics office estimates. Morgan Stanley Group Inc. economistEric Chaney sees France's economy growing just 1.3% next year. For 1997,the critical year for picking nations that will be eligible for monetaryunion, he sees France's budget deficit hovering above 4%, a full percentagepoint off the target.THIN GRUEL.. Boxed in by the unions, Juppe hopes to stimulate moribundconsumer activity by granting tax breaks to investors selling stakes inmoney-market funds. To tackle 20% youth unemployment, he is looking topersuade companies to fill half their job vacancies with people under theage of 25. And he is calling on business and labor to speed up negotiationsover part-time work and other ways to make French industry more flexible.   But that's thin gruel considering France's budgetary plight. The strikesmay be over for now. But their repercussions on France and all of Europewill be felt through 1996 and beyond.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: France's Growing Debt ProblemCHARTS BY ERIC HOFFMANN/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: STYMIED: The strikes hurt retailersCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FROM BLUEPRINTS TO GRAND DESIGNEx-engineer John Correnti now must recast NucorBy:By Stephen Baker in PittsburghAs a young engineer, John D. Correnti built factories for a living. The jobkept him moving about as often as a traveling salesman. He built blastfurnaces in Ohio, a tire-cord factory in Georgia, a uranium plant in Texas.He was usually hundreds of miles away, he now jokes, by the time anyglitches appeared. In 1983, Correnti was finishing up a steel mill in Utahfor Nucor Corp. when he got a surprise phone call from Chairman F. KennethIverson ordering him to run the plant. Correnti was stunned. ``You didn'ttell me I'd have to live with my mistakes,'' he protested.   Iverson just called Correnti again--and this time he's turning the wholeshebang over to him. On Jan. 1, the 48-year-old executive will take over asCEO of the Charlotte (N.C.) minimill giant, which is poised to passBethlehem Steel Corp. as the second-biggest steel company in America,trailing only the U.S. Steel Group of USX Corp. The transition shouldn't bebumpy for the compact, silver-templed Correnti: Since 1991, he has beenNucor's chief operating officer. What's more, Iverson is sticking around aschairman. Still, taking over for a CEO who led Nucor to 30 years of strongsales growth and solid profits is daunting. ``He's an icon,'' Correntisays.ADJUSTMENTS NEEDED. Correnti's promotion comes at a trying time for Nucor.For a decade, it has been the high-flying Wal-Mart of the steel industry,keeping costs down on basic products and passing the savings on tocustomers. But as imitators spring up, also offering cheap, basic steel,Nucor finds itself under pressure to revamp its product mix and get intohigher-margin steels. Meanwhile, it's still struggling with new technologyat its iron carbide plant in Trinidad. Worried investors have traded thestock down to about $54, vs. last year's high of $72.   Correnti admits Nucor has some adjusting to do. To compete in premiummarkets, it must improve product quality. Customers in those markets, suchas auto and appliance makers, also demand lots of customized attention, aspecialty of the integrated steel companies.   Yet Correnti takes over a strong, nearly debt-free company. As newchallengers grapple with startups in Kentucky and Indiana, Nucor already isexperimenting with making upscale stainless steel and ultrathin gauges inits Indiana and Arkansas plants. Plus, it's busy building a thirdflat-rolled steel mill, a $500 million behemoth in South Carolina. Correntiexpects Nucor's sales this year to jump 13%, to $3.35 billion, and earningsto top 1994's record $227 million. He's looking for 15% to 20% sales growthfor the next five years. Even if Nucor stumbles, it likely will eclipseU.S. Steel as the No.1 steelmaker by the year 2000. ``After South Carolina,it would just take one more mill,'' he says.FRIEND OF BILL. The question is whether Nucor under Correnti can staynimble. He says he will keep the 22-person headquarters small and continuedelegating great powers to the plant managers. His job? To oversee newprojects, stay in touch with Wall Street, and visit the 19 divisions two orthree times a year. Except for all the flying time--spent reading mysterynovels--Nucor's rapid growth rate won't be much of a drain on its CEO, hesays; ``What's the difference between 15 divisions and 30 divisions? It'sjust a few more lines on the page.''   Correnti is regarded as harder-driving than the genial Iverson, and hepreens a bit more in the limelight. He made friends with then-Governor BillClinton when the company was negotiating plant sites in Arkansas. And hecontinues to meet with Clinton, talking steel and politics at the WhiteHouse--or, more recently, chatting at a Little Rock banquet for retiringDemocratic Senator David H. Pryor. ``I'm one of the Republican Friends ofBill,'' he says.   He's also quicker than Iverson to make enemies. Speaking at RobertMorris College in Pittsburgh, Correnti bulled into a subject mostexecutives sidestep, saying matter-of-factly that he would ``never dream ofbuilding a mill'' in a union town like Pittsburgh. But as competition heatsup for Nucor, Correnti's combative ways might be just what the companyneeds.JOHN D. CORRENTIBORN Apr. 1, 1947, Rochester, N.Y.EDUCATION Clarkson University, BS in civil engineeringCAREER PATH Construction engineer at U.S. Steel; plant manager, COO atNucorGOAL To expand Nucor by 15% to 20% a year, which would make it the No.1U.S. steelmakerHOBBIES Skiing, reading Dick Francis mysteriesQUOTE ``I just want to keep the train on track, steaming ahead''Photograph(s):Photograph: BACKUPCorrenti, left, will still have the counsel of the savvy Iverson, who isstaying on as chairmanWILL MCINTYRECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SHE IS THE NRAIts first female chief is out to oust Clinton and lure womenBy:By Paul Magnusson in WashingtonMarion P. Hammer was working late one night in Tallahassee when a carloadof thugs followed her into a parking garage and threatened her. ``I reachedinto my purse, pulled out my gun, brought it up through the headlights, andaimed right at the driver,'' she recalls. ``He put it in reverse, the tiresstarted smoking, and they were gone.''   That was a decade ago, when Hammer was lobbying the Florida legislatureto relax restrictions on handguns. Her success there helped kick off a28-state movement to ease restrictions on carrying concealed weapons. InDecember, her record as a winning lobbyist and hard-line opponent of guncontrol helped her become the first female president of the 3.3million-member National Rifle Assn. after her predecessor, Thomas L.Washington, died of a heart attack. Hammer, who had been vice-president, isexpected to run unopposed in April for a one-year term of her own.   Now, the 56-year-old Hammer has her adversaries firmly in her sights.She wants Congress to overturn the federal assault weapons ban.``Restrictions on gun ownership are just a form of harassment,'' she says.Next up is the defeat of pro-gun-control politicians--starting with thePresident. ``The one thing we definitely plan to do is to work to beat BillClinton,'' says Hammer.   Hammer's confrontational style may be just right for today's embattledNRA, which has image and money problems, has recently lost 200,000 members,and is being audited by the Internal Revenue Service for allegedlycommingling funds. To boost membership again, Hammer plans to step up theNRA's appeal to women and families using two time-honored NRA programs: the``Refuse to be a Victim'' educational campaign for women, emphasizing crimeprevention and self-defense while promoting gun ownership; and the ``EddieEagle'' gun-safety campaign for children, which is Hammer's personalcreation.``WILDLY SUCCESSFUL.'' Under Hammer, the NRA won't neglect politics at thestatehouse either. She spent 20 years lobbying in Florida on behalf of gunowners and proudly points to Florida's first concealed-weapons permit,which allows her to pack her .38 caliber Colt Detective Special or her 9-mmBeretta semiautomatic. ``During the past three years, the NRA has beenwildly successful in the states, and Hammer is the poster child for theconceal-and-carry issue,'' laments Josh Sugarmann, director of the ViolencePolicy Center, a gun-control group.   Hammer, a grandmother of three, likes to unwind at the target rangeafter a day of hard lobbying. On the range or at the office, her opponentssay, she seldom misses her mark.Photograph(s):Photograph: TRUE BELIEVERLobbyist Hammer fended off thugs with a hidden weapon, then sparked a28-state push to ease curbs on handgunsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TELECOM: WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THE WALLS FALLOnce reform passes, a frenzy of pair-ups is sure to followBy:By Joseph Weber in Philadelphia, with John Carey in WashingtonThey might as well be ringing a starting bell on the Capitol steps.Washington's long revamp of telecommunications law is just about finished.The message most telecom companies hear ringing loud and clear: Let thedeals begin.   On Dec. 20, House and Senate conferees finally hammered out a compromisethat would allow Baby Bells, cable-TV operators, and long-distancecompanies to invade one another's turf. It would also permit companies toown more radio and TV stations than is now permitted. Thorny details, suchas how much to relax curbs on foreign ownership of U.S. companies, remainto be determined. But says Representative Rick Boucher (D-Va.): ``All thecore issues have been settled. This will be landmark legislation.''   Once the bill is passed, probably by early 1996, a swarm of mergers,alliances, and joint ventures seems inevitable. That's because most of therigid regulatory barriers between segments of the industry will be gone.Now, says Robert Barada, chief strategist for San Francisco-based Baby BellPacific Telesis Group: ``Technology and customer demand are going to breakdown the walls.''``LOOKING.'' Which companies are likely to pair up? Bell Atlantic Corp. andNynex Corp. may be among the first, either through a complete mergeror--more probable--a joint venture on long-distance service. Bell AtlanticCEO Raymond W. Smith and Nynex chief Ivan Seidenberg already have jointventures going to provide cellular phone service and, with PacTel, developprogramming for cable TV. Indeed, a Bell Atlantic spokesman calls along-distance joint venture with Nynex ``a real option.'' Adds NynexTelecom Group President Richard A. Jalkut: ``We are looking at all possiblecombinations.''   Teaming up to challenge AT&T, MCI Communications, and Sprint in thelong-distance market would make good business sense for the two NortheastBaby Bells. The Bell Atlantic and Nynex regions account for $20.5 billionof the nation's annual $73 billion long-distance bill (charts). A mergerwould give the two Bells the marketing and technical firepower needed tocompete for customers. Just pooling their ad budgets--Bell Atlantic alonespends about $105 million yearly on all advertising--would challenge the $1billion the Big Three long-distance carriers spend promoting their phoneservices.   Who's next? Analysts expect each Baby Bell to eventually link up with atleast one other. Among the predicted pairings: Pactel and US West, SanAntonio-based SBC Communications and BellSouth, and, perhaps, Chicago-basedAmeritech with Bell Atlantic and Nynex. GTE Corp., with phone linesscattered around the country, is expected to find allies, too. Among otherthings, partnerships would help the Bells better tap international markets.Team-ups of Southern Baby Bells, for instance, could move into LatinAmerica, while Western outfits could target the Pacific Rim.CULTURE CLASH. Long-distance providers, too, should find dealmakingirresistible. Pacts with the Baby Bells would eliminate the need toduplicate local networks while providing potent marketing partners.Analysts say MCI Communications Corp. is a natural ally for a BellAtlantic-Nynex team, for instance. But long-distance carriers are lookingfurther afield as well. Since late 1994, Sprint Corp. and cable operatorsTele-Communications, Cox Cable, and Comcast have been exploring ways toleverage phone and cable-TV operations into advanced communicationssystems. One caveat: A couple of years ago, Bell Atlantic sought to mergewith TCI in a failed deal that confirmed Smith's empire-buildingaspirations. That failure showed how tough it can be to join the go-gocable world with the more conservative Bells.   Another caveat: Analysts figure AT&T will probably avoid cutting dealswith Baby Bells because it won't want to be accused of recreating Ma Bell.It may team up instead with, say, Time Warner Inc.--already a rumorednegotiating partner--to use cable lines for local phone service. That woulddramatically blur the old lines between segments of the telecomindustry--and set the stage for even more radical change. The deals to comewill be ``complex, multifaceted, multidimensional things,'' says TonyFerrugia, a telecom analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc. in St. Louis.   In the end, the rewired telecom biz probably will include far fewerplayers who will deliver better service and offer bold innovations. Ma Bellwon't exactly be coming back together after 12 years, but some of heroffspring almost certainly will.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Two Phone Giants' Long ReachCHART BY LISA KNOUSE BRAIMAN/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: SEIDENBERG AND SMITH: A long-distance joint venture?(L TO R) PHOTOGRAPHS BY TIM REDEL; KATHERINE LAMBERTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ALL TOGETHER NOW: `MAKE THAT TO GO'Insatiable demand for convenient, ready-to-eat meals has the food bizscramblingBy:By Greg Burns in ChicagoBoston Chicken Inc. didn't expect much when it tested ready-made holidaymeals this past Thanksgiving. But customers flocked in, gobbling downhundreds of roast turkeys with all the fixin's. Why? ``People don't evenhave time to cook Thanksgiving turkey dinner,'' says Saad J. Nadhir,co-chairman of the take-out chain.   In 1996, the nation's $900 billion food industry will be at the mercy ofcustomers who don't have time. Shoppers who can barely steal a few momentsto shop--let alone whip up home-cooked feasts--will set the pace of growthfor food processors, retailers, and food-service chains. The edge will goto big, dominant companies that can use marketing clout to expand ``shareof stomach'' at the expense of weaker competitors. Other winners will beinnovators of all sizes that find new ways to ease the hunger pangs of aharried populace.   Inevitably, the time squeeze on shoppers will create losers, too,especially among traditional full-line supermarkets. Their strong cashflows give them enviable staying power, so an immediate shakeout isunlikely. But erosion will continue as supermarkets face off againstup-and-comers such as Nadhir, who estimates that half the customers at hisfast-growing Boston Chicken chain would otherwise have cooked at home.``You have too many retailers competing for too few food dollars andappealing to consumers who have less time to deal with it,'' saysconsultant Neil Z. Stern of Chicago's McMillan & Doolittle.IDLE OVENS. Food processors and restaurant chains will see 5% to 6% revenuegrowth in 1996, Stern estimates. Supermarkets will eke out 2% to 3% growth,barely even with inflation. As U.S. households prepare fewer meals at home,the percentage of food dollars spent at food retail stores--as opposed torestaurants, cafeterias, convenience stores, and the like--will dip to 48%in '96 from 55% a decade ago (chart). ``It's a great threat tosupermarkets,'' warns John H. Bryan, chief executive officer for Sara LeeCorp.   Consumers clamoring for ready-to-eat meals have made deli sales the onesupermarket bright spot. Supermarket chains such as Byerly's in Edina,Minn., and Dominick's Finer Foods in Northlake, Ill., have pioneered newin-store formats. In '96, expanded deli departments will attract at least 8cents of each food dollar, up from 4 cents in 1986. And watch for moresupermarkets to introduce mall-style food courts featuring proven operatorssuch as McDonald's Corp., which is testing outlets at a Farmer Jackssupermarket in Michigan and a Kroger in Tennessee. Food processors willjoin in, too: Sara Lee has 17 sandwich shops serving its premium deli meatsinside Kroger supermarkets in Texas and Ohio.   Among restaurant chains, cost control will be crucial. McDonald's hascut the cost of opening a new restaurant by 30% over the past five yearsthrough standardization and more reliance on drive-thru layouts. That hashelped McDonald's step up its U.S. growth fivefold, including jointventures that have put Golden Arches in Wal-Mart Stores, Home Depots,Incredible Universe home-electronics stores, and Amoco gas stations.FAR AND AWAY. With so many more outlets at hand, busy shoppers visit moreoften, leaving less on the plate for the competition. Says McDonald'sVice-Chairman Jack M. Greenberg: ``If you can dominate a trading area, it'smuch more difficult and expensive for competitors to take customers awayfrom you.''   Dominance matters to food processors, too. They're struggling toincrease scale and efficiency to satisfy the likes of supercenters, whichcombine cut-rate supermarkets and discount stores under one roof. Foodprocessors also hope to give their ho-hum U.S. results a boost by pursuingfast-growth markets overseas. And sharp operators such as H.J. Heinz, CPCInternational, Campbell Soup, and others will be trying to lock inrelationships with fast-growing food-service operators. ``Everybody has thesame three strategies--lower domestic costs, grow internationally, and pushinto food service,'' says analyst John M. McMillin at Prudential SecuritiesInc.   With all hands reaching for the same brass ring, the strongest brandsrule. As in 1995, industry players will sell off weak units to moredominant competitors and buy businesses that enhance existing strengths.The goal? Be No.1. ``I'm not even sure being No.2 is enough anymore,''McMillin says. For investors, the message is clear: In the scrap over``share of stomach,'' bet on the top dogs.Prognosis '96Positives   -- With more consumers eating on the run, companies emphasizingconvenience will find eager customers.   -- Food-service operators will grow by opening outlets in stores,supermarkets, and gas stations.Negatives   -- Value-conscious shoppers will resist price increases.   -- Supermarkets will continue to lose ``share of stomach'' to sharperfood-service operators, such as Boston Chicken.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Food Manufacturing, Restaurants, & FoodStoresIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Eating OutCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MIGHTY MORPHIN POWER REARRANGERSDeregulation will transform the industry--and continue to pinch profitsBy:By Mark Maremont in Boston`Exciting, intense, and fun'': That's how a prominent electric-utilityexecutive describes his job these days. Surprised? If you thoughtelectricity was about as thrilling as dentistry, look again. Athree-year-old drive toward deregulation is causing new upheavals, fromcut-rate pricing to an unprecedented surge in mergers.   On the regulatory front, the action in 1996 is likely to get a jumpstart from an innovative plan approved by California's Public UtilitiesCommission at the end of 1995. The plan, subject to change, would let somecustomers shop for electricity from rival suppliers starting in 1998. Thelong-awaited decision is another sign that the economic and politicalforces propelling deregulation are too powerful to halt. Even AmericanElectric Power Co., the nation's second-largest investor-owned utility--andat one time a staunch opponent of competition--proposed its ownfar-reaching deregulation plan in 1995. Rather than fight the tide, saysCharles A. Falcone, an AEP senior vice-president, ``we have decided we wantto help shape the industry's new structure.''SMOOTH SHIFT. AEP and other utilities had little choice. Profits will beboosted or ravaged for years depending on how the industry and regulatorsresolve some vexing questions. One big one is how far competition shouldgo. The most radical approach would let customers choose an electricitysupplier just as they choose a long-distance phone carrier, with powerflowing over still regulated lines maintained by the local utility. A moremoderate approach would retain today's basic structure but requireutilities to set rates based on prices in a wholesale power pool, whichproponents say would cut down on confusion. Muddying the waters, Californiaregulators decided to let both approaches coexist.   Then there's the issue of the billions of dollars in uneconomical powerplants and long-term power contracts on the books of many utilities. Thesewill become millstones in a world where the cheapest power suppliers willprevail. Big customers and some low-cost utilities contend that overlyexpensive power plants and contracts should be written off, forcingshareholders to bear the brunt of utilities' past poor decisions. But mostutilities argue that their costs are largely a legacy of poor regulations,so customers should continue to foot the bill for a period. Allowingcustomers to disregard their obligations ``is like asking your bank to letyou walk away from half your mortgage just because you want a new house,''argues Thomas J. May, CEO of Boston Edison Co.READY TO BID. More states will grapple with these and other contentiousissues in 1996, starting with Massachusetts and New Hampshire. Meanwhile,utilities are shedding costs and their monopolistic mind-sets. BostonEdison dumped one-fifth of its managers in 1995 and tried to spur newthinking by reassigning most of those remaining to new jobs. WPL HoldingsInc., a low-cost Wisconsin utility, has offered to show rivals' bigcustomers how much they could save by switching to WPL. It can't wrest awaythe customers now, but it hopes to have the chance soon. ``Nobody ownscustomers,'' says Erroll B. Davis Jr., WPL's aggressive CEO.   Despite cost-cutting, profit margins aren't likely to improve much aftera five-year slide. Why? To stop defections, many utilities are cuttingprices to big customers 10% to 40% in return for long-term commitments.Average aftertax profit margins declined to 17.2% in 1995, from 18.9% in1991, says Daniel Scotto, an analyst with Bear, Stearns & Co.   Moreover, some high-cost utilities are carrying artificial assets ontheir books, such as payments due from customers over the next 20 to 30years. If deregulation proceeds far enough, utilities may have to switch toindustrial accounting standards that don't recognize such assets. Theresulting megawrite-offs ``could get very ugly,'' says analyst Scotto, whocites Centerior Energy Corp. as a prime candidate. Some utilities could beforced into a restructuring or even bankruptcy.   Also on tap for 1996 are more dividend cuts by an industry wheredividends once provided almost the only investment appeal. And mergers,which reached a record $11.9 billion in 1995, are likely to keep surging,especially if stock prices start to plummet as competition takes hold. Noquestion about it: The electric-utility industry isn't boring anymore.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Low interest rates have lightened debt loads.   -- Delay in deregulation is allowing utilities more time to prepare.   -- Demand for power is rising, and capacity is ample, so there's no needfor costly construction.Negatives   -- Demands by big customers for lower prices are hurting margins.   -- High-cost utilities face a bleak future in   -- deregulated world.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: UtilitiesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Utility ProfitsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHO SAYS YOU CAN'T FIND GOOD HELP?Business-service firms boom as companies around the globe retoolBy:By Richard A. Melcher in ChicagoOn some recent continent-hopping business trips, George T. Shaheen,managing partner for Andersen Consulting, became thoroughly convinced thatchange knows no boundaries. The rage in China was all about restructuringand developing new markets. A Brazilian TV company was worried about how tocompete in foreign countries. ``It doesn't matter where you're doingbusiness,'' says Shaheen, ``everyone is going through a massiveretooling.'' While that may be wrenching to many, for Andersen and otherproviders of business services, upheaval is a boon.   Business services--a new category in BUSINESS WEEK's IndustryOutlook--encompasses legal services, advertising, personnel supply,research and consulting, accounting, engineering, architecture, andmiscellaneous others, such as equipment rental and leasing. While theirgrowth rates vary, all of these industries to some degree cash in on thecontinuing global trend toward seeking outside help. In 1996, predictsDRI/McGraw-Hill, business services will grow 3.5% after inflation, to $806billion in 1995 dollars.   Consultants such as $4 billion Andersen should do far better than that.Andersen, which specializes in providing advice on systems and so-calledchange management, expects business to rise 20% for a second year and toadd as many as 8,000 people to its workforce of 37,000. Meantime, Bain &Co. figures its business will jump 30% this year on the back of its``growth'' consulting, which advises once shrinking clients how to grabmarket share and find new customers overseas.TEMP FEVER. Business-service providers will take on jobs of increasingsophistication. Corporate layoffs will remain in the range of last year's420,000 or so, figures outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas, socompanies will continue to off-load everything from public relations tocomputer services. That will ensure a fourth year of strong growth for thetemporary-help sector, which the National Association of Temporary &Staffing Services estimates has annual revenues of $40 billion (chart).``Temporary help used to be for emergency needs,'' says ManpowerInternational Inc. Chairman Mitchell S. Fromstein. ``Now, it's part of acompany's ongoing workforce strategy.'' Fromstein expects Manpower revenuesto be up some 15%--even higher than the industry's healthy 9% rise.   At Manpower, as at scores of other companies, growth is being fueled bydemands for special skills. Today, Manpower is supplying computerprogrammers and systems integrators as well as clerical workers.Industrial-design specialists such as Boston's Design Continuum Inc. areworking with clients from research to final production. In advertising,efforts to commercialize the Internet are providing golden opportunitiesfor nimble upstarts. ``The Internet will pose a major challenge for the bigagencies,'' says analyst James D. Dougherty of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc.WORK, WORK. Generally, though, size seems to be an advantage. As industriesconsolidate, companies turn to providers that can handle business globally.In the advertising business, where growth is expected to be nearly 8%thanks to election and Olympics spending, ``it's increasingly difficult formidsize [advertising] agencies to compete,'' says Rochelle Lazarus, CEO ofgiant Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide Inc.   So look for the fragmented business-services sector to spawn plenty ofmergers. Last year, EDS Corp. purchased A.T. Kearney for $600 million,marrying computer systems and engineering knowhow. This year, law firms areripe for combination, says consultant Bradford W. Hildebrandt. While lawfirms are recovering from the depressed early '90s, Hildebrandt expectsrevenues to rise 10% in 1996, so regional, national, and even internationalmergers should be on the uptick. ``We'll see global consolidation like webegan seeing in accounting 10 years ago,'' predicts Hildebrandt.   Other forces driving the mergers: difficulty in finding topprofessionals and pricing pressure from customers. More and more companiesare demanding fixed fees from law firms. The outplacement industry has seencommissions on large contracts drop from as much as 17% per individual toabout 10%, according to John A. Challenger. Yet across most of the growingservices sector, ``the No.1 risk and temptation'' is to take on more workthan firms have the ability to handle, say Bain's worldwide managingdirector, Thomas J. Tierney. For now, that's a hurdle most serviceproviders are eager to attempt.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Continued industry restructuring favors a variety of services, fromtemporary help to consulting and engineering.   -- Booming economies in Asia and other markets offer new work to U.S.architects, engineers, and advertisers.Negatives   -- A shortage of quality staff looms as businesses demand moresophisticated services.   -- Consolidation among clients adds price pressures and kills smaller orless specialized firms.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Business ServicesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Temporary HelpCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILL WALL STREET HIT A WALL?It will be tough to match '95, but low rates could keep the market robustBy:By Leah Nathans Spiro in New YorkWall Street should get another gift from the Federal Reserve in 1996:continued low interest rates. DRI/McGraw-Hill predicts that 30-yearTreasury bonds will end the year at 6.26%, up just a tad from 6% at yearend1995. Rock-bottom rates mean another super year for the securitiesindustry, since investors will keep deserting bank certificates of depositsto seek higher returns in the stock market, boosting the market and WallStreet commissions. ``From everything we see, it's going to be another goodyear,'' declares John J. Mack, president of Morgan Stanley & Co.   After a slow start, 1995 blossomed into a very good year for thesecurities industry. New York Stock Exchange firms reaped an estimated $6.5billion in pretax profits. That's the second-best year ever after 1993's$8.6 billion blow-out. Fueling the industry was record stock-market volume,thanks to a Standard & Poor's 500-stock index that soared 37% and strongunderwriting and mutual-fund sales.   For 1996, the BUSINESS WEEK profit estimate is just $5.5 billion,though. That's because it would be tough for rates to decline in 1996 asmuch as they did in 1995, when they fell from 8% to about 6%. Decliningrates are Wall Street's dream environment, since they boost corporaterefinancing as well as the stock market.TAKEOVER RUMORS. The new year is starting off with lots of momentum.Mergers and acquisitions were red-hot in 1995, racking up $450 billion indeals, topping the previous record of $355 billion in 1994, according toSecurities Data Co. ``There is no reason to believe the robust M&A marketwon't continue,'' says Kim Fennebresque, a managing director at UBSSecurities Inc. Initial public offerings were another winner, with anestimated $29 billion in new issues in 1995, almost reaching the 1993record of $34 billion.   Wall Street is notoriously cyclical, though, so the gold rush could slowin '96. The stock market is unlikely to sustain its record performance fortwo years in a row. The securities industry also faces excess capacity: Toomany firms are fighting for the same business. Aggressive up-and-comersrange from Germany's Deutsche Bank and Union Bank of Switzerland to U.S.commercial banks. ``It's a difficult challenge to continue to maintain highmargins,'' says Jerome P. Kenney, a Merrill Lynch executivevice-president.   With so much competition, consolidation is expected to continue in 1996.Rumors constantly have firms dressing themselves up for sale. Some of them,such as Lehman Brothers Inc., PaineWebber Inc., and Prudential Securities,are medium-size firms that are finding it expensive to competeinternationally. Meanwhile, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and MorganStanley are spending heavily to position themselves as global competitorsthat can remain independent. ``In 1996, the large will get larger, smallboutiques will prosper, and those in the middle will get squeezed,'' saysBruce S. Foerster, president of South Beach Capital Markets Advisory Corp.in Miami.   Whether large or small, brokerage stocks are due for a correction.Analysts aren't as hot on them, since they had a spectacular rise in 1995.Merrill Lynch & Co. shares rose 51% through mid-December, and CharlesSchwab & Co. was up 86%. Mergers and acquisitions, hottest in banking andmedia, might lose some steam.   There are bright spots. Merrill Lynch, the biggest brokerage, seescontinued growth in its retail business. Its equity assets under managementhave grown significantly in 1995 simply because the stock market was up37%. This increase means more asset-management fee income in 1996, even ifthe growth of assets slows. And following a dismal 1995 in many emergingmarkets, Merrill is looking for an improvement in 1996.   The entire industry may get a boost from Washington. A capital-gains taxcut and a restoration of tax deductibility for individual retirementaccounts look likely in 1996, says Marc E. Lackritz, president of theSecurities Industry Assn., since ``there is broad agreement among theHouse, the Senate, and the Administration that this is a good idea.'' TheSIA estimates the IRA change alone could earn the industry as much as $200million a year in additional IRA mutual-fund fees.   Of course, it's the unexpected that hurts markets the most, as in thelast big market plunge with the gulf war in 1991. A recession or sharplyhigher rates are constant worries. But it now looks as if Wall Street canspend another happy year looking forward to bonus time.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The soaring stock market is boosting the brokerage business.   -- Mergers, acquisitions, and IPOs should remain strong.   -- Congress may cut capital-gains taxes and restore deductibility ofIRAs.Negatives   -- Brokerage stocks are due for a correction after their big 1995runup.   -- Overcapacity in the industry will keep restraining margins.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: SecuritiesIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Securities FirmsCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A YEAR OF HIGH-RISE EXPECTATIONSThe office market expects a banner year, while other markets look lessrobustBy:By Amy Barrett in WashingtonFor much of the past two years, the real estate and construction industrycelebrated the return of growth. Having survived the dark days of the early1990s, investors savored the recovery of apartment and retail properties,followed by offices and hotels. But 1996 will be more of a mixed bag. Onthe downside, there are early signs of overheating in some markets forconstruction of apartment and retail space. On the upside, a strongerhousing market should help pick up the slack. And with office occupancy andrents improving, 1996 will mark the return of one fixture of the 1980s:high-rise office projects.   The generally good news for real estate stems largely from the continueddecline of interest rates. Lower rates helped spark homebuilding in thesecond half of 1995. And National Association of Home Builders ChiefEconomist David F. Seiders figures moderate economic growth will lead toeven lower mortgage rates in 1996, averaging about 7.3% for 30-yearfixed-rate mortgages. That should nudge multi- and single-family housingstarts up about 3%, to nearly 1.4 million. The days of speculative boom andbust are gone: ``People look at houses as shelter rather than as aninvestment strategy, and frankly that's pretty healthy,'' says Bruce E.Karatz, chairman of Los Angeles-based Kaufman & Broad Home Corp.   Apartment construction continues to pick up steam. According to theNAHB, construction will begin on 290,000 apartments in 1996, up a bit from1995's 274,000. While that is still less than half the 1985 frenzied peakof nearly 670,000 units, industry pros are warning that some Sunbeltmarkets, such as Phoenix and Las Vegas, may already be overbuilt.BANNER YEAR. In retail construction, megamerchants such as Wal-Mart StoresInc. and Circuit City Stores Inc. are aggressively expanding. But itdoesn't appear that the market is headed for a repeat of the overbuildingbinge of the 1980s. Retail construction should fall 10% in 1996, accordingto The McGraw-Hill Companies' F.W. Dodge unit. One reason: Aside from theretail giants that can finance their own expansion, ``capital is prettywell cut off to that sector,'' says Douglas A. Tibbetts, president ofEquitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc.   Players in the office market expect 1996 to be a banner year. Thanks inno small part to the explosive growth of high-technology companies, officevacancy rates continue to slide. And the strength of the market is sparkingnot only build-to-suit construction but some partially speculative buildingin tight markets. Arthur J. Mirante II, chief executive officer of Cushman& Wakefield Inc., says some cities will see construction with as little as50% of the project pre-leased. ``The fundamentals for office haven't beenthis good in 10 years,'' says Thomas A. Carr, president of Carr RealtyCorp. in Washington, D.C.   Still, not all markets are booming. Los Angeles and downtown Dallas,which has a staggering vacancy rate of 35%, are still struggling. AndArthur Andersen & Co. Managing Director Barry D. Libert warns that betterand cheaper telecommunications will allow more tenants in the future toavoid downtown locations. As a result, office operators will be forced tobeef up their marketing and improve the flexibility of lease packages.   Perhaps the best buys around remain high-end hotel properties. Outsideof Las Vegas, there is little new construction of luxury hotels. AndJapanese investors who overpaid for such properties in the 1980s continueto sell. A Japanese bank recently sold the 539-room Ritz Carlton Hotel,Mauna Lani, in Hawaii, built for $180 million, for just $75 million.SMALL FAVORS. While the Japanese are selling, U.S. real estate continues toattract U.S. pension funds, which should cautiously expand their holdingsin 1996, as well as foreign investors, from such places as Hong Kong,Taiwan, and Germany. Real estate investment trusts aren't raising a lot ofmoney through public offerings--investment dollars have gone into thebooming stock market instead--but they're discovering that privateplacements can work, too. For instance, Carr Realty struck a deal inNovember that will result in a $250 million investment in the REIT bySecurity Capital U.S. Realty. Carr plans to use the capital to build andbuy offices across the country.   1996 won't see a return to the glory days of leaping prices. But thesedays, most real estate executives are thankful for slow but steadyprogress.Prognosis '96Positives   -- The office sector will continue to recover, thanks in part to strongdemand by high-tech companies.   -- Upscale hotels should enjoy rising room rates and healthy occupancylevels.Negatives   -- Some shopping centers will feel the squeeze from a sluggish retailmarket.   -- With apartment construction still picking up steam, some Sunbeltmarkets may already be overbuilt.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: Construction & Real EstateIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Downtown Office VacanciesCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457LOOKING FOR SAFETY IN NUMBERSConsolidation--and competition from other investments--are changing thebusinessBy:By Tim Smart in New HavenIf there is one word that sums up prospects for the insurance industry in1996, it's consolidation. Last year saw a record $18 billion worth ofinsurance-company mergers and acquisitions, and there's no letup in sight.``There are too many players competing for too little return in a crowdedmarketplace,'' says Eric Simpson, a vice-president at rating agency A.M.Best Co.   The late November announcement of Travelers Inc.'s $4 billion purchaseof Aetna Life & Casualty's property-casualty unit capped a year in whichCNA Financial swallowed Continental Insurance for $1.1 billion and ZurichInsurance took over Home Insurance. The same pressures that forced thesedeals--weak returns, large exposures to environmental claims, and lack ofsufficient capital to keep ratings up--are expected to continue in 1996.While the companies have said nothing publicly, analysts believe that CIGNACorp. and Prudential Insurance Co. are among the big-name companiesconsidering selling their property and casualty units.CUTTING OVERHEAD. For property-casualty insurers, two big helpers are lowinflation and low interest rates. The benign operating environment in 1995led to a doubling of net income, to $22.3 billion from $10.9 billion in1994.   In 1996, however, property-casualty insurers should see only a modestuptick in their business. A survey of Wall Street analysts by InsuranceInformation Institute found them expecting growth in premium dollar volumeof about 4.6% in 1996. While that would be better than the 3.9% rate ofgrowth in 1995, it will still lag behind the growth of the early 1990s. Theproblem: continued price pressures from overcapacity, especially incommercial lines, such as general business liability and workers'compensation. ``There has been no fundamental improvement in underlyingperformance during the last five years,'' says Robert Stein, director ofErnst & Young's insurance-industry practice.   With paltry premium growth, property- casualty insurers will have to cutoverhead, now a quarter on every dollar of premium. Travelers hopes to trim$300 million from operating expenses and cut 3,000 jobs when it takes overthe Aetna unit.   The consolidation trend affecting property-casualty writers is no lessdramatic in life insurance. Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. and New EnglandMutual Life Insurance Co. have announced plans to merge, while severaloperators, such as General Electric Capital Services Inc., went on buyingsprees. Here, the motivation is increasing assets under management tocompete with gargantuan mutual-fund houses and other financial-servicesconglomerates.EXPENSIVE DISTRIBUTION. Life insurers enter 1996 facing continued weaknessin their core business as more Americans turn away from traditional lifeinsurance to investment products such as mutual funds. While mutual fundsare sold through low-cost, consumer-oriented direct marketing such astelevision, life insurers still sell their products mainly face-to-facethrough an expensive network of agents.   A survey by consultant Towers Perrin found that the No.1 issue ofconcern for life-insurance chief executive officers is improving theirdistribution system. Towers Perrin consultant Rick Berry estimates thatdistribution makes up two-thirds of the cost of a life-insurance policy.``Traditional life companies have delegated to their agents decisions likewhat mix of products to sell, what markets to pick, and how to promote theproducts,'' says Berry. Many life insurers have begun striking deals withbanks to sell their products, a trend that is likely to accelerate in1996.   Insurers have had good results selling annuities, which typically offerincome or capital gains as well as life insurance. The 13% rate of growthfor annuities is four times the rate for traditional life insuranceproducts. But competition is getting fierce. ``It's a changing landscape,''says CNA Chairman and CEO Dennis H. Chookaszian. ``Banks will be a muchmore significant seller of these products in the future.'' A positive forlife insurers is that their mortgage and real estate problems of the early1990s have largely dissipated, while strong financial markets have helpedinvestment returns.   A couple of years back, few would have imagined alliances such asTravelers' bold deal with Aetna or life insurance companies allowing theircompetitors in banking to sell their products. But as the historicallyunderperforming insurance industry tries to catch up to the new world orderin financial services, it is learning to adapt.Prognosis '96Positives   -- Life insurers are holding on to their share of retirement assets.   -- Property-casualty writers are increasing reserves for environmentalclaims.   -- Losses from claims are moderating.Negatives   -- Much of the industry's increased capital is coming from investmentgains, not core earnings.   -- With 2,400 competitors, the business is ripe for consolidation.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Prognosis '96: InsuranceIllustration: Chart: Spotlight: Property-CasualtyCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE TOP MANAGERS OF 1995What did it take for an executive to succeed in the past year?Good managers know how to cut: They trim costs, reengineer, andrestructure. Great managers know how to grow: They realize you can't shrinkyour way to greatness. In 1995, the best managers in the world grew theirway to greatness.   The men and women of BUSINESS WEEK's Top 25 Managers of theYear--Americans, Europeans, Asians--all rode the tiger of growth tospectacular success. In a global economy of vast technological change,intense competition, and political upheaval, these managers cranked outannual increases of 20%, 30%, sometimes even 40% in profits andsales--while other corporate ``titans'' were still trimming their sails andeking out marginal gains.   What did it take for an executive to make it into BUSINESS WEEK's Top25? Begin with product innovation--the hot strategy of the year formanagers who had already wrung out their corporate inefficiencies. When thebureaucratic layers are gone, when the marginal competencies are dumped,the only strategic assets left to corporations are the products they sellin the global marketplace. This was proved in 1995, when the most reliablepath to fast growth was to bring out new products adored by lots ofconsumers.   Riding the technological currents was the favorite tactic used bymanagers in bringing out their innovations in 1995. But managers also hadto take risks, especially the risk of cannibalizing old models with newproducts. There was new software for personal computers and the Internet,color copier/printers for the home office, and even new first-class seatsthat fold out into beds. All were smash hits.   BUSINESS WEEK's top managers used corporate alliances to drive theirgrowth. American and European managers divvied up the incredibly successfulDBS launch--direct broadcast satellite transmission of TV and stereo music.A French-owned company built the 12-inch satellite dishes for the home, andthe Americans developed the satellites and software to close the loop.Nearly two million homes in the U.S. now have DBS. This global cooperationgenerated tremendous growth for all concerned. So did alliances betweenindustries: One software giant linked up with a corporation running a TVnetwork to provide new information products over the wire.   Top managers used globalization strategies wisely to boost growth. Asianterritories outside Japan proved once again to be the fastest-growingmarkets in the world in 1995. Every smart manager wanted a bigger piece ofthe Asian pie. Some succeeded, as did one investment banker who was able tocut a deal enabling his firm to do business inside China. Another Americanmanager reversed strategy and revitalized his heavy capital equipmentcompany by focusing on new opportunities in Europe.   Then there were Asian managers using the global markets to move outsidetheir region into other parts of the world. One computer maker divided hisoperation into 21 smaller companies so that each could list on the stockmarket where it did most of its business.   Of course, reengineering remained important as a catalyst for growth forsome top managers. One new Japanese manager quietly restructured ingrownbusiness practices of his company and led it to a projected doubling of netprofit and a record year. An American continued to reshape a traditionaldefense-base conglomerate into a tough market-oriented competitor.   How did BUSINESS WEEK come up with its Top 25 Managers of the Year? Themagazine polled its 220 editors around the world, including its largeforeign bureau system, the largest of any global business magazine. Themethodology was deceptively simple: screening the financial figures,questioning the best analytical minds, and talking to the leading corporatemanagers around the world. The bureaus asked: Who was the best in 1995?Here's the collective reply.THE TOP MANAGERS OF 1995ROBERT AYLING British AirwaysMIKE ARMSTRONG Hughes ElectronicsANA BOTIN Banco SantanderCASEY COWELL US RoboticsGEORGE DAVID United TechnologiesMICHAEL EISNER Walt DisneyGEORGE FISHER KodakWILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG Li & FungANDREW GROVE IntelGERALD GREENWALD United AirlinesRALPH LARSEN Johnson & JohnsonJAN LESCHLY SmithKline BeechamJOHN MACK Morgan StanleyARTHUR MARTINEZ Sears RoebuckSCOTT McNEALY Sun MicrosystemsPAUL O'NEILL AlcoaBERND PICHETSRIEDER BMWLEW PLATT AND RICHARD BELLUZZO HPALAIN PRESTAT Thomson MultimediaJEAN-PIERRE ROSSO CaseTADASHI SEKIZAWA FujitsuSTAN SHIH AcerWILLIAM SIART First Interstate BankWILLIAM STEERE PfizerPATTI STONESIFER MicrosoftCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST MANAGERSManaging big corporations in 1995 was tougher than ever. It was hard toraise prices, technological change accelerated, and globalization meantmore competition. Achieving growth meant taking more risks. These 25managers were the top winners in the global game.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BERND PISCHETSRIEDER, BMW's new CEO, surprised everyone by getting BMW'sBERND PISCHETSRIEDER, BMW's new CEO, surprised everyone by getting BMW'snew American-made Z3 roadster featured in the latest James Bond movie,GoldenEye. In 1995, Pischetsrieder, 48, drove BMW into the big leagues as amillion-unit-a-year producer with a new auto plant in the U.S. Sales in theU.S. zoomed to over 90,000 Beemers, the best since 1986's record.Photograph(s):Photograph: BERND PISCHETSRIEDERPHOTOGRAPH BY WOLFGANG WILDECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GERALD GREENWALDIt isn't easy running a huge employee-owned airline, but GERALD GREENWALD,chairman of UAL, managed to make lots of people happy in 1995. By more thandoubling the stock price, to $211, Greenwald, 60, put big smiles on allinvestors: Wall Street, pilots, and machinists, although fourth-quarterearnings estimates didn't meet analysts' expectations. Earnings are stillexpected to hit about $900 million, triple 1994's figure.Photograph(s):Photograph: GERALD GREENWALDPHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL L. ABRAMSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PATRICIA Q. STONESIFER put Microsoft's Consumer Div. on the map in 1995.PATRICIA Q. STONESIFER put Microsoft's Consumer Div. on the map in 1995.The 39-year-old manager, known for ``crisp'' thinking, drove the divisionto launch 20 new CD-ROMs and software products for the home, includingFury3--Microsoft's first shoot-'em-up game--and a souped-up joystick calledSide Winder. The division had estimated sales of $800 million, making itthe country's No.1 multimedia company.Photograph(s):Photograph: PATRICIA Q. STONESIFERPHOTOGRAPH BY REX RYSTEDTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457STAN SHIHWith the booming sales of Acer's Aspire personal computer, a multimediadesktop designed for the home, Acer Chairman and CEO STAN SHIH solidifiedhis position in 1995 as Asia's paramount entrepreneur. By decentralizingownership (he is spinning off 21 independent companies), Shih remains closeto his customers. Revenues for the Taiwan-based group in 1995 are expectedto be up 77%, to $5.7 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: STAN SHIHPHOTOGRAPH BY HUANG SHIH-TINGCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MICHAEL D. EISNER, chairman of Walt Disney, showed in 1995 he could do itMICHAEL D. EISNER, chairman of Walt Disney, showed in 1995 he could do ithis way, without close pal and President Frank G. Wells, who died in ahelicopter crash in 1994, or studio chief Jeffrey Katzenberg, who left inanger. The 53-year-old Eisner made a $19 billion deal for CapitalCities/ABC, lifting Disney to global media's top tier. Theme parks areminting cash anew. Even EuroDisney turned a profit.Photograph(s):Photograph: MICHAEL D. EISNERPHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID STRICK/ONYXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ARTHUR C. MARTINEZIt all came together in 1995 for ARTHUR C. MARTINEZ, CEO of Sears Roebuckand the mastermind of the Big Store's comeback. His drive to renovate dowdyoutlets and upgrade women's apparel paid off with big revenue hikes lastyear as rivals floundered. His risk-taking was duly rewarded. Martinez, 56,was named chairman of the parent in July.Photograph(s):Photograph: ARTHUR C. MARTINEZPHOTOGRAPH BY LARA JO REGAN/SABACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SCOTT G. MCNEALYHot Java! Sun Microsystems CEO SCOTT G. McNEALY went eye to eye with BillGates in 1995 with Java, the revolutionary Internet software. But that wasjust icing for McNealy, 41. Sun's ``servers'' became serious contenders incorporate computing. For Sun, it meant an 82% rise in profits, to $356million, on sales of $5.9 billion in fiscal 1995.Photograph(s):Photograph: SCOTT G. McNEALYPHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT HOLMGRENCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ROBERT AYLING, British Airways' managing director, ran one of the world'sROBERT AYLING, British Airways' managing director, ran one of the world'smost profitable airlines in 1995. His reward: being made CEO as of Jan. 1.BA is expected to report $890 million in pretax profits on sales of $12billion for the year ending March, 1996. Smashing! Ayling, 49, skippedcollege and climbed the corporate ladder without family or school ties. Henow must decide whether to put more money into USAir. Don't bet on it.Photograph(s):Photograph: ROBERT AYLINGPHOTOGRAPH BY COURTESY OF BRITISH AIRWAYSCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ANA PATRICIA BOTN, 35, is chief executive of Spain's Santander Investment.ANA PATRICIA BOTN, 35, is chief executive of Spain's Santander Investment.Botn shares the penetrating gaze and workaholic drive of her father,Emilio, chairman of Banco Santander. In using Santander's strong capitalbase in Latin America, Botn has built market share and won for Santanderthe lead role in bringing Mexico back to the capital markets.Photograph(s):Photograph: ANA PATRICIA BOTNPHOTOGRAPH BY DANIEL BEITRA/GAMMA-LIAISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TADASHI SEKIZAWAFor TADASHI SEKIZAWA, 1995 was the year Fujitsu finally cast off theshackles of a weak economy and soaring yen. Sekizawa, 64, restructuredingrown business practices and dumped nationalistic policies. Fujitsustarting selling PCs built 90% with non-Japanese components. It expects todouble group net profit to a record $887 million.Photograph(s):Photograph: TADASHI SEKIZAWAPHOTOGRAPH BY MITSUHIRO WADACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JAN LESCHLY, CEO of Anglo-American drugmaker SmithKline Beecham, spent 1995JAN LESCHLY, CEO of Anglo-American drugmaker SmithKline Beecham, spent 1995digesting $5 billion in acquisitions of managed-care and consumer-medicinemarkets, then turned his attention to heartburn--by managing the transitionof ulcer drug Tagamet, once the world's largest-selling drug, toover-the-counter. SKB's sales could hit $10 billion in '95.Photograph(s):Photograph: JAN LESCHLYPHOTOGRAPH BY PAUL MASSEY/FRANK SPOONER PICTURESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, CEO of GM Hughes Electronics, has led a great newC. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, CEO of GM Hughes Electronics, has led a great newproduct launch--DirecTV, a satellite-to-home television service that beamscrystal-clear programming to rooftop dishes. Armstrong took a stodgymilitary contractor and used its high-tech smarts to tap into newcommercial markets. The stock is up 50% on the year.Photograph(s):Photograph: C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONGPHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN S. ABBOTTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG, top-notch managers of Li & Fung, are members of aWILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNG, top-notch managers of Li & Fung, are members of anew Asian corporate elite. William, 46, is a Princeton grad with a HarvardMBA, while Victor, 50, is a Massachusetts Institute of Technology grad witha Harvard PhD. The brothers are converting their Chinese-style familyexport-trading business, into a modern, publicly owned corporation. In1995, they bought British rival Inchcape Buying Services, doubling Li &Fung's annual sales, to $1.5 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: WILLIAM AND VICTOR FUNGPHOTOGRAPH BY MARY BETH CAMP/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JEAN-PIERRE ROSSOWhen JEAN-PIERRE ROSSO took over heavy-equipment manufacturer Case in 1994,it hadn't turned much of a profit in years. Cost-cutting by parent Tennecostopped the bleeding, but there was no strategy. He redesigned Case'soutdated construction- and agricultural-equipment lines and focused onEurope. The payoff? Earnings in 1995 should double, to $250 million, on an11% hike in sales, to $4.8 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: JEAN-PIERRE ROSSOPHOTOGRAPH BY CHRIS CORSMEIERCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PAUL H. O'NEILLIn early 1994, an avalanche of cheap Russian metal threatened to buryAmerica's world-leading aluminum companies. Aluminum Co. of America's CEO,60-year-old PAUL H. O'NEILL, pushed for a multinational solution, whichincluded painful smelter shutdowns in the U.S. He also pressed forward withglobal acquisitions, from Italy to Australia. With aluminum prices on therebound in 1995 and world supply and demand on a more even keel, Alcoamotored to strong earnings.Photograph(s):Photograph: PAUL H. O'NEILLPHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL L. ABRAMSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILLIAM E.B. SIART of First Interstate Bancorp is such a good manager he'sWILLIAM E.B. SIART of First Interstate Bancorp is such a good manager he'sabout to lose his job. As bank president since 1990 and CEO since January,Siart, 48, helped turn the lender around, raising shareholder return onequity from a dismal -10% in 1991 to 26% last quarter. Now, Wells Fargo andFirst Bank System are vying for Siart's bank.Photograph(s):Photograph: WILLIAM E.B. SIARTPHOTOGRAPH BY THIERRY LEDOUXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ALAIN PRESTAT, CEO of Paris-based Thomson Multimedia, provided the amazingALAIN PRESTAT, CEO of Paris-based Thomson Multimedia, provided the amazing$599 12-inch dish and set-top box that made direct satellite broadcast oneof the biggest hits of 1995. Thomson's RCA Digital Satellite System soldnearly 2 million units in a year. Operating profits jumped fourfold. Nextup: new Digital Video Disks with more capacity.Photograph(s):Photograph: ALAIN PRESTATPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD SCHULTZCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ANDREW S. GROVE made 1995 the year Intel moved beyond merely being theANDREW S. GROVE made 1995 the year Intel moved beyond merely being theworld's biggest chipmaker to being the biggest force in the entire computerindustry. Grove, 59, pushed into motherboards, logic chipsets, and evenentire computers. Intel's next targets include engineering workstations andlarge servers. Its 1995 sales are expected to be up more than 40%, to $15billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: ANDREW S. GROVEPHOTOGRAPH BY DOUGLAS LEVERECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILLIAM C. STEERE JR.For WILLIAM C. STEERE JR., 59-year-old CEO of Pfizer, the big payoff camein 1995. He sold off nondrug operations and refused to shell out billionsfor distributors, as rivals have. Instead, the avid helicopter skier hasfocused on riskier new products. Driven by antidepressant Zoloft andantihypertensive Norvasc, Pfizer's net income in 1995 rose 20%, to nearly$1.56 billion, while sales gained 23%, to $10.2 billion.Photograph(s):Photograph: WILLIAM C. STEERE JR.PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAN LEVENSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GEORGE M.C. FISHER started to prove in 1995 that Eastman Kodak's coreGEORGE M.C. FISHER started to prove in 1995 that Eastman Kodak's corephotography business still had vigor by boosting consumer-imaging revenues19% for the first nine months. Also, he filed a complaint that Fuji Photoconspired with Japan's government to limit Kodak's share there. Kodakstock, up 39%, is back as a Dow leader.Photograph(s):Photograph: GEORGE M.C. FISHERPHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN S. ABBOTTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JOHN J. MACKIn one of Wall Street's best years ever, Morgan Stanley Group PresidentJOHN J. MACK had a nice one of his own. Mack, 51, forcefully integratedindependent departments. It worked. The firm's stock rose 43%, and itsearnings soared 73%. Under Mack, Morgan became the only foreign investmentbank allowed to do business inside China.Photograph(s):Photograph: JOHN J. MACKPHOTOGRAPH BY PETER SCHINZIER/AGENTUR HAMANNCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457RALPH S. LARSENJohnson & Johnson Chief RALPH S. LARSEN doesn't shrink from a fight. In1995, he won J&J's first-ever hostile takeover battle, snaring Cordis.Using ads that slammed a rival's product, Larsen also turned an obscureMerck prescription drug, Pepcid AC, into an over-the-counter heartburnpowerhouse. J&J had one of its most profitable years on the 57-year-oldCEO's watch. Net income is expected to be up 19%.Photograph(s):Photograph: RALPH S. LARSENPHOTOGRAPH BY BRAD TRENTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GEORGE A. DAVIDFor GEORGE A. DAVID, an ocean sailboat racer, 1995 was the year his companyfinally delivered. United Technologies saw earnings and margins risedespite falling defense spending and modest revenue growth. The 53-year-oldCEO galvanized the $21 billion conglomerate to capitalize on its great namefranchises--Otis, Carrier, Sikorsky, and Pratt & Whitney. Wall Streetcheered: The stock rose about 48%.Photograph(s):Photograph: GEORGE A. DAVIDPHOTOGRAPH BY ANDY FREEBERGCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CASEY G. COWELLHe's chairman of the hottest U.S. modem manufacturer. Thanks to theexplosion of computer networks, CASEY G. COWELL's U.S. Robotics sawrevenues explode to $889 million in 1995, up from $378.6 million in '94.Cowell, 43, built new plants and designed faster modems. He also bid forbankrupt Hayes Microcomputer Products, once the country's largest modemmaker. Cowell is shooting for a $5 billion company by 2000.Photograph(s):Photograph: CASEY G. COWELLPHOTOGRAPH BY BLACK/TOBYCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457LEWIS E. PLATTHow do you make a huge company grow 20% a year? In 1995, Hewlett-PackardCEO LEWIS E. PLATT showed 'em how again. Sales are up 26%, to $31.5billion; profits are up 52%, to $2.4 billion. Platt, 54, tapped RICHARD E.BELLUZZO, 42, to merge the retail-minded PC and printer division with theold Big Iron business. Platt believes corporations want one-stop shoppingfor information technology, and he's giving it to them.Photograph(s):Photograph: LEWIS E. PLATTPHOTOGRAPH BY RAY MAINSCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MANAGERS TO WATCH IN 1996Abigail Johnson, 34, is heir very apparent at Fidelity Investments. Theboss's daughter owns 24.5% of Fidelity. That makes her a billionaire, butis she a manager capable of taking over from Dad, Edward C. ``Ned'' JohnsonIII, who is 65? So far, Abby has dodged a role in senior management tomanage money. Will she become chairwoman and leave day-to-day management toothers?Eric A. Benhamou, chief executive officer of 3Com, loves to manage--otherbusinesses, that is. He is Silicon Valley's gentlest takeover artist. His3Com pulled off 10 acquisitions worth $1 billion in three years. Now he'strying to persuade Wall Street that he can make money in the expandingmarket for lower-end networking gear and PC network cards for smallbusiness and the home. Tired of slowpoke modems? Call Benhamou.Ford Chairman Alex Trotman probably has the toughest job in Detroit in1996. Customers aren't stampeding to his newly styled Taurus. Ford isoverhauling 40% of its entire U.S. product line and 35% of its Europeanofferings. Trotman is under pressure to find a way to move all these new,more expensive models in a market that is interested only in bargains. Willlower rates give Trotman some breathing room by cutting leasing costs?In April, 1995, Nobuyuki Idei, 58, became the first nonengineer to leadSony, replacing Norio Ohga. He quickly dumped Mickey Shulhoff, Sony'shigh-profile U.S. head. Idei speaks fluent English and French, but it hasyet to be seen whether he can speak Hollywoodese.Bill Gates faces his biggest challenge in years. While the 40-year-oldchairman of Microsoft has the PC software market sewn up--not so themushrooming Internet world. In December, Gates mapped out an ambitiousInternet strategy. Then he licensed Java, the hot Internet software. Isthis a new beginning or the end of his hegemony?For as long as Jerry Levin has been chairman of Time Warner, investors havewondered if he had the ``it'' of leadership. This fall he acted boldly andacquired Turner Broadcasting System. But now he has to stir up that magicsynergy, something he couldn't do between Time Inc. and Warner. Is this hislast shot?Gerhardt Schulmeyer, chief executive at German computer and telecom companySiemens Nixdorf Informations Systems, is aiming to topple Big Blue inEurope. But can he break the great resistance to change within Germany'stelecom industry? If Schulmeyer can't do it in 1996, Germany will only fallfurther behind.Whoever thought an obscure animal-feed ingredient could lead to so muchfuss? But for Dwayne O. Andreas, chairman of Archer Daniels Midland, lysinecould be his Waterloo. Federal antitrust investigators are reviewing hoursof taped conversations provided by a former employee, Mark Whitacre, whoclaims ADM fixed lysine prices. Meantime, under fire from shareholders,Andreas, 77, has appointed a committee of outside directors to put ADMcorporate governance under a microscope. Can he survive another year?Ditto for Michael H. Spindler. With first-quarter results ending Dec. 31 inthe red, following a year of takeover rumors and boardroom turmoil, AppleComputer's embattled CEO is hanging on by a thread. The board is backinghim for now.Insiders says W. James McNerney Jr., a 46-year-old Yale graduate andHarvard MBA, is a front-runner in the race to succeed Jack Welch as CEO ofGeneral Electric. In October, Welch pulled McNerney away from a criticalpost as head of GE's Asia operations to take over management of the $3billion lighting unit.Lester M. Alberthal Jr. may soon find himself running an independentElectronic Data Systems, the information services giant in Plano, Tex. EDShas been part of General Motors since 1984, when it was sold by famousfounder Ross Perot. GM announced in August, 1995, that it planned to spinoff EDS if it can get the Internal Revenue Service's approval for atax-free deal. Analysts expect EDS's independence day to come by thespring.When you're running for your life, do you reach for a Snapple or aGatorade? William D. Smithburg, CEO of the Quaker Oats, has his hands fullwith both. His dominant Gatorade franchise faces a terrific challenge in'96 as Coca-Cola promotes its rival sports drink, Powerade, at the 1996Olympics. He has even knottier problems with his Snapple franchise.Can Hiroshi Okuda cure Toyota's big-company disease? In August, the63-year-old finance man became president of Japan's largest auto maker, thefirst non-Toyoda family member to run the company. Many see the boldexecutive as the best hope for a fresh breeze at Toyota.Can a power-tool marketing whiz finally put some drive back into Polaroid?On Dec. 1, 44-year-old Gary T. DiCamillo took the reins as the new CEO.Given credit for reviving Black & Decker's consumer power tool business,he's now charged with resurrecting a company that has been driftingsideways for years.Journalists recoiled in 1995 as new Times Mirror CEO Mark H. Willes closedNew York Newsday and ordered layoffs at the flagship Los Angeles Times.Willes, a 15-year veteran of General Mills, was brought in to repair yearsof sluggish profits at Times Mirror. His goal: boost earnings per share by50% in 1996.Photograph(s):Photograph: Abigail JohnsonPHOTOGRAPH BY JAMIE TANAKAPhotograph: Eric A. BenhamouPHOTOGRAPH BY LARRY FORDPhotograph: Alex TrotmanPHOTOGRAPH BY ALAN LEVENSONPhotograph: Nobuyuki IdeiPHOTOGRAPH BY BRIAN SMITH/OUTLINEPhotograph: Bill GatesPHOTOGRAPH BY PATRICK HARBRON;Photograph: Jerry LevinPHOTOGRAPH BY GEORGE LANGE/ONYXPhotograph: Gerhardt SchulmeyerPHOTOGRAPH BY STEVE WOITPhotograph: Dwayne O. AndreasPHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT HOLMGRENPhotograph: Michael H. SpindlerPHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT HOLMGRENPhotograph: W. James McNerney Jr.PHOTOGRAPH BY PAN FRANCIS/GAMMA-LIAISONPhotograph: Lester M. Alberthal Jr.PHOTOGRAPH BY ILENE ERLICHPhotograph: William D. SmithburgPHOTOGRAPH BY PETER GREGOIREPhotograph: Hiroshi OkudaPHOTOGRAPH BY CAROLINE PARSONSPhotograph: Gary T. DiCamilloPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD SCHULTZPhotograph: Mark H. WillesPHOTOGRAPH BY EDWARD SANTALONECopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST ENTREPRENEURSAn amazing year for entrepreneurs! A new club was formed:double-billionaire winners. Jim Clark did it once with Silicon Graphics andcame back with Netscape. Steve Jobs hit it big with Apple-took a longbreak-and won again with Pixar. The hurdle was certainly raised in '95.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SHIKHAR GHOSH, Open Market's 38-year-old chairman and co-founder, allowsSHIKHAR GHOSH, Open Market's 38-year-old chairman and co-founder, allowsdogs in his company's Cambridge (Mass.) offices, but that's his only quirk.Open Market builds secure software for critical commercial applications onthe Internet. It has helped set up the hottest commercial Web sites,including those of Banc One and Ziff-Davis, which rely on Open Market'ssoftware for handling credit-card transactions and filling orders. Ghoshmay be the one holding the keys to really doing business on the Net.Photograph(s):Photograph: SHIKHAR GHOSHPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD SCHULTZCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457STEVE JOBSHow sweet it is. STEVE JOBS, co-founder of Apple Computer, has been tryingto come up with a second hit for a decade. No such luck--until Nov. 29.That's when his company, Pixar Animation Studios, makers of the smash hitmovie Toy Story, went public with a bang. The stock, priced at 22, zoomedto 49 before falling back to 24. Jobs's 80% stake was briefly worth $1.1billion. What's next? His other company, NeXT, is making Web software, andJobs may see his third IPO in early 1996.Illustration(s):Illustration: STEVE JOBSPHOTOGRAPH BY RICHARD MORGENSTEIN; ANIMATION BY THE WALT DISNEY COMPANYPHOTO COMPOSITION BY JAIME BEAUCHAMPCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, AND DAVID GEFFEN.Not many companies start life with $2 billion in capital. But then, notmany upstarts come with JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, and DAVIDGEFFEN. Hollywood's DreamWorks company will begin 1996 with a new comedy onABC and a George Michael album. Down the road: Prince of Egypt, an animatedfilm about Moses, and interactive games with Microsoft.Photograph(s):Photograph: JEFFREY KATZENBERG, STEVEN SPIELBERG, and DAVID GEFFEN.PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID STRICK/ONYXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JAMES H. CLARK AND MARC L. ANDREESSENJAMES H. CLARK, 50, founder of Silicon Graphics, has done it again. HisNetscape Communications makes the Internet's top software. Clark took itpublic 18 months after founding it with cyberwizard MARC L. ANDREESSEN, 24.Its market cap is now $5 billion. Now, that's an IPO!Photograph(s):Photograph: JAMES H. CLARK AND MARC L. ANDREESSENPHOTOGRAPH BY WILLIAM MERCER MCLEODCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUD, both 33, are two French entrepreneursDENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUD, both 33, are two French entrepreneursevery American venture capitalist would be glad to have discovered. TheirParis-based software company, Business Objects, is No.1 in the fast-growingdecision-tools market. It ``IPO'd'' at 17 1/2 in 1994 and hit a 52-weekhigh of 54 in 1995. Sales and profits boomed with the launch of a sizzlingsecond generation of products.Photograph(s):Photograph: DENIS PAYRE and BERNARD LIAUTAUDPHOTOGRAPH BY THIERRY LEDOUXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ROBERT PRIDDYThe third time's a charm for ROBERT PRIDDY, who founded two other airlinesbefore creating ValuJet Airlines. Using unorthodox techniques liketicketless travel, flying secondhand DC-9 aircraft, and maintaining alow-frequency route system, Priddy has helped ValuJet grow to $350 millionin sales, with regular service to 26 cities. Earnings should hit $67million in 1995.Photograph(s):Photograph: ROBERT PRIDDYPHOTOGRAPH BY SHONNA VALESKACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST NEW PRODUCTSProduct innovation was the key to growth in 1995. And boy, were there greatproducts! Hot Web sites and cd-roms captured imaginations, but there wasalso room for jazzy cars, toys for grownups, and the laptops, pagers, andother stuff needed for work these days.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A BIKE FOR ALL MOUNTAINSElectric Bicycle's ev Warrior is a battery-powered electric mountain bikethat hums along at 20 mph and has a range of 15 miles. Price: $800 to$1,400.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FITS IN A TIGHT SPOTPackard Bell Electronics' Corner Computer offers wing-style disk drivesthat eliminate the problem of cd-rom trays that spill out over the top ofthe keyboard. The price starts at $1,899.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457AN EXEC MARCHES ON HIS SEATHerman Miller's award-winning Aeron chair features space-age materials andadjustable height, armrests, hip pivot, and lumbar support. Theeye-catching piece costs $700.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FOR THE TROUT IN YOUR LIFETo a fly fisherman, the Sage rpl+ rod is the last word in yin and yang. Therod is strong yet sensitive to the slightest nibble. Line running throughthe rod can handle weight and still form a graceful arc. Cost: $400 to$500.Photograph(s):Photograph: (FISHING ROD) BART GORINCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ONE FOR THE MONEYIntuit's newest Quicken software lets users bank online from home, pickmutual funds, and otherwise tackle personal finance chores. The new $60Quicken Deluxe cd-rom also includes a Finance 101 section to help demystifymoney management.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FLOPPIES MAY BE ENDANGEREDFew tasks are more time-consuming than copying data from your pc's harddrive onto floppy disks. But Iomega's $200 Zip add-on drive stores 100megabytes--70 times as much as a floppy--on one $20 removable disk.Photograph(s):Photograph: (ZIP DRIVE) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HARD WORK, BIG FUNSony's hot new game machine, Play Station, expands the meaning of ``play.''Mastering the sophisticated controller and cd-based action games is hardwork, but the 3-D graphics are stunning. Price: $299 for the console.Photograph(s):Photograph: (SONY PLAY STATION) JOHN ABBOTTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JOLTIN' JAVAIt's the hottest Internet software on the planet. Java, a new programmingscheme from Sun Microsystems, is shaking everyone up--including Microsoft.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A GIANT LEAP FOR MINIVANSChrysler invented the minivan segment, but it has broken the mold with itscompletely redesigned new model. Hottest new feature: the driver-sidesliding door, an option rivals are scrambling to copy. Handling andsuspension are dramatically improved. Chrysler covers all the price points,from its Dodge Caravan and Plymouth Voyager ($16,575) base models up to itsoption-packed, long wheel-base Chrysler Town & Country lxi ($30,045).Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST WEB SITESTHE SPOT(www.thespot.com)A daily soap opera about twentysomethings.EDGAR(www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm)Repository for sec filings by companies since '94.CENSUS(www.census.gov)If it's demographic information you want, this is the place.ESPN SPORTSZONE (espnet.sportszone.com)Up-to-date scores of college and pro games.WOODROW (woodrow.mpls.frb.fed.us)Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis' site has tons of financial info.IBM's Almaden Reseach Center (www.almaden.ibm.com:80/vis/stm/gallery.html)Breathtaking portraits of atoms, made by scanning tunneling microscopes.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A MULTIMEDIA MAC FOR ALL SEASONSApple Computer's Macintosh Performa 5215CD is an all-in-one multimedia PC.Its 15-inch screen can be tilted and swiveled. It fits nicely in the home,with a single cable containing power cord and printer hookup that lets itscrunch right up against walls, saving desk space. The 5215 has a remotecontrol for CD playing or TV viewing. Price: $2,000.Photograph(s):Photograph: (PAGER AND COMPUTER) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE EYE HAS ITCanon's ES5000 Eye Control camcorder does just that--it lets youeye-activate focus shifting, quick zoom, and other features. Whatever youlook at stays in focus. This top-of-the-line model, with Hi-Band, 8mmresolution is priced at $2,200.Photograph(s):Photograph: (CAMCORDER) TED MORRISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NET GAINSIt changed everything on the Net. The power of Netscape Communications'Navigator software is remaking the entire information industry. Thanks tofast downloading and enhanced graphics, it's widely considered the best``browser'' for surfing the World Wide Web. Available for free on the Net,Navigator now commands 70% of the Web browser market--far surpassing itspredecessor, Mosaic, which was invented by Netscape co-founder Marc L.Andreessen. It's a tenuous lead, because nearly everyone, includingMicrosoft, is aiming at Netscape.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SO WHO NEEDS A PHONE?Motorola's Tango Two-Way Paging System is the first pager of its kind: Itallows businesses and individuals to respond to their pagers without havingto get to a phone. Users can simply select from a menu of up to 120preprogrammed messages. Through Skytel, the service provider for Tango, theprice for national service starts at $74.95 per month. Cost of the pageralone: $399, or $15 a month to lease.Photograph(s):Photograph: (PAGER AND COMPUTER) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE LONG, LONG RACKETThe 1970s gave tennis buffs the oversize racket; the 1980s, the widebody;and now, in the 1990s, there's the extralong. With its Max series, DunlopSlazenger led the pack with the newest racket technology, adding 1 1/2inches to the standard 27-inch frame. It's 125 square inches--15 more thanmost big rackets. At 9 1/2 ounces, the extralongs are extremely light.They're best suited to average-size men, seniors, beginners, and women whodon't pound the ball and want a little more on their serve. Price: $225.Photograph(s):Photograph: (TENNIS PLAYER) JOHN W. MCDONOUGHCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457COLOR COPIES FOR A SONGIt hit shelves in December, and already Hewlett-Packard's CopyJet is makingwaves. Home-office and corporate types are grabbing the gizmo, both a colorprinter and copier, rather than schlepp to Kinko's for color. At $2,500, itbeats the $20,000-plus machines on the market. HP figures color copies run7 cents on this baby, vs. $1 to $1.50 at an outside copy center.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HANDS UP, YOU LOUSE!Putting in a long night? Break the stress with the air-powered Burp Gun, arecreation of the 1950s ping-pong ball shooter that boomers remember. Greatbraaap! sound when you squeeze off a round. Price: $19.95.Photograph(s):Photograph: (BURP GUN) TED MORRISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457MOVE OVER, MR. ANDRETTIBlasting off in the new Porsche 911 Turbo is the closest you'll probablyget to driving a real race car. A pulse-revving 400 horsepower in the '96model gets it from 0 to 60 miles per hour in 4.4 seconds. Top speed is 180mph. Price: a cool $105,000.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE BEST CD-ROMSSo your son wants to be the next Spielberg? Microsoft's Windows 95 CD-ROM3-D Movie Maker ($44.95) lets kids create 3-D films on PC.-- Art lovers like to see works from many perspectives. Corbis Publishing'sA Passion for Art is a splendid $40-to-$50 CD-ROM that takes them throughthe Barnes collection.-- Delrina's Echo Lake is a cozy $60 program for housing photos, videos,and sound clips of your loved ones.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ONE PRETTY PICTUREThe titanium-clad Contax G1 is a classic range finder camera withstate-of-the-art automation. It has a beautiful retro look and accepts fourinterchangeable Carl Zeiss lenses. Price for the body: $1,500.Photograph(s):Photograph: (CAMERA) TED MORRISONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457FLEXIBLE FLYERfter three years of development and a battle with Bombardier, theGulfstream V is corporate globetrotters' hot new tool. The G-V, which seats12 to 19 and retails for $35 million, can fly nonstop from New York toTokyo, 6,500 nautical miles.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457SNAPPY SHOTSWant a photo of dearAunt Martha on your PC? Play Inc.'s $200 Snappy plugsinto a PC and links to a camcorder, VCR, or TV. Click to freeze a framethat can be enhanced or morphed on the PC.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NOTEBOOK NONPAREILIBM's ThinkPad 760CD is the ultimate notebook computer. The brilliant12.1-inch color display and advanced video features allow Hollywood and adagency types to view commercials or the daily rushes. Price: a hefty$7,500.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DOUBLE-DUTY DRIVERThe Taylor Made Burner Bubble is one of the hottest drivers on the golfcourse. Taylor Made Golf shifted weight on the shaft from under the grip acouple of inches toward the head. That hikes centrifugal force and clubheadspeed during the swing. A low center of gravity moves the ball into the airfast and allows the driver to double as a jazzy fairway wood. Price: $299for steel, $499 for titanium.Photograph(s):Photograph: (GOLF CLUB) BRIAN SMITHCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BOOMING BOXA no-show in home PCs until 1995, Hewlett-Packard is on track to hit thetop three by '97, thanks to the Pavilion. It allows each family member toset up his or her own library of commonly used software. Price: $2,100 to$3,500.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NO TOY BOATFeathercraft's fold-up Khatsalano-S kayak can fit into a backpack and openinto a full-length, sea-touring craft. Price: $3,600.Photograph(s):Photograph: (MOTORCYCLE AND KAYAK) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PRODUCTS TO WATCH IN 1996Cadillac is counting on its new German-engineered, entry-level Catera sedanto entice boomers away from the Lexus and the Beemer. Price: $33,000.-- With its Pentium chips, Intel cemented its dominance of thepersonal-computer market. Now, with the next-generation Pentium Pro, Intelgoes for the server and workstation market.-- Can the revamped Ford Taurus get it in gear in 1996? The sedan'sundulating styling and stiff price (close to $20,000) scared off lots oftire kickers in 1995. Will Ford Motors make it worth their while to givethe new Taurus a try?Photograph(s):Photograph: (FORD TAURUS) DEAN SIRACUSACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457RELIVING YESTERDAY'S TRIUMPHSThe Triumph Thunderbird 900 is a redo of the legendary Triumphs of the'50s--presumably without the equally venerable oil leakage and electricalproblems. The guts are all modern, with three- and four-cylinder multivalveengines. The 885 cc Speed Triple will bring joy to any leather-cladoffice-bee seeking thrills. Price: $9,995.Photograph(s):Photograph: (MOTORCYCLE AND KAYAK) JOHN WILKESCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HAS CADDY TURNED THE CORNER?   I have received numerous inquiries from your readership concerning ``ACaddy that's not for Daddy'' (The Corporation, Dec. 18). Despiteconsiderable disclosure of facts and open discussion, your author chose toinclude her opinions and the clearly biased opinions of our competitorswithout including any of our perspective.   With regard to our reduction in sales volume: Cadillac's planned andprofitable reduction of daily rental fleet sales accounts for much of thereduction in the division's sales from 1989 to 1995. While we chose not toforeshadow our 1995 calendar year forecasts to competitors by providingthem for this story, we did provide a yearly accounting of our daily rentalfleet reduction statistics (from 32% of total sales in 1991 to 18% in1994). We expected that disclosure of this plan and accompanyingperformance would not be omitted from your review of our salesperformance.   As for our dealers, you characterized the perception of them as``salesmen in white belts and plaid sport coats'' and continued toperpetrate a disservice to our very professional dealer personnel. Ourdealers consistently earn high customer-satisfaction scores and were onceagain rated No.1 domestic luxury nameplate in a recent J.D. Power &Associates Inc. Sales Satisfaction Survey, second only to Infiniti andahead of Lexus, Mercedes, Lincoln, BMW, and all other luxury brands.   You also raise questions about our customer demographics. Fundamentalchanges in our owner demographic profile have resulted from theintroduction of the 1992 Seville, Seville Touring Sedan, and Eldoradomodels. The author accurately quoted the average age of ``some model''owners at nearly 70. Specifically, this model is the Fleetwood, which weare eliminating from the model line this year. A fair accounting of ourprogress would also have noted that the average age of Seville STS ownersis 52 years, an average age that has been reduced by six years since theintroduction of this model in 1991.   Regarding side air bags, we were disappointed to note that your authorchose to omit the rollout of air bags in the 1997 DeVille model, mentioningonly the introduction for Catera in mid-1997 and again creating theappearance that Cadillac was behind other luxury manufacturers in theimplementation of this technology. The introduction of the side air bags atthe beginning of the 1997 model year on the DeVille was made very clear inour interview.   Finally, you refer to us as ``an industry joke.'' In spite of the factthat nine new models have been added to the luxury market from two all-newmanufacturers (Lexus and Infiniti) since 1989, Cadillac continues as volumeleader in the U.S. luxury market--a title held for the last 46 years. TheDeVille remains America's most-purchased luxury sedan--a title held for thepast nine years. The Northstar-powered Seville STS is a recognizedtechnology tour de force among automotive critics and enthusiastic owners.The all-new Catera has been reviewed favorably by all of the author'scolleagues.   The above-listed facts and many other positive points concerningCadillac's overall performance were omitted from your story. Our marketleadership and product leadership makes preposterous the notion thatCadillac is the brunt of jokes in the industry. To the contrary, ourproduct technology and large loyal owner base are the envy of theindustry.John O. GrettenbergerGeneral ManagerCadillac Motor Car Div.Warren, Mich.Editor's note: Cadillac supplied numbers on fleet sales only through 1994and acknowledged that it expected total sales to decline by 15% in 1995.Our description of the negative perception of Cadillac dealers focused onyounger buyers it hopes to attract with the Catera and matches the Caterateam's own characterization of its consumer research.   Your story on the Catera missed the mark. As I see it, Catera is yetanother encouraging step as Cadillac transforms itself. Why keep harping onthe Cimarron, unquestionably a Stone Age disaster? Cadillac left the StoneAge long ago. Why not mention the Seville Touring Sedan, Detroit's mostexciting world car? What about the national Baldrige Quality Award Cadillacreceived in recognition of quality and changes in culture? And what aboutthe Northstar system? You're much too bleak. At 57, I am most certainly aDaddy. But Catera just may be the Caddy I've been waiting for--and myboomer son, too.Dan PanshinSt. Paul, Minn.   Regarding General Motors Corp.'s plans for the new Catera, your articleleft out a few more mistakes that the Cadillac Div. has made in past yearsbesides the Cimarron and the Allante. How about the 8-6-4 engines and theearly model Sevilles?   Cadillac had better be satisfied with its grandfather image, because anymiddle-aged luxury-car buff worth his salt would not even think about a newCadillac, considering the company's track record for the past 15 years.Especially with introductory models.Frank CredendinoMt. Vernon, N.Y.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457`TERRORISTS SHOULD NEVER BE CONFUSED WITH DISSIDENTS'   I must take exception to your story about Saudi Arabia in your Nov. 27issue (``A dangerous spark in the oil fields,'' International Business).BUSINESS WEEK played into the hands of terrorists by trying to create alink between the terrorist car bombing in Riyadh that claimed the lives offive Americans and the internal situation in our country.   Even though no one knows yet who committed this act of murder, yourarticle stated that the car bombing ``suggests once again that internalenemies, not external ones, may now be the biggest threats'' to states onthe Arabian Peninsula.   Whether in the U.S., Israel, France, Egypt, or Saudi Arabia, people maydisagree about internal policies. But terrorists should never be confusedwith dissidents. Terrorists kill because they are criminals and murderers.They do not need an ``excuse,'' especially feeble ones such as ``belttightening,'' as cited in your article.   The ``internal situation'' that you described did not cause the carbombing any more than the U.S. budget crisis caused the Oklahoma Citybombing. Terrorism is a meaningless act. As your story revealed, if yousearch for ``reasons,'' you will only be led astray.Bandar bin Sultan bin AbdulazizAmbassadorRoyal Embassy of Saudi ArabiaWashingtonCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457EXPORT DIVERSION, MAYBE. DUMPING, ABSOLUTELY   Regarding ``Exports that aren't going anywhere'' (Legal Affairs, Dec.4), I'd feel sorrier for companies whose low-priced exports are beingdiverted back to the U.S. if they weren't meeting the classic definition ofdumping: selling at a lower price in a foreign country than they dodomestically.   When a foreign manufacturer sells at a lower cost in the U.S. than itdoes in its own country, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission is all overthem. Are American companies claiming injury when their dumping activitiesresult in the obvious economic consequences? Wait until the othercountries' FTC equivalents get through with them.   The reality is that price differentials are extremely difficult tomaintain in the global economy. If the law doesn't get you, economicswill.Dick LockePresidentGlobal Procurement GroupSan FranciscoCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TRAVELERS DOESN'T TRAFFIC IN HARD SELLING   Your recent article on ``How Travelers got moving again'' (Finance, Dec.4) stated that CEO Robert I. Lipp ``began pushing Travelers homeowners' andauto policies through the PFS network of 100,000 hard-sell part-timeagents, who work for commissions far below the typical 15% paid...'' Thearticle was great, but the connotation that PFS agents employ hard-selltactics is incorrect. Roughly 80% of the sales force is in fact part-timeand does not rely on commissions to make a living. Thus, the basic PFSapproach is educational, not confrontational. Part-time PFS agents do nothave to make the sale to put food on the table. Hard sell? Nothing could befurther from the truth.David BeemerVirginia Beach, Va.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHERE TO INVEST IN 1996: PHONE NUMBERS (DEC. 25)The correct phone number for ordering additional copies of our previousissue, ``Where to invest in 1996," is 609 426-5594.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A WINNING NUMBER FOR THE LABORITES?The national lottery flap may further undermine the ToriesBy:By Julia Flynn in London`Scamalot.'' That's what critics are now calling Camelot Group PLC, thefor-profit, Anglo-American consortium running Britain's national lottery.After barely a year of operation, Camelot Group is weathering a storm ofcontroversy. Among the allegations are offering bribes, cozying up togovernment regulators, and paying top executives unseemly salaries for thelow-risk chore of peddling lottery tickets to wager-loving Britons.   The consortium denies any impropriety, and no one at Camelot has beenformally charged with any wrongdoing. No matter. The Labor Party is turningScamalot into a referendum on the ruling Tories' laissez-faire approach tobusiness. With elections just a year away, Labor will do everything to keepthe issue hot. Pressure already is mounting to revamp government oversightof the lottery and to turn the operation over to a not-for-profit groupwhen Camelot's license expires in 2001.   The Conservatives had reasoned that a for-profit business would operatea lottery more efficiently than a state-run firm. So after reviewing bothfor-profit and not-for-profit bids, the government went with Camelot. It'scomposed of four British companies--candy and soft-drinks giant CadburySchweppes, computer maker ICL, Racal Electronics, and banknote printer DeLa Rue--and one U.S. company, lottery operator GTech Corp. A new governmentagency--the Office of the National Lottery, or Oflot--oversees Camelot.``SMELL FACTOR.'' By December, Camelot was estimating it would sell $7billion worth of tickets and scratch cards in its first year, making thelottery one of the world's biggest. Then controversy flared. On a BBCinvestigative program, Richard Branson, owner of Virgin Atlantic Airways,alleged that Guy B. Snowden, GTech's co-chairman and a Camelot director,had offered him a bribe to withdraw his group's bid for the lottery.Branson said he informed Oflot's director general, Peter Davis, of thealleged bribe, but Davis denies being told. Snowden labels the charges``beneath contempt'' and is considering a libel suit against Branson, whois already suing GTech for libel. On Dec. 20, Davis said an investigationwould begin in January.   The same day as the BBC broadcast, Davis admitted to a House of Commonscommittee that he had accepted rides in GTech's jets, helicopters, andlimousines while touring state lotteries in the U.S. Davis also hasacknowledged a close friendship with GTech board member Carl B. Menges. Ina heated debate, Labor member Donald Anderson argued that the ``smellfactor'' prevents Davis from having ``the credibility necessary for theperformance of his functions.'' The government so far has refused to sackDavis.SCRUTINIZED. Labor MPs also are raising questions about whether Oflot letCamelot profit at the expense of the good causes it is supposed to fund.Camelot made a $37 million profit on revenues of $3.9 billion during thehalf-year ended in September and paid out a $14.6 million dividend to itsfive shareholders, the maximum payout allowed under its license. Yet in aSeptember 1994 letter to an MP, Oflot's Davis wrote that based on theconsortium's forecast he expected it would be ``over four years beforeCamelot shows a cash return on its investment.'' Camelot says it did not``deliberately understate'' its expected returns.   Meanwhile, Camelot's pay packets are raising eyebrows, too. CamelotChief Executive Tim Holley received $682,785 for 1995, including a $184,800bonus. Holley declines to comment. Oflot says it doesn't regulate the payat Camelot, but in a country where high salaries arouse ire, this argumentis hardly convincing. Says Denis Vaughan, an orchestra conductor whostarted the move for a lottery to help the arts: ``Oflot is more of alapdog than a watchdog.''   GTech merits far closer watching as well, Camelot's critics say. TheRhode Island-based company, which operates 74 lotteries for governments andother public authorities, has endured scrutiny for its methods of winningcontracts in the U.S. Its former national sales manager, J. David Smith,has been charged by federal prosecutors with taking kickbacks in NewJersey. GTech has never been charged with a crime and says it wasvictimized by Smith, who is vigorously defending himself. Nonetheless,critics are calling for a reexamination of GTech's role in Camelot.   Scamalot will make even more headlines when the inquiry starts probingBranson's allegations. The way things are going, Camelot's partners maycome to regret that they ever bet on this business.Photograph(s):Photograph: PLACING A BET: Is the watchdog agency asleep?LAURIE SPARHAM/NETWORK/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457TOSSING A LIFELINE TO MEXICO'S BIGGEST BANKSEven Banamex and Bancomer are getting a state bailoutBy:By Geri Smith in Mexico CityMexico's yearlong economic crisis has been murder on the country's bankingsystem. The government has been forced to take over six banks and bail outnine others. But the prevailing wisdom was always that the system's crownjewels, Banamex and Bancomer, would easily weather the storm. Now they,too, are in sufficient distress that the government is preparing to assumechunks of their troubled loan portfolios--and those of two other banks. Thecost: More than $4 billion on top of the $11 billion the government hasalready spent on bailouts. The government effort has already grown somassive that some critics are saying that the banks are beingrenationalized.   It's a stunning reversal. Just four years ago, the government made $13.5billion selling off the state-controlled banks to some of Mexico's cockiestentrepreneurs. They plunked down an average of three times book value for18 banks, figuring that the economic reforms of then President CarlosSalinas de Gortari, coupled with free trade with the U.S., would guaranteevigorous economic growth and handsome profits.SICK SYSTEM. Instead, the new owners have seen the value of their holdingsdevastated by the high interest rates and bad loans that are the hallmarksof the financial crisis. With borrowers unable to pay, past-due loans nowexceed $17 billion--18% of the system's portfolio. If tougher U.S.accounting standards were applied, the figure would be as high as35%--meaning the system is very sick. One big loser is financier AgustinLegoretta III, whose investor group has lost nearly all the $1.4 billion itpaid for Grupo Financiero Inverlat--now a ward of the state.   The banks' problems present a big threat to President Ernesto ZedilloPonce de Leon's pledges that the economy will recover in 1996. The countryneeds healthy banks to finance any recovery. Yet, Standard & Poor's Corp.says Mexican banks won't start to turn around until the third quarter of1996 because banks and borrowers are still being hit by 50% interestrates.   The worry is that Mexico's banking problems will be a drag on theeconomy for years. Moody's Investors Service warns that the bank bailoutcould cost 10% to 15% of GDP, or up to $40 billion. That would slow growthand suck Mexican and international funding away from other uses. With manyeconomists expecting the economy to shrink in early 1996, the governmentmay have to step in with more money soon. ``The government is providingBand-Aids to the banks as they come for help, but the real cancer--thepast-due loans--has not been eliminated,'' says economist Rogelio Ramirezde la O.   The government doesn't have any easy way out of this mess. Confidence inMexico is so low that if the government tries to help the banks by bringingrates down, the markets will likely pummel the peso and Mexican securities.That's what happened last fall when market jitters forced an upward spikein rates, producing a flurry of new defaults.WARY INVESTORS. In October, Standard & Poor's downgraded Banamex' peso debtto BBB-, S&P's lowest investment-grade rating. In response, the loan-buyoutprogram, previously used to help smaller banks, was extended to Banamex andBancomer, which together control 39% of the system's assets. ``Banamex andBancomer are the most important banks in Mexico, and we simply can't runthe risk that their finances might deteriorate,'' says Eduardo Fernandez,president of Mexico's Banking & Securities Commission.   The banks' troubles present a buying opportunity for foreignbanks--though most are wary of getting entangled in a Mexican bank now. ButSpain's Banco Bilbao Vizcaya paid $340 million to buy control of troubledMercantil Probursa in July. Canada's Bank of Nova Scotia is negotiating toassume control of Inverlat. And Bancomer is shopping around for a foreignminority investor to inject fresh capital.   As they grapple with the banks' problems, Mexican officials now concedethat they mishandled the bank sell-off in the early 1990s. Too muchemphasis was placed on obtaining high prices and too little emphasis on thebanking skills of the buyers. ``In retrospect, I would have applied some ofthe purchase price to better capitalization of the banks,'' says FinanceSecretary Guillermo Ortiz, who was in charge of the privatization programthen and is responsible for bailing the banks out now. He is probablydoomed to spend a long time correcting his mistake.Photograph(s):Photograph: BANAMEX TRADERS: Aid hasn't solved the bank's real problem, badloansKEITH DANNEMILLER/SABACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457APPLE: ANOTHER BOUT OF BAD TIDINGSProfit pressure may bring layoffs and suitorsBy:By Peter Burrows, with Kathy Rebello, in San Francisco and Steve Brull inTokyoMike Spindler just can't get a break. Instead of celebrating the blowoutsales he expected this Christmas quarter, Apple Computer Inc.'s CEO isbracing for a very rough ride. In mid-December, the company warned of apossible loss during the period, and analysts fear the worst--layoffs,projects killed, maybe more losses. Some even say Apple will have littlechoice but to sell off parts, if not all, of the business. And there areagain rumors that Spindler's job is in jeopardy. Says Robertson, Stephens &Co. analyst John T. Rossi, who doesn't foresee profits again until nextfall: ``Apple is in a tougher spot than it's been in for a long time.''   The reason? Banking on a strong season, Apple pumped up production byabout 30%. To move its many Macintosh models, the company slashed prices.Simultaneously, it faced a shortage of profitable high-end models. To makematters worse, Apple was slammed by a vicious price war in Japan. The netresult: On Dec. 15, Apple announced that its unit sales and revenue for theChristmas quarter were running above last year's level but below internalforecasts. Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. analyst Eugene G. Glazer now expectsApple to report a $5 million loss for the quarter, down from a $178 millionprofit on sales of $2.8 billion for the same quarter a year ago. Glazerfigures Apple's gross margins for the period slipped to a tiny 18.2%.CREDIT WATCH. Apple has gained market share worldwide, hitting 9.3% of thePC market this fall, up from 7.9% at midyear, figures New York-basedresearcher Link/IDC. Apple execs see the share improvement as critical,maintaining that software developers--and then customers--will abandon theMac if it loses more ground to PC rivals. But to make its market-sharegains, Apple sacrificed profitability--and its long-held tenet thatconsumers are willing to pay a premium for its computers. Recent price cutsnarrowed the gap between Macs and PCs from $1,000-plus in 1994 to $320, IDCfigures.   Apple isn't giving up on its strategy. It recently sweetened discountsto big resellers with $20 million worth of Mac sales a year. And dealerssay Apple will cut prices 10% again in January on some PowerBook laptopsand high-end 9500 Power Macs. But outsiders worry that Apple can't affordits crusade. Analysts figure Apple's cash balance is down to $200 million.Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investor Services started reviews of Apple'scredit on Dec. 18.   That makes internal cost-cutting crucial. Insiders say between 1,000 and2,000 employees--7% to 15% of the workforce--could be let go beforequarterly results come out on Jan. 17. More manufacturing also may beoutsourced, and nascent businesses--such as multimedia set-top boxes--maybe sold or axed.   Some outsiders contend even that won't do it. Glazer says slashing 1,500jobs translates into $100 million in yearly savings, vs the $450 million hethinks Apple needs to reach Compaq Computer Corp.'s 23.5% gross margins andearn its 10% net. To fuel development of the Mac alone, Apple spends about5.6% of sales on R&D, vs. 1.8% for Compaq.   Spindler engineered Apple out of a similar crisis in 1993, when he laidoff 13% of the workforce and took a one-time quarterly loss of $188million. Can he do it again? With gross margins way down, he has less roomto maneuver. Thanks to a bloody price war started by Fujitsu Ltd., Apple'sJapanese unit, normally the source of 30% of the company's profits, will belucky to break even this quarter, analysts in Japan say.   Despite rumors, insiders think it's unlikely Spindler will get the bootat Apple's scheduled board meeting in mid-January. ``The board standsbehind the statement in October in support of Michael Spindler,'' says adirector.TROIKA TALES. Apple's troubles, meanwhile, have lowered its share price by34% since mid-July, to about $32--not far above the company's book value of$23.50. That has made Apple takeover bait. Two new suitors said to besniffing around: Sun Microsystems and a three-way partnership of Appleco-founder Steve Jobs, who left in 1985; Lawrence Ellison, CEO of softwaregiant Oracle; and Jim Manzi, former chief of Lotus Development, thesoftware company recently taken over by IBM.   Sun execs won't comment on rumors, though Eric E. Schmidt, its chieftechnology officer, calls Apple ``a strong brand.'' As for the troika? Noway, says Jobs: ``The rumor ain't true. Though there might be romance inthe idea, I'm afraid one can't go home again.'' The question: How muchbreathing room does Spindler have left?Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Apple's Discounting Hurt Profits...CHARTS BY ALBERTO MENA/BWIllustration: Chart: ...Without Improving Sales GrowthCHARTS BY ALBERTO MENA/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: Spindler seems willing to sacrifice margins for market share.But can Apple afford it?PHOTOGRAPH BY LOUIS PSIHOYOS/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE COMEBACK KID OF RUSSIA?Yeltsin has no charismatic rival, and the economy looks betterBy:By Peter Galuszka in MoscowOn election day, voters thronged to the brick school building that servedas the voting place in precinct 1465--a working-class Moscow neighborhood.One of the voters favoring the Communists--the big winners--was 83-year-oldMaria Artshenava. In her youth, the Communists brought stability and pride,she said. Today's market reformers have brought only pain. With a pensionof only $45 a month, ``all I can buy is bread,'' she complained.   For the second time in two years, Russian voters have given PresidentBoris Yeltsin the same message: Reforms have enriched just a sliver ofRussian society while impoverishing the rest. At the same time, Russia'ssuperpower status, achieved under the old regime, has collapsed. That's whyvoters made the revived Communist Party the leaders, with 22% of theparliamentary vote. Ultranationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky's misnamedLiberal Democratic Party did better than predicted, coming in second.   It is certainly a disappointing outcome for Yeltsin and the whole reformcamp. But it is not quite a disaster. Indeed, Yeltsin will even find someencouraging nuggets in the results as he ponders his strategy for the farmore important June presidential elections. Yeltsin hasn't yet declaredwhether he will be a candidate in that crucial vote, which will choose aleader for a five-year term.FALLING FLAT. As he mulls his options, the Russian President will note withsatisfaction that the parliamentary elections have not produced acharismatic challenger for the presidency. Grigory Yavlinski, the onlyreformer with much popularity, gained just 9% of the votes. Yeltsin's mostfeared rival, Alexander Lebed, the nationalist former general, fell flat onhis face. His party received less than the 5% minimum for parliamentaryrepresentation.   While Yeltsin will face a strong campaign from the resurgent Communists,their leader, Gennady Zyuganov, is a bumbling-professor type who lackscharisma. Says Nikolai Petrov, a senior analyst at the Carnegie Endowmentfor International Peace in Moscow: ``This does improve Yeltsin's chances.There's danger from the Communists and nationalists, but he'll get a chanceto mobilize the democratic electorate.''   The big question is Yeltsin's health. If he is able to run in June, hewill likely enjoy the heavy backing of the financial and business groupshis policies have enriched as well as the old military and industrialelite. But if he takes himself out of the race, the reformers couldsplit--opening the way for Zyuganov or Zhirinovsky.   There is also concern that the Communist resurgence may frighten Yeltsininto abandoning his relatively austere economic program. Such a move couldbe self-defeating if inflation, which he has chopped from 2,000% in 1992 toaround 170% for 1995, shoots up again.   But Yeltsin should be able to hold the line on reform. Although theCommunists are likely to pick up at least 150 of the Duma's 450 seats andZhirinovsky did surprisingly well, with more than 50 members, thePresident's powers are much greater than those of the Duma. Moreover, anyCommunist effort to roll back reform will be hurt by the poor showing oftheir allies, the Agrarians, a group led by collective farm managers, whodread privatization of agriculture. They only won about 20 seats. Finally,the Communists and Zhirinovsky disagree on economics. The otherwise erraticZhirinovsky tends to support sound fiscal policies.   Yeltsin is not acting as if he's going to cave in to his rivals. Moscowinsiders say he will likely ditch unpopular Foreign Minister Andrey V.Kozyrev. But key aides such as Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin andprivatization chief Anatoly Chubais are likely to stay on.   If Yeltsin can hang on until June, he may be helped by real economicimprovement. With inflation down and the ruble relatively stable, theindications are that economic output is likely to rise in 1996 for thefirst time in six years. Russians are no longer seeing their savings eatenaway to the degree they were two years ago. By June, they may see moreRussian goods on the shelves and perhaps more competitive pricing. Whilesuch changes may not win the votes of big losers such as Maria Artshenava,they could be enough to gain Yeltsin another five years.Photograph(s):Photograph: OLD GUARD: Communist chief Zyuganov won 22% of the votesJEREMY NICHOLL/MATRIXCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NO SMOKE, BUT PLENTY OF HEATWhy the smokeless tobacco biz is starting to hackBy:By Tim Smart, with Ed Brown, in New HavenFor years, UST Inc. has chewed up the competition and spit out pure gold.Partly because the Greenwich (Conn.) maker of Skoal and Copenhagen brandsnuffs has avoided the political and legal hassles that have plaguedcigarette companies, it has posted profit numbers most consumer-productsoutfits can only dream about. Earnings have doubled in five years, to $387million last year--enough to generate a hefty 32% net margin on $1.2billion in sales.   Now, UST may be about to get chewed up. A study released on Dec. 18 bythe American Health Foundation, a Valhalla (N.Y.) organization that focuseson research about the health hazards of tobacco, found that a single can ofsmokeless tobacco contains three times the dosage of cancer-causingchemicals found in a pack of cigarettes. (The average user of smokelesstobacco consumes three cans per week.) In Kansas, a team of lawyers ispreparing a nationwide class action alleging that UST and others have knownfor years that their products are addictive and harmful. Meanwhile, tobaccohas until Jan. 2 to respond to Food & Drug Administration proposals thatwould sharply curtail marketing of smokeless tobacco.TRIPLE WHAMMY. Perhaps more ominously, UST's fundamental business ischanging for the worse. Analysts expect profits to increase by 11% in 1996,but much of the rise will come from higher prices. Unit-sales growth forUST's smokeless tobacco through the first nine months of this year was apaltry 0.5%--after increases of 2.6% in 1994 and 2.3% in 1993 and twicethose rates in the 1980s. From about 90% in the late 1980s, UST's marketshare has fallen to about 84%.   The problem: UST's traditional market of mostly young blue-collar malesisn't expanding. Attempts to lure new buyers to smokeless tobacco--mainlyformer cigarette smokers or younger users--have failed. Competitors,meanwhile, have begun chipping away at UST. Swisher International Inc.'sHelme unit offers its Silver Creek brand in a two-for-one package, whileConwood Co. is selling its new Cougar brand for about half the price ofUST's Skoal.   UST is fighting back, but slowly. It recently unveiled Skoal FlavorPacks, a pouch-like version of Skoal designed as an alternative tocigarettes. But similar products have had only limited success with theirtarget market: cigarette smokers. Meanwhile, Joseph R. Taddeo, head ofUST's tobacco unit, resigned in June after a dispute with CEO Vincent A.Gierer Jr.--analysts say over the course of new-product initiatives.Taddeo's replacement is marketing executive Robert D. Rothenberg. Gierer,Rothenberg, and other company executives refused interview requests.   Analysts expect Rothenberg to further shift UST's advertising emphasisaway from stock-car racing and rodeo audiences to rock concerts and collegecampuses. Advertising spending is going up, too. One splashy promotion isUST's Rock The Smokies campaign, which offers a drawing for free tickets toa country-music concert to be held on Fourth of July weekend in Newport,Tenn. Anyone who sends in a coupon can ask for free samples of USTproducts.   But aggressive marketing could easily ignite more opposition fromactivists and regulators. ``Statistics show that it's young people thatstart using tobacco, not adults,'' says Mitchell R. Zeller, a deputyassociate commissioner at the FDA. ``It's the President's goal that thenext generation grow up without becoming addicted to tobacco.'' The new FDArules would limit marketing efforts such as sponsorships and the handingout of free samples. The agency also is likely to pressure UST and storesto ensure that they don't sell to minors.I.D., PLEASE? Some states aren't waiting for Washington. In October,Massachusetts forced UST to consent to stringent restrictions on the use ofmail-order samples there, including checking driver's licenses to verifythe age of those writing in for samples. This came after a six-month stingin which the state had minors clip coupons in Rolling Stone and othermagazines, then write for free samples after claiming to be adults. ``Ifyou could fill out a coupon and sign something without showing any proof ofage and get a six-pack of beer in the mail, people would be outraged,''says Assistant Attorney General George Weber.   Diversification would seem prudent at this point. UST got intowinemaking in the mid-1980s under the Chateau Ste. Michelle and ColumbiaCrest labels, but wine still only accounts for 7% of sales and 1.3% ofoperating profits, hardly enough to offset pressures on its main business.UST may have to come up with something else--or endure some bites into itspeerless financial record.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: No Profit ProblemCHART BY RAY VELLA/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: STINGMassachusetts forced tighter rules after it proved minors got free samplesfrom ads in Rolling StoneCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WILL FLIPPER PLAY IN ESTONIA?Why John Kluge is on a buying binge in HollywoodBy:By Ronald Grover in Los AngelesJohn W. Kluge didn't get to be one of the richest men in America by beingstupid. A onetime Ford assembly-line worker, he invested in a Washingtonradio station in 1946 and later a string of TV stations. That made hisfortune in a big way in 1984, when he sold the TV stations to RupertMurdoch for $2 billion. He was among the first to jump into cellular,too--picking up a cell-phone operation in 1983, which he sold three yearslater for a cool $1.6 billion.   Yet for all his lucrative dealmaking, the 81-year-old Kluge has nevermanaged to conquer Hollywood. He has lost an estimated $275 million onOrion Pictures Corp., the production outfit he began investing in duringthe mid-1980s--only to see it sink into bankruptcy. Orion emerged fromChapter 11 in 1992, but it still gushes red ink. So why would Kluge'sMetromedia International Group Inc. swoop in on Dec. 21 to bid $115 millionfor debt-plagued Samuel Goldwyn Co.? Or, among other apparently oddballdeals, agree on Nov. 30 to pay an estimated $533 million for AllianceEntertainment Corp., a distributor of golden-oldie music by the likes ofMel Torme and Rosemary Clooney? The answer: Eastern Europe.PICK OF SHOWS. Since the Berlin Wall came down, Kluge and his aides havebeen aggressively buying up licenses to provide wireless cable TV, radio,and telephones in such places as Riga, Tallinn, and Nizhny Novgorod. Now,Kluge's troops are hustling to line up the programming they intend to sellto these new customers. If it outbids Dutch media giant Polygram for theSamuel Goldwyn studio, Metromedia will gain the rights to a library of1,100 films, including such classics as Guys and Dolls and Pride of theYankees, as well as some 700 episodes of TV programs such as Flipper andGentle Ben.   Will they line up in Estonia to see Flipper? Hard to say. But Kluge andcompany certainly think so. In a flurry of deals since August, 1994,Metromedia has also snapped up two smallish film companies. If you add inOrion and Goldwyn, the deals would give Metromedia rights to more than2,100 films and television shows.   One problem: Much of Kluge's new empire isn't making any money. In arecent filing with the Securities & Exchange Commission, Metromediaacknowledged that its collection of companies lost $51.2 million in thefirst six months of 1995, on sales of $179.9 million. Moreover, the companyis clogged with $399 million in short-term and long-term debt.   Kluge isn't talking about how he intends to turn his money-losersaround. And he shows no sign of altering his strategy. Associates sayMetromedia continues to bid for licenses not only in Eastern Europe butalso in Asia. The company already ships such U.S. programs as MTV, CountryMusic Television, and the Discovery Channel to wireless cable-TVsubscribers in such cities as Moscow, Bucharest, and Tashkent. It also ownsradio stations in Moscow, Budapest, and elsewhere, and is building wirelessphone systems in other regions.   Looking for financial stability, last April Kluge merged Metromedia withActava Group Inc., a mishmash of companies formerly known as FuquaIndustries. Its chairman, John D. Phillips, is a 52-year-old turnaroundspecialist who has sold off everything but Actava's Snapper Power Equipmentunit. An executive whose tastes run to denim and Harley Davidsons, Phillipswill act as CEO of Kluge's entertainment companies from from Actava'sAtlanta headquarters.   As a source of new programming, Kluge is counting on Motion PictureCorp. of America (MPCA), a production house he agreed on Nov. 27 to buy for$32.5 million in stock and cash. MPCA, which produced such low-budget hitsas Dumb and Dumber and Threesome, plans to turn out 14 to 16 films nextyear for Metromedia. If Metromedia wins Goldwyn, which specializes in artfilms such as The Madness of King George, it would get ownership of a dozenother films in the works, including American Buffalo with Dustin Hoffman.   Can a library of movies and some startup production help put Kluge'sentertainment biz in the black? Possibly. More likely, they will keep himin the game long enough to make back the losses from his Orion debacle--andfind another, bigger company to buy him out. After all, some of JohnKluge's shrewdest moves have come from knowing when to sell.KLUGE'S MEDIA EMPIREORION PICTURES Has a film library of 1,200 movies, including Platoon,Terminator, and Silence of the Lambs. Emerged from bankruptcy in late 1992.Lost $18.9 million on $73 million in revenues for the six months ended Aug.31.METROMEDIA INTERNATIONAL Provides wireless cable TV, paging, and telephoneservices to Eastern Europe and former Soviet-bloc nations. Lost $13.1million on $3.3 million in sales for the first six months of fiscal 1996.SAMUEL GOLDWYN* Owns a 52-theater chain and a library of 1,100 films,including Pride of the Yankees and Guys and Dolls, and 700 TV episodes. Italso has film production and distribution. Lost $12.3 million on sales of$53.5 million in the six months ended Sept. 30.*Bid to acquire company on Dec. 21DATA: COMPANY REPORTSPhotograph(s):Photograph: BRAVE FACE: His new empire is losing moneyPHOTOGRAPH BY ANDY FREEBERG/OUTLINEPhotograph: GOLDWYN'S THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGEPHOTOGRAPH BY PHOTOFESTCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE NAACP BETS ON A NEW BREADWINNERKweisi Mfume hopes to show donors the crisis is overBy:By Susan B. Garland in WashingtonLast March, officials of the scandal-plagued National Association for theAdvancement of Colored People asked members of the AT&T Foundation to lunchat Manhattan's Remi restaurant. Myrlie Evers-Williams, who had just takenover as NAACP chair, quickly got down to business. What could the nation'svenerable civil rights organization do to persuade the foundation to renewa three-year, $225,000 education grant that had expired in 1993? AT&T'sanswer: Put your house in order. ``We were looking for strong leadership,strong financial controls, and a strong mission,'' recalls Milton J.Little, an AT&T Foundation vice-president who was at the meeting.   Enter Representative Kweisi Mfume (D-Md.). On Feb. 15, Mfume will leaveCongress to become president and CEO of the NAACP, a move that figures tobolster its clout--and its bottom line. Already, his appointment may havewon over one big donor: On Dec. 28, Nissan Motor Corp. USA is expected toannounce it will donate $100,000 to the NAACP. The organization's backershope others will follow. ``We wanted someone whose integrity wasfirst-rate,'' says Nancy L. Lane, director of corporate affairs for Johnson& Johnson, who served on the NAACP's search committee.DAUNTING TASK. Mfume's challenges are twofold: He must attract young blacksnow drawn to militant leaders like Louis Farrakhan while reassuringCorporate America that the NAACP is worthy of support. ``We need to changethe hearts, minds, and direction of young people so that they seeappreciation of work, respect for elders, and individual responsibility asbedrock principles,'' he says.   Mfume thinks this message of self-reliance will appeal to donors. ``Ihope corporate partners who have not shied away will say to others thatit's all right to come home to the NAACP,'' he says. The task is daunting.The 87-year-old organization has been reeling since August, 1994, when itousted Executive Director Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. after discovering he hadpaid $300,000 to settle a sexual-harassment suit. Auditors found otherevidence of gross financial mismanagement. The scandal led to longtimeChairman William F. Gibson's defeat last February to Evers-Williams.   Mfume is meeting with auditors to come up with fiscal controls for thegroup, which is $3.8 million in debt. He hopes to build a $150 millionendowment by 2001, improve efficiencies by merging regional offices, andask some suppliers to restructure or forgive debt.   Business, which contributed almost half of the NAACP's 1995 budget of$8.5 million, is key to his efforts. Despite financial disarray, manycompanies, including Procter & Gamble, Sears, Quaker Oats, and IBM, havekept up support. Companies argue that business has an interest in backinggroups that promote minority opportunities. ``It's important we have askilled and qualified workforce,'' says Eric R. Graves, manager ofconstituency affairs at Texaco Inc.   Other corporate donors couldn't ignore the disorder. In 1995, corporategiving declined some 30% from 1994. Joseph E. Seagram & Sons Inc. withheldits annual $50,000 grant in 1994 and 1995. Seagram spokeswoman Patsy Glazersays the company had been waiting to see who would head the organization.Now, she wants to meet with Mfume. Merrill Lynch & Co. also is withholdingsupport until it sees how the NAACP's game plan shapes up. AT&T is waiting,too, but Little is hopeful: ``We believe Mr. Mfume's leadership is what isneeded.''SALES TOUR. Backers say Mfume proved his leadership mettle as a member ofthe House Banking Committee. There, he emerged as a consensus-builder,mediating disputes among the banking, insurance, and securities industries.Says Banking Committee Chairman James A. Leach (R-Iowa): ``There are somepeople who think that what's good for the free market is bad forlower-income people. Kweisi believes the reverse--that what makes themarket work will be better for lower-income people.''   That philosophy is behind Mfume's plans to set up NAACP mentoringprograms to match students with corporate volunteers. He also wants to workwith companies to set up apprenticeship programs and with officials toimprove public schools. He may also push for incentives to encouragecorporations to work with small minority companies.   Over the next few weeks, Mfume intends to embark on a nationwide tour tomeet with corporate leaders. But with the NAACP's programs barelyfunctioning, many branch offices virtually closed, and one-third of itsstaff on furlough, the organization could be a tough sell. It will take allof Mfume's skills as bridge-builder to convince Corporate America that theNAACP won't be just another bad investment on corporate books.WHERE THE MONEY GOESNAACP programs that draw corporate supportFAIR SHARE Helps corporations set and reach goals regarding minority hiringand purchasing from minority suppliersACT-SO Nationwide competition among students on academic subjects such asarts, humanities, and sciencesBACK-TO-SCHOOL Encourages dropouts and troubled students to continue theireducation by providing tutoring and counselingPhotograph(s):Photograph: IDEA BROKER: Mfume was an effective Capitol Hill mediatorMANTEL/SIPACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457REPACKAGING THE POST OFFICEFacilities are getting face-lifts, clerks are getting friendlierBy:By Mark Lewyn in WashingtonWhen retired CIA analyst William R. Dodge stopped at Furr's supermarket inAlbuquerque on Dec. 22, his shopping list included butter, chocolate chips,nuts, and postage stamps. Stamps? Sure. Overnight delivery, too. TheAlbuquerque facility is one of eight that the U.S. Postal Service recentlyhas tucked inside popular retail outlets around the country.   The new offices are just one sign that the USPS is trying to reinventitself. Aside from opening facilities in outlets such as Furr's and Kmart,it is sprucing up old offices and improving customer service.Stamps--including new, self-adhesive ones--can now be purchased at ATMs, byphone, and with credit cards. During the holidays, sales clerks directedtraffic and branch hours were extended. Workers even dressed as Santa todeliver Express Mail.   Why the changes? After all, the agency is flush from last year's ratehike, higher mail volume, and better cost controls and cash management.Postmaster General Marvin T. Runyon says he ended fiscal 1995 with a recordsurplus of $1.77 billion on revenue of $54.3 billion. But in many markets,the Postal Service is losing out to private carriers and new technologiessuch as fax machines (chart). ``We just can't sit here and say to people,`Here are our hours and, if you feel like it, bring your mail to us,'''says Runyon. ``We need to get [market share] back.''   The new approach was evident over the holidays. Runyon hired 40,000part-time workers to sort mail, leased 116 planes to carry it, and set up acommand center in Washington to make sure it got through. The effort seemsto have worked: On Dec. 20, 1995's busiest mail day, the service delivereda record 725 million pieces of mail, up 6% from 1994.   To publicize the reforms, Runyon hiked his ad budget 50% in 1995, to$143 million. Last fall, he also hired Loren E. Smith, a former Citibankexecutive who did stints at Kraft General Foods Inc. and Colgate-PalmoliveCo., to oversee marketing.   At the heart of the new strategy are the new postal ``stores.'' So far,200 of the 40,000 local offices have had face-lifts that include attractivelighting and salesclerks trained to be friendly and helpful. It's lookinggood: On average, the new shops have posted 20% sales gains over theoffices they replaced. Now, Smith is stepping up the pace--all postalfacilities in Albuquerque and Atlanta are getting makeovers. Philadelphia;Columbus, Ohio; Boston; and Richmond, Va., are next. New services includephone debit cards and a ``Pack-and-Send'' wrapping service.   Shoppers who endured surly postal service and long lines over theholidays likely are skeptical of such reforms. But Runyon knows he has tomake the strategy work--or see a lot less mail with a USPS postmark.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Why The Overhaul?CHART BY ALAN BASEDENCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A HEAVYWEIGHT CONTENDERThis breakthrough may be the key to a fat pillBy:By Geoffrey Smith in BostonLast July, Amgen Inc. looked like it had a lock on one of the drugindustry's most heated races: the search for a ``fat drug.'' In amuch-heralded study whose announcement boosted Amgen's stock by $900million, researchers disclosed that a protein called leptin, produced bythe newly discovered OB gene, stripped away body fat when injected intoobese mice.   Barely five months later, an Amgen rival may have taken the lead: OnDec. 28, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., was toannounce that it had found the ``receptor'' for leptin--the structure oncell walls that is a crucial part of regulating leptin's function.Receptors don't make anyone skinny, but many drugs target receptors toinhibit or stimulate a bodily function. While Amgen is testing aninjectable drug, Millennium says its receptor may be the key to anantiobesity pill, which would be far more lucrative.MIND-SET. Researchers had hoped a shortage of leptin--the protein thatsignals the brain to stop eating--was a big factor in obesity. But studiesnow show that obese people often have high leptin levels. Millenniumbelieves the receptor it found will lead it to another obesity gene, calledDB, that determines whether the brain can recognize leptin's stop-eatingsignal. ``The receptor may lead to drugs for potentially the most prevalentform of human obesity--one resulting from the brain's resistance to leptinrather than the lack of leptin,'' says Millennium CEO Mark Levin.   Weight-watchers shouldn't rethink New Year's resolutions yet:Researchers say a wonder drug is years away.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457EXHALE BLOWS 'EM AWAYBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONBy Ronald GroverCall it a Christmas miracle. No one was more surprised than execs atTwentieth Century Fox when its Waiting to Exhale opened on Dec. 22 andimmediately became the unexpected hit of the holidays. Fox had targeted itsmarketing for the film, starring singer Whitney Houston and three otherblack actresses, heavily at black women. Exhale opened primarily in largecities; the studio hardly even opened the movie in the 'burbs until afterChristmas.Hollywood isn't sure why, but despite its segmented marketing and limiteddistribution, Exhale is knocking 'em dead. The film, based on a novel byTerry McMillan, was made on a budget of $15 million, about half theHollywood average. In its opening weekend, the movie had a huge $14.3million box office, beating out six other new films, including WarnerBros.' Grumpier Old Men and Universal Pictures' Sudden Death. Being one ofthe few women-oriented films helped. Whatever other reasons for Exhale'ssuccess, Hollywood won't ignore the lesson: Look for a wave of black-femalebuddy movies --glitzier, big-budget ones.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A TRUNKFUL OF PINK SLIPS AT BUDGETBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONWITH THE RENTAL CAR BUSIness wrapping up one of its worst years ever,Budget Rent a Car's new chairman, Jack Frazee, had a Grinch-like holidaymessage for 500 salaried employees: Your services are no longer needed.Frazee hopes to save $20 million annually by cutting 20% of the salariedworkforce. The cuts are part of a massive shakeup at Budget, the No.3rental agency with estimated 1995 U.S. revenues of $1.5 billion. Frazeealso showed the door to his CFO and two senior vice-presidents and closed40 unprofitable offices. Handing out pink slips over the holidays was ``notfun,'' Frazee says. ``But I try to remind the people who are left that thecompany is a lot more stable as a result of the actions we've taken.''Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PIER 1'S $20 MILLION QUESTIONBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONPIER 1 IMPORTS ALSO HAD A lump of coal in its Christmas stocking: Theretailer disclosed on Dec. 26 that it would post a pretax loss of $20million because of ``inappropriate trading activities'' by a financialconsultant--Capital Insight of Beverly Hills, according to the consultant'slawyer--hired to manage excess cash and short-term investments. Pier 1,otherwise enjoying strong sales gains, says the loss won't materiallyaffect liquidity or operations, but a board committee is investigating.Pier 1 CEO Clark Johnson didn't return phone calls.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457IS CYRIX LOOKING AT A DEFAULT?By:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONCHIPMAKER CYRIX IS SPUTtering. On Dec. 22, the company warned that it maylose $8 million or more in the fourth quarter. A price collapse forcedCyrix to write down its inventory of chips compatible with Intel's 486.Cyrix said the loss could force a default on $88 million in loans used topurchase production equipment to build its newest chip, which is designedto rival Intel's new Pentium Pro. The company hopes to get a waiver fromcreditor IBM, which manufactures Cyrix' newest chip.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457A DESERT DEAL FOR BRITISH PETROLEUMBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONDESPITE A BLOODY INSURgency by Islamic militants in Algeria, BritishPetroleum on Dec. 23 signed a five-year deal with Sonatrach, Algeria'sstate-owned oil company, to explore and develop gas fields in the remoteI-n-Salah region of the Sahara desert. BP will foot 65% of the $3.5 billioncost of the project and will get one-third of the gas's salesvalue--enough, it figures, to boost its worldwide gas production by up to30%. A spokesman says BP is hoping that energy installations, which accountfor 95% of Algeria's foreign earnings, won't be targeted by the insurgents.Exxon and Atlantic Richfield also are mulling deals in Algeria.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457CALLING CORPORATE AMERICA'S BLUFFBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONIN THE MAYBE-IT-DOESN'T-PAY to-stick-your-neck-out category: House MinorityLeader Richard A. Gephardt and 45 fellow Democrats are challenging morethan 90 executives to detail business tax breaks they would be willing tosacrifice to help balance the federal budget. The challenge, in lettersmailed Dec. 22, was prompted by national newspaper ads signed by thebusiness leaders imploring Congress to put ``everything on the table'' toreach a budget deal. Among others, the letter went to Paul Allaire ofXerox, Lou Gerstner of IBM, Bob Allen of AT&T, and Joe Dionne of TheMcGraw-Hill Companies, parent of BUSINESS WEEK.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ET CETERA...By:EDITED BY THANE PETERSON-- The Feds and Occidental Chemical settled the 16-year-old Love Canalcleanup case.-- Cordis shares fell after Johnson & Johnson extended its review of itsbuyout offer.-- Daiwa's ex-N.Y. general manager was indicted for allegedly helping hidelosses.-- Goldman Sachs is mulling whether to dissolve its partnership and gopublic.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE JOBS MARKETBy:EDITED BY THANE PETERSONGood thing Steve Jobs knows the ups and downs of entrepreneurship. Hiscompany, Pixar Animation Studios, maker of Toy Story, went public on Nov.29, sending the stock to 39. Then Pixar fell to 23 on worries that the bulkof Toy Story's earnings will go to partner Walt Disney. But just afterChristmas, Pixar shares edged back up, to $28, after several analysts ratedthe stock a ``buy.'' The current value of Jobs's 80% stake: $840 million.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Pixar Inc. Stock PriceCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457ARTHUR LEVITT SPEAKS SOFTLY AND CARRIES A LITTLE STICKBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHTBy Amy Barrett, with Michael SchroederWhen President Clinton unexpectedly vetoed a securities-litigation reformbill on Dec. 19, it marked a setback for Securities & Exchange CommissionChairman Arthur Levitt Jr. The SEC chief had toiled for months to forge acompromise that satisfied Republicans' desire to curb nuisance suits andthe Administration's insistence on protection for small investors. Congressoverrode the veto, but the debacle dealt a blow to Levitt's dream ofbecoming a consensus-builder able to bridge the gulf on Capitol Hill.   Because the veto blindsided GOP lawmakers, Levitt comes off lookingineffectual. White House pols seeking favor with the trial lawyers' lobbyswayed the President, rather than Levitt. And Levitt's O.K. of a``safe-harbor'' section of the bill that protects companies from suits overfalse projections riled consumer groups. ``Levitt's credibility has beendeeply wounded by playing politics,'' says Michael A. Calabrese, a directorof Congress Watch and an opponent of the bill.BIT PLAYER? Levitt, 64, former chairman of the American Stock Exchange, wasviewed as a savvy regulator when Clinton appointed him in 1993. Since theRepublican takeover of Congress, he has skillfully courted GOP legislators.His modus operandi: seizing chances to get with the Republicans'deregulatory program. For example, after winning GOP concessions on thesafe-harbor provision of the securities-reform measure--including theexclusion of such protection for initial public offerings--Levitt signedoff on that portion of the bill. High-tech companies with volatile stockprices had sought the change to reduce their exposure to costly lawsuits.   While Levitt contends he would have opposed the legislation if thesafe-harbor provision had not been modified, critics grumble that he choseto blink rather than duke it out with Republicans. ``I was stunned,'' saysformer SEC Commissioner Richard Y. Roberts, a Republican, of Levitt'sposition.   More surprising, though, was Levitt's nonrole in the President's vetodecision. Clinton relied mainly on longtime Arkansas adviser Bruce Lindseyand Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes in arriving at his no-go decision.Levitt, for his part, insists his views were well known to the WhiteHouse.   The perception that Levitt was a bit player in the affair could hurtnext year when the House will consider paring back securities regulations.Rather than mounting an all-out assault on the bill's objectionableprovisions, the SEC chief is trying to win a place at the negotiating tablewhile pushing to eliminate overlapping state and federal regulations. Yetwith Levitt's White House clout now in question, the bill's sponsors may beless inclined to make concessions.   Levitt's efforts to protect his agency's funding could also take a hit.So far, his accommodating approach has paid off. Republicans who havesavaged other regulatory agencies are expected to hold the SEC budgetsteady at $300 million in 1996. But Congress could well make another run atthe regulator's budget next year, while Levitt appears weakened.   Despite his recent wounding, Levitt shows no signs of a retreat from hisagenda. He still intends to pressure the National Association of SecuritiesDealers to reform the NASDAQ market and make it more equitable for smallinvestors. And the SEC chief is about to unveil a proposal to require moredisclosure of derivative holdings, which could greatly complicatecompanies' public filings. ``I expect flak from all quarters,'' Levitt saysserenely. But his success in dodging the next round of artillery shells maydetermine the legacy Levitt leaves behind at an embattled SEC.Photograph(s):Photograph: VETO: It makes him look ineffectualBARBARA REISCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457WHAT'S BUGGING THE FEDSBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHT-- It seemed like farce to many foreigners, but it's no laughing matter atthe Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.Both agencies have launched probes to find the source of press reports lastfall that the CIA snooped on the phone calls of Japanese officials duringU.S.-Japan auto trade talks. And they're aiming high: They interviewedDeputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers and other economic officials.Summers, who says he played no role in the auto talks, denied involvement.The CIA no longer considers him a suspect, but investigation continues.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BALKANIZED AID PACKAGEBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHT-- Bringing peace to Bosnia may be easier than getting Congress to O.K. $600 million in reconstruction aid. The Clintonites will sell it as a U.S.job creator. But there's a hitch: The White House wants to divert some workto the Eastern European countries hurt most by a trade embargo againstSerbia. The Hill may balk at that.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BUDGET SLOW BOATBy:EDITED BY DOUGLAS HARBRECHT-- Protracted wrangling over the fiscal 1996 budget has dashed any chancethat President Clinton will send Congress a fiscal 1997 budget by Feb. 5,the statutory deadline. After two government shutdowns and marathon budgettalks, the Office of Management & Budget is two months behind in its reviewof agency spending proposals for the next fiscal year. The most likelyoutcome: The White House may send just a letter to Congress explaining thedelay.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457JAPAN'S SHADOW KINGMAKER IS BIDDING FOR THE SPOTLIGHTBy:EDITED BY STANLEY REEDBy Brian Bremner in TokyoIchiro Ozawa has always preferred the role of shadow kingmaker in Japanesepolitics. Back in 1993, the brash political heavyweight helped lead a massdefection from the then ruling Liberal Democratic Party, snapping its38-year reign. When his reformist government collapsed in 1994, Ozawapulled off an improbable merger of nine parties into an opposition bloccalled the New Frontier Party but didn't take the top leadership post.   Now, Ozawa, 53, has emerged from the shadows. In mid-December, heannounced a surprise bid to challenge longtime colleague Tsutomu Hata tolead New Frontier. And when the results were tallied on Dec. 27, Ozawa wonby more than 2 to 1. The stage is now set for an epic battle between Ozawaand LDP President and International Trade & Industry Minister RyutaroHashimoto in a general election sometime in 1996. At stake will be controlof the Diet's 511-seat lower house and the Prime Minister's chair.``AS VAGUE AS POSSIBLE.'' Ozawa's bid for the spotlight is timely. Afterfour years of economic stagnation and a string of bank failures, theJapanese public is fed up with the Socialist-LDP government's dysfunctionalmanagement of the economy. Socialist Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama'scoalition is coming under withering attack for a plan to use $6.6 billionin public money to bail out seven insolvent housing-loan corporations,which made reckless real estate loans in the 1980s. ``The intent is to beas vague as possible about the assignment of blame,'' Ozawa told BUSINESSWEEK. ``This is the kind of society Japan has become.''   Ozawa wants to remake the Japanese system. He champions sweepingderegulation. He also wants to give the now weak Prime Minister's officeenough power to set clear policy directions. Japan's glacialconsensus-style decision-making threatens to consign the nation to decline,he warns. ``No leader has come up with a strong vision of how to goforward,'' he says.   Ozawa's biggest liability aside from heart problems is his associationwith the money politics he says he wants to clean up. After all, he was akey LDP fund-raiser and power broker for years. He is taking heat right nowfor his ties to a Buddhist organization that turned out 6 million votes tosupport Ozawa candidates in last July's Upper House elections. Ozawa's risecould also bust up New Frontier if he can't keep Hata on board.   Hashimoto, who made a big splash by staring down Washington in lastsummer's auto talks, is much more popular than Ozawa. Still, there isgrowing sentiment in Japan that Ozawa may be the only leader who canproduce significant change. ``He's very determined, and the time left forJapan to pull out of this stagnation is limited,'' figures Masaya Miyoshi,president of the Japan Federation of Economic Organizations, or Keidanren.   Indeed, Ozawa has won plaudits from some economists for his proposal tohalve income and corporate taxes, wipe out special-interest loopholes, andeventually make up some of the difference by hiking Japan's sales tax from3% to 10%. But with Japan's budget deficit projected to hit 4.2% of grossdomestic product in 1996, vs. 2.0% in the U.S., Ozawa has to be careful notto lead Japan into a fiscal mess.   Ozawa could also help heal strained ties with the U.S. He is apragmatist on trade who is well regarded in Washington. Ozawa says he isworried that Washington has started to lose interest in Japan. He finds itregrettable that there is a tendency in Washington ``to treat theU.S.-Japan alliance more lightly than before.'' If Ozawa becomes PrimeMinister, that would certainly command American attention.Photograph(s):Photograph: OZAWA: The next Premier?NARUYOSHI YAMAGUCHI/SYGMACopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457PRIVATIZING A BRAZILIAN GIANTBy:EDITED BY STANLEY REEDBy Ian Katz in Sao Paulo-- Brazil's slow-moving free-market reforms are getting a fresh impetusfrom the sale of Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, the state-controlled mininggiant. In what's likely to be Latin America's biggest privatization, Brazilon Dec. 20 picked a group headed by Merrill Lynch & Co. and Rothschild Inc.from a star-studded field of competitors to manage the sale of thegovernment's 51% share in CVRD. The sale, set for late 1996, should fattenstate coffers by at least $5 billion.   Privatization of CVRD will mark ``the point of no return'' for Brazil'smove away from decades of statism, says Amaury Bier, chief economist ofCitibank in Sao Paulo. Recently, investors had been growing uneasy over theslow pace of free-market legislation in Brazil's Congress. The naming ofthe sale managers shows the government ``is serious about moving ahead,''says Ricardo Gallo, vice-president for capital markets at Bank of Boston inSao Paulo.   The Merrill Lynch group will earn a 1.9% commission on CVRD's saleprice. The lucrative job drew bids from such heavyweights as Citibank, J.P.Morgan, and Salomon Brothers. A key issue is whether to sell thegovernment's shares in a global public offering or auction off operationssuch as mining, forestry, and transport separately. But the choice ofMerrill Lynch, which joined with CS First Boston to manage a $3 billionstock sale of Argentine oil company YPF in 1993, indicates that Brazilfavors privatizing CVRD through a similar high-profile public offering.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HOW TO EVALUATE TAX REFORMThis is shaping up as the year of America's great tax debate. About time.The U.S. tax system is a mess, riddled with exemptions, deductions, andcredits that serve little purpose beyond rewarding favored constituents.The tax system is expensive for individuals and corporations to complywith, too.   Tax reform is already an issue in the Presidential race. A GOPcommission headed by former Representative Jack F. Kemp will soon issuerecommendations. All the main tax-writing committees plan to hold hearingson tax reform this year. To evaluate all the competing proposals foroverhauling the byzantine tax code, ranging from a single income-tax rateto a national sales tax, we suggest a guide that's over 200 years old: TheWealth of Nations. Adam Smith laid out four maxims with regard to taxes ingeneral: certainty, convenience of payment, economy in collection--andequality.   The flat tax is in the forefront of tax reform, and three of Smith'smaxims--certainty, convenience of payment, and economy in collection--wouldbe well served by a one-rate structure. The leading proponents of a flattax are Hoover Institution economists Robert Hall and Alvin Rabushka, andtheir ideas powerfully shaped the flat-rate tax legislation of HouseMajority Leader Richard K. Armey (R-Tex.). Hall and Rabushka would levy asingle 19% flat rate on wages and salaries; Armey wants to get the rate aslow as 17%. There would be no deductions, though to keep the systemsomewhat progressive Hall and Rabushka exempt from income taxes $16,500 fora married couple and $4,500 a child. Capital gains, interest, and dividendswould be exempt from taxes. Businesses would lose many deductions, althoughinvestment spending would get an immediate 100% first-year tax write-off.Business would pay a 19% rate on total income (17% for Armey), afterdeducting wages, salaries, pensions, and costs of goods and materials.Bottom line: a highly simplified and more efficient system where incomegets taxed only once as close as possible to its source.   Still, even with generous up-front exemptions, an all-or-nothingone-rate tax is less progressive. In the past decade, global economicforces have increased income inequality. Most Americans have only one majorasset to their name: the home they bought using generous tax incentives.Losing the mortgage-interest deduction would squeeze the middle class. Aflat tax raises other questions, such as ditching charitable deductions andthe deductibility of state and local taxes while the federal governmentasks charities and local governments to assume more responsibilities.Perhaps a ``modified,'' streamlined tax approach is called for, one basedon two or three rates and allowing for a few of the most justifiabledeductions, such as charitable contributions and home-mortgage interest.   The good news: The gale winds of creative tax reform are sweepingWashington. Radical simplification would go a long way toward creating aless intrusive government and a more efficient economy. But some equitymust be preserved.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457DON'T TREAD ON FREE TRADEWhat will the new year bring? An agreement between the White House andCongress to slash federal deficits for the rest of the century. Inflationwill remain subdued, and since inflation powerfully influences the stockand bond markets, investors should enjoy decent returns. And, as our 1996Industry Outlook makes clear (page 72), the U.S. economic expansion thatbegan in 1991 should continue.   Of course, as in any forecast, a lot could go wrong. One particularlydisturbing threat to continued growth lies with the virulent voices ofeconomic reaction--protectionists such as Pat Buchanan and the rapidlyexpanding number of politicians who know better but make sympathetic noisesto garner votes. The rallying cry of today's isolationists and their fellowtravelers may be, ``no more free-trade agreements''--not with Chile norwith anyone else. But what they are calling for, if heeded, would lead onlyto slower growth. Instead, policymakers should push hard for fewer tradebarriers--and faster economic growth.   True enough, there are losers as well as winners from freer trade. Buttrade is not a zero-sum business. It's freer trade that helped slay theinflation dragon that terrorized the U.S. economy for much of the '70s and'80s. White-hot foreign competition is a key reason for disinflation fastbecoming the norm in the once inflation-prone U.S. economy. Trade spursgrowth by offering entrepreneurs and companies bigger markets. U.S.companies are getting more and more of their sales overseas. Perhaps mostimportant, freer trade encourages the creation and spread of newtechnologies and commercial ideas. In sharp contrast, steep trade barrierscan leave an economy stagnant. Look at Latin America for much of the periodafter World War II--or the former Soviet Union, for that matter.   Isolationists are far more powerful in Europe and Japan than they are inthe U.S. Many developing nations are still maneuvering to boost exportswhile protecting their home market, too. It is more important than everthat the world's remaining superpower provide free-trade leadership. In thetumultuous period following the end of the cold war, the most importantdecision made by the Bush and Clinton Administrations and Congress was tocontinue the free-trade policies America has championed since 1945. Thisbet has paid enormous economic dividends in the 1990s. The bounty fromtrade and stronger economic ties among nations is plentiful indeed.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457NEWBORN BABIES, BAWLING MOMSThey want laws to make insurers pay for longer hospital staysBy:By Keith H. Hammonds in New York, with bureau reportsIt is likely the most reviled fiat in recent medical history: 24 hoursafter childbirth, mother and baby are out the hospital door, cut off bytheir insurer. ``So negligent,'' says Kathy Sargent, an expectant mother inWestport, Conn. ``Appalling,'' says Randi Curran of San Francisco, who willgive birth this spring. ``It must be men who made up this policy.''   Managed care has met the masses--and the masses aren't happy. Perhaps40% of newborns currently are discharged after one day, say hospitals,twice the number in 1990. The economics driving that shrinkage arecompelling: Childbirth is by far the most common reason Americans enterhospitals, and reducing stays would save insurers hundreds of millions ofdollars a year. Most mothers, though, would rather stay put, and doctorsdon't want medical decisions taken out of their hands. The result is ``arallying point for people who have bad feelings about managed care,'' saysMichael A. Maffetone, CEO of University Hospital at Stony Brook, N.Y.STATEHOUSE ACTION. The outrage has found an outlet: In 1996, 25 states areexpected to introduce legislation that would require insurers to pay for a48-hour inpatient stay for normal deliveries when a physician prescribesit. Five already have passed such laws. In California, wherehealth-maintenance organizations pioneered the one-day stay years ago,insurer pressure to reduce postpartum stays to 12 hours has legislatorspromising a bill on Governor Pete Wilson's desk in January. Senator BillBradley (D-N.J.) is amassing support for similar federal legislation.   In this debate, pure medicine may be on the insurers' side. While somedoctors and hospitals say they're seeing more cases of jaundice anddehydration in newborns, the hospital readmission rate for babies remainsaround its traditional 2%. Several studies have found no link betweenone-day stays and consequent complications. ``There is virtually noclinical evidence that there's a technical medical necessity for an acutemedical stay of more than 24 hours,'' says A. Bruce Campbell, chief medicalofficer at Aetna Health Plans.   Insurers and HMOs have joined with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce andgroups such as the American College of Nurse-Midwives to battleminimum-stay legislation. Many hospitals, too, worry that governmentremedies, while intended to give doctors and patients decision-makingpower, risk setting a precedent for wide-ranging regulation of medicalpractices--or simply will force insurers to cut compensation elsewhere.   Some hospitals have devised an alternative solution: A growing numberare offering to absorb the cost of a second night's stay for mothers whoseinsurers don't pay. Hospital executives say they're motivated primarily bysafety concerns, but they admit the attending publicity doesn't hurt. ``Iwill not lie,'' says T.J. Padden, administrator at Box Butte GeneralHospital, a 44-bed facility in rural Alliance, Neb. ``It's not a badmarketing thing.'' Incremental costs for additional nights are low--rarelymore than $200 a night, and far lower at Box Butte. Stony Brook, the firsthospital to underwrite longer stays, says its maternity admissions are up8% in the past six months.FLAT FEES? The downside to this approach, say other hospital executives, isthat it ultimately could weaken their negotiating power with insurers:Eating the cost on one procedure could encourage HMOs to cut back onothers. For now, though, the commotion may be gaining the desired effect.Hospitals that pay for a second night say some insurers have quietly agreedto foot the bill when patients so desire--although just one company,Independence Blue Cross and Pennsylvania Blue Shield, has publiclyannounced such a retreat.   Ultimately, managed care likely will offer a different solution.Insurers are starting to compensate hospitals on a flat-fee basis for manyprocedures, much as Medicare does, rather than negotiating per diem rates.As that happens, providers will take on some of the financial risk ofgiving care--but also much of the decision-making power. The 24-hour staymay yet survive, but it won't be on managed care's head.Illustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Babies Out The DoorCHART BY ALBERTO MENA/BWPhotograph(s):Photograph: MUCH ADO?Shorter initial hospital stays for newborns haven't led to a higherreadmission ratePHOTOGRAPH BY LISA QUINONES/BLACK STARCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457BUSINESS WEEK INDEXPRODUCTION INDICATORS                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEARLY                                     WEEK        AGO         % CHGSTEEL (12/23) thous. of net tons     NA          1,798#      NAAUTOS (12/23) units                  133,174     141,894r#   -5.4TRUCKS (12/23) units                 112,949     122,358r#   4.1ELECTRIC POWER (12/23)  millions of kilowatt-hrs.          NA          64,899#     NACRUDE-OIL REFINING (12/23)  thous. of bbl./day                 NA          13,892#     NACOAL (12/16) thous. of net tons      19,793#     19,438      -2.7PAPERBOARD (12/16) thous. of tons    NA#         828.3       NAPAPER (12/16) thous. of tons         NA#         800.0       NALUMBER (12/16) millions of ft.       404.4#      442.4       -19.1RAIL FREIGHT (12/16)  billions of ton-miles              24.6#       25.1        0.4Sources: American Iron & Steel Institute, Ward's Automotive Reports, EdisonElectric Institute, American Petroleum Institute, Energy Dept., AmericanForest & Paper Association, WWPA1, SFPA2, Association of AmericanRailroadsLEADING INDICATORS                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEARLY                                     WEEK        AGO         % CHGSTOCK PRICES (12/22) S&P 500         609.42      618.65      32.8CORPORATE BOND YIELD, Aaa (12/22)    6.88%       6.83%       -18.6INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS PRICES (12/22)  111.4       112.3       -0.5BUSINESS FAILURES (12/15)            NA          333         NAREAL ESTATE LOANS (12/13) billions   $503.4      $503.9r     9.4MONEY SUPPLY, M2 (12/11) billions    $3,735.7    $3,735.0r   4.5INITIAL CLAIMS, UNEMPLOYMENT  (12/9) thous.                      341         378         4.0Sources: Center for International Business Cycle Research (CIBCR), Standard& Poor's, Moody's, Journal of Commerce (index: 1990=100), Dun & Bradstreet(failures of large companies), Federal Reserve, Labor Dept. CIBCRseasonally adjusts data on business failures and real estate loans.PRICES                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEARLY                                     WEEK        AGO         % CHGGOLD (12/27) $/troy oz.              387.050     387.600     1.4STEEL SCRAP (12/26) #1 heavy, $/ton  134.00      134.00      -6.6COPPER (12/23)  cents/lb.            134.2       139.1       -4.4ALUMINUM (12/23)  cents/lb.          79.0        79.0        -13.2COTTON (12/23) strict low middling  1-1/16 in.,  cents/lb.             80.35       83.84       -2.2OIL (12/26) $/bbl.                   19.26       19.12       9.2Sources: London Wednesday final setting, Chicago market, Metals Week,Memphis market, NYMEXINTEREST RATES                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEAR                                     WEEK        AGO         AGOFEDERAL FUNDS (12/26)                5.50%       5.90%       5.60%COMMERCIAL PAPER (12/26) 3-month     5.62        5.61        6.31CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT  (12/27) 3-month                    5.55        5.67        6.37FIXED MORTGAGE (12/22) 30-year       7.46        7.45        9.34ADJUSTABLE MORTGAGE (12/22) one-year 5.60        5.70        6.73PRIME (12/27)                        8.50        8.50        8.50Sources: Federal Reserve, HSH Associates, Reuters Holdings PLCFOREIGN EXCHANGE                                     LATEST      WEEK        YEAR                                     WEEK        AGO         AGOJAPANESE YEN (12/27)                 102.81      102.34      100.32GERMAN MARK (12/27)                  1.43        1.44        1.57BRITISH POUND (12/27)                1.56        1.54        1.54FRENCH FRANC (12/27)                 4.89        4.95        5.43ITALIAN LIRA (12/27)                 1579.5      1589.8      1642.8CANADIAN DOLLAR (12/27)              1.36        1.36        1.40MEXICAN PESO (12/27)3                7.635       7.560       4.975Sources: Major New York banks. Currencies expressed in units per U.S.dollar, except for British pound in dollars#Raw data in the production indicators are seasonally adjusted in computingthe BW index (chart); other components (estimated and not listed) includemachinery and defense equipment. 1=Western Wood Products Assn.   2=SouthernForest Products Assn.    3=Free market value   NA=Not available   r=revised  NM=Not meaningfulIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: PRODUCTION AND LEADING INDEXESThe production index edged up during the week ended Dec. 16. Beforecalculation of the four-week moving average, the index rose to 129.8, from128.5. Increases in the seasonally adjusted output of autos, trucks, andelectric power led the advance.The leading index was up slightly in the latest week. The unaveraged indexdropped to 262.4, from 263.1 in the previous week. Higher stock prices andlower bond yields are signaling solid economic growth ahead.BW production index copyright 1996 by The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBW leading index copyright 1996 by CIBCRCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457THE WEEK AHEADDue to the prolonged Washington shutdown, all government release dates arecertain to be postponed.NAPM SURVEYTuesday, Jan. 2, 10 a.m. -- The National Association of PurchasingManagement's business activity index probably rose to 47.8% in December,according to the median forecast of economists surveyed by MMSInternational, one of The McGraw-Hill Companies. That low reading suggeststhat the industrial sector was struggling in December. For the previousfour months, the NAPM index slid below the 50% mark that signals ashrinking factory sector. The index was 46.5% in November.CONSTRUCTION SPENDINGTuesday, Jan. 2, 10 a.m. -- The MMS survey expects that constructionoutlays probably dropped by about 0.5% in November, after jumping 2.7% inOctober. Following a surge in October, spending on public-works projectslikely fell back in November.NEW HOME SALESWednesday, Jan. 3, 10 a.m. -- New single-family homes probably sold at anannual rate of 675,000 in November, little changed from the 673,000 salesrate in October, says the MMS report. Home buying has declined for threeconsecutive months, but lower mortgage rates in 1996 could stabilize homesales in the first quarter.FACTORY INVENTORIESThursday, Jan. 4, 10 a.m. -- Factory inventories probably grew by about0.3% in November, after a 0.4% gain in October. That's suggested by thesmall increase in factory output for the month.EMPLOYMENTFriday, Jan. 5, 8:30 a.m. -- The MMS median forecast calls for a gain of125,000 new nonfarm jobs in December, less than the 166,000 added inNovember. However, the survey also calls for manufacturing jobs to rise by15,000, the first increase since August. The unemployment rate probablystood at 5.6% last month, unchanged from November's rate.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457HEALING THE SOIL IN A LUSH VALLEY...BUT JUST IN TIME FOR AN URBAN FLOOD?By:EDITED BY HARRY MAURERBy Susan Jackson in Los AndesArturo Turesca likes what he sees--nothing--as he walks among his grapearbors, peeling off dead bark and looking underneath. During the spring,Turesca released test tubes of mealybug parasites among the 20 hectares ofvineyards he farms. He'll probably save money by using parasites instead ofpesticides to combat mealybugs, which are the worst enemies of grapeplants. And he'll make the Aconcagua Valley a healthier place.   Why is Turesca phasing out pesticides when neither chemical-free dietsnor environmentalism are exactly at the forefront of national debate inChile? His agricultural muse is Maria Helena Moreira, an exuberant51-year-old Brazilian economist who put a successful academic career onhold to start Aconcagua Verde, an ambitious project that aims to minimizepollution while maximizing production in this lush valley 100 kilometerseast of Santiago. Moreira, with backing from the MacArthur Foundation inthe U.S., is looking to spark a mini-revolution in the Aconcagua. ``If wesucceed, this will be the only valley in Chile that will be able to producelarge-scale in an environmentally friendly way,'' says Moreira.   Fruit is big business in Chile. Exports equaled 18% of gross domesticproduct in 1994 and have been rising in 1995. The Aconcagua, always anagricultural area, really started booming some 20 years ago, when Chiletore down its trade barriers. Now, nearly 70% of the valley's irrigableland--some 35,000 hectares--is devoted to export fruit production, morethan half of it in table grapes.   But while exports have skyrocketed, the soil has suffered, admitsClaudio Garcia, Aconcagua Valley manager for Chiquita Exportadoras Ltda.``There's a lot of natural degradation--the soil is heavily worked bymachines and people, so it has become much less porous.'' Then there arepesticides. Like most grape farmers, Turesca has to abide by exporters'rules. The exporters are in turn bound by the rules of importers--mostlythe U.S.--which require that fruit be 100% pest-free. Many farmers sprayfruit with twice as many pesticides as necessary just to make sure.   The ravages of grape monoculture began to bother Moreira during a visitshe made to Chile in 1990. Late that year, she applied, along withsociologists and scientists from the University of California and theUniversity of Rio, to the MacArthur Foundation for aninternational-cooperation grant. The project: to study the effects ofmonoculture on the valley and figure out how to grow fruit with less damageto the soil. A tall order for $500,000, but that's how much Moreira wasawarded in 1991, when she and a team of professors began surveying localfarmers and exporters. In November, 1995, the project was handed over tothe town of Los Andes, but Moreira has stayed on.   So far, only a handful of producers are using Aconcagua Verde's methods,but this is just the first year. Garcia expects the numbers to grow: ``Iwould imagine that costs will drop as productivity rises,'' which happensas soil regains its health.   Moreira and her crew recommend that farmers let certain weeds grow undertheir arbors to prevent erosion. What controls the weeds? Geese. ``They dothe mowing--and we plan to start a side business selling down for sleepingbags and quilts,'' she says.   When a Basque dandy bought the Aconcagua Valley in the 19th century, hisplan was to cut a mule route to Argentina through the middle of it. Theplan didn't take hold, but a century and a half later the concept of thevalley as a throughway is coming back. The main road from Santiago is goingto be widened, which will halve travel time to 45 minutes, a temptingthought for smog-sick city dwellers longing to escape. Residential plotsare now selling for four times as much as they would as farmland.   A proposed tunnel from Argentina could also threaten the valley'sagricultural future. Chile's congress is considering carving a tunnelthrough the Andes that would serve as a bridge between the Pacific and theAtlantic. The resulting commercial and residential development ``would doomthe valley in terms of agriculture,'' says Moreira. Cars, notcontamination, could be the valley's biggest threat.Illustration(s):Illustration: Map: Los Andes, ChileMAP BY MATTHEW KOPITPhotograph(s):Photograph: PIONEERS: Moreira with agronomist Sebastian Burgos andfeathered friendsPHOTOGRAPH BY SUSAN JACKSONCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457INVESTMENT FIGURES OF THE WEEKCOMMENTARYAs the stock market's best year in two decades drew to a close, investorstook profits. After reaching a high of 5216.5 on Dec. 13, the Dowindustrials fell as low as 5059 and then rebounded to 5106 on Dec. 27. Asexpected, the Federal Reserve cut short-term interest rates, but thatdidn't count for much with bond buyers, who instead focused on the budgetimpasse between President Clinton and the GOP-controlled Congress. Lookingabroad, the long-ailing Japanese and Mexican stock markets staged yearendrallies.MARKET ANALYSIS                                                        % changeU.S. STOCKS                               Latest    Week     52-weekDOW JONES INDUSTRIALS                     5105.9    -0.1     33.0MIDSIZE COMPANIES (S&P MidCap Index)      216.4     2.1      28.6SMALL COMPANIES (Russell 2000)            314.1     2.6      28.1ALL COMPANIES (Russell 3000)              350.5     0.9      33.1FUNDAMENTALS                              Latest    Week ago Year ago90-DAY TREASURY BILL YIELD                5.02%     5.22%    5.59%30-YEAR TREASURY BOND YIELD               6.00%     6.10%    7.83%S&P 500 DIVIDEND YIELD                    2.23%     2.24%    2.79%S&P 500 PRICE/EARNINGS RATIO              17.4      17.3     17.0                                           % change (local currency)FOREIGN STOCKS                            Latest    Week     52-weekLONDON (FINANCIAL TIMES 100)              3676.4    2.8      18.8TOKYO (NIKKEI INDEX)                      20,011.8  4.6      1.8TORONTO (TSE COMPOSITE)                   4684.2    0.7      11.5TECHNICAL INDICATORS                      Latest    Week ago ReadingS&P 500 200-day moving average            557.5     554.4    PositiveStocks above 200-day moving average       64.0%     62.0%    NeutralSpeculative sentiment: Put/call ratio     0.56      0.72     NegativeInsider sentiment: Vickers sell/buy ratio 1.24      1.24     PositiveBLOOMBERG FINANCIAL MARKETSINDUSTRY GROUPS                        % change                     % change                       1-    12-   Strongest stock  1-    12-ONE-MONTH LEADERS      month month in group         month month Price1 HEALTH CARE SERVICES 18.6  55.8  AMGEN            21.6  96.8  57 5/82 OIL AND GAS DRILLING 18.4  33.8  ROWAN            24.2  54.0   9 5/83 DRUGS                10.7  66.6  ELI LILLY        15.2  73.2  56 1/24 OIL WELL EQUIPMENT    8.8  33.7  McDERMOTT        22.4 -14.2  21 7/8  AND SERVICES                     INTERNATIONAL5 MEDICAL PRODUCTS      8.8  64.9  ST. JUDE MEDICAL 20.6  54.6  39 15/16                        % change                     % change                       1-    12-   Weakest stock    1-    12-ONE-MONTH LAGGARDS     month month in group         month month Price1 ALUMINUM             -9.6  19.2  ALCOA            -11.2  22.4 51 1/22 SPECIALTY APPAREL    -9.5   6.1  GAP              -13.8  38.5 41 3/8  RETAILERS RETAILERS3 GENERAL MERCHANDISE  -6.7   8.4  KMART            -18.8 -51.4  6 1/2  CHAINS4 PAPER CONTAINERS     -6.7  -8.6  STONE CONTAINER   -9.8 -22.5 13 3/45 METALS               -6.1   7.0  ASARCO           -13.2   5.7 30 3/8MORNINGSTAR INC.MUTUAL FUNDSLEADERS                             LAGGARDSFour-week total return          %   Four-week total return         %1 FIDELITY SELECT             11.7  STEADMAN AMERICAN            -5.8  ENERGY SERVICE                    INDUSTRY2 EVERGREEN U.S. REAL         11.4  KEYSTONE AMERICA HARTWELL    -5.4  ESTATE EQUITY Y                   EMERG. GR. B3 WRIGHT EQUIFUND-MEXICO      11.4  AMERICAN PERFORMANCE         -5.4                                    AGGRESSIVE GRTH.52-week total return            %   52-week total return           %1 ALGER CAPITAL APPRECIATION  77.5  EV MARATHON GREATER INDIA   -33.22 FIDELITY SELECT ELECTRONICS 73.8  WRIGHT EQUIFUND-MEXICO      -32.33 GOVETT SMALLER COMPANIES A  72.4  STEADMAN TECHNOLOGY GROWTH  -28.0DRI/McGRAW-HILLRELATIVE PORTFOLIOSDollar amounts represent the present value of $10,000 invested one year agoin each portfolioPercentages indicate five-day total returns   U.S.      Treasury   Foreign   Money   stocks    bonds      stocks    market fund   Gold$13,678$13,334$12,030$10,564$10,198   +1.23%    +1.40%     +2.80%    +0.12%        +0.61%All data on this page are as of market close Wednesday, Dec. 27, 1995,unless otherwise indicated. Industry groups include S&P 500 companies only;performance and share prices are as of market close Dec. 26. Mutual fundreturns are as of Dec. 22. Relative portfolios are valued as of Dec. 26. Amore detailed explanation of this page is available on request. r=revisedIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: STOCKSIllustration: Chart: BONDSIllustration: Chart: THE DOLLARIllustration: Chart: MUTUAL FUNDS - 4-week total returnIllustration: Chart: MUTUAL FUNDS - 52-week total returnCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996   Number 3457GLOOMY DAYS ARE HERE AGAINDEPARTMENT STORES SHOW PROMISE, BUT SLUGGISH SALES COULD SINK MANYMERCHANTSBy:By Susan Chandler in ChicagoConsumer confidence is up, and the stock market is at record highs. Butinstead of merchants expect a Darwinian shakeout in 1996. "The strong aregetting stronger. The weak are disappearing or consolidating," says ArthurC. Martinez, chairman and chief executive of Sears, Roebuck & Co.   Many retailers have reason to be gloomy. Retail sales rose only 4.5%during 1995, far below the 7% annual growth common during the roaring1980s. They're expected to rise by the same 4.5% in 1996, while profitswill remain restrained by heavy discounting.   Roughly 15,000 retail companies sought protection from creditors inbankruptcy court by late 1995, pushing Chapter 11 filings up 20% from 1994.Retail economists expect even more in 1996 (chart). That's because thislatest round of financial troubles isn't just from taking on too much debt.It's concentrated among regional retailers with outdated computer systems,yesterday's merchandise, and aging stores. For many, liquidation may be theonly answer, says Carl E. Steidtmann, chief economist of ManagementHorizons, a consulting unit of Price Waterhouse based in Columbus, Ohio.   The trouble is, consumers just aren't spending much. Incomes are fairlystagnant, and consumers' non-mortgage debt-to-income ratio hit an all-timehigh of 19% in late 1995. What's more, baby boomers are paying more forservices, from child- to elder-care leaving them less for shopping. Andconsumers have discovered that they can get hefty discounts by waiting forsales. "Now that we've taught them to do that, we shouldn't sit around andwonder why," says John Ronzetti vice-president of the National RetailFederation.KMARTS CONSTRACTION. Discounters are feeing a lot of pain. A raft ofregional chains, including Bradlees Inc, and Caldors Corp., sought Chapter11 protection in 1995 as competition from fast-growing Wal-Mart Stores Inc.and Target Stores intensified. The shakeout many even claim Kmart Corp.,the nation's third-largest retailer, retail expects say. Kmart CEO FloydHall, who replaced the ousted Joseph E. Antonini in June, says he willclose 70 stores in 1996, cut $300 million in costs, and continue to unloadinventory. 'The best answer to Chapter 11 [talk] is to have a solidperformance under our belt," he says.   Easier said than done. Just ask specialty retailers, who are expectinganother drab year for apparel sales. Clothing sales are expected to growonly 3.5% in 1996 after a 2.5% increase in 1995. St. Louis-based EdisonBrothers Stores Inc. filed for Chapter 11 in November and plans to close500 of its 2,700 mall-based shops. Ann-Taylor Stores Corp. is heading for amakeover after suffering a double-digit tumble in same-store sales in1995--the result of fashion and pricing miscues in an unforgiving market,says retail consultant Alan Millstein, who publishes the New York-basedFashion Network Report.HITTING THE GAS. For beleaguered catalog companies, 1996 may spell a bit ofrelief. Hit by higher paper and postage costs, catalogers saw their bottomline take a beating in 1995; Lands' End Inc. profits throught Octoberdropped 61%. A survey of U.S. catalogers by consultant A.T. Kearney Inc.found 62% expect sales to increase in 1996.   Department stores should continue to slowly regain maket share fromoutlet stores and off-price retailers. Lower prices--and thinnermargins--are the key. "We've had to get our costs down to offer fashionthat's also a value," says Allan Questrom, CEO of Cincinnati-basedFederated Department Stores Inc., parent of Macy's and Bloomingdale's.   Consumer-electronics stores are ecxpected to have another hot year, asshoppers snap up computers and related items. That means strong revenuegrowth for category killers--high-volume specialty chains such as Best BuyCo. and Circuit City Stores Inc. But they, too, must settle for theslimmest of margins.   Sears seems to be getting the formula right. It's one of the lastdepartment stores with a broad array of hard goods, such as appliances andcomputers. With these products going gang-busters and its apparel shareexpanding, Sears is winning market share. Says CEO Martinez: "When thathappens, you push the accelerator a little harder." But in what looks likea treacherous 1996, many other retailers will be satisfied just to stay inthe road.Prognosis '96Positives  -- Housing purchases should continue to help sales of home-relatedgoods.  -- Consumer confidence is rising, and that bodes well for sales ofbig-ticket items such as home computers.Negatives  -- Apparel sales will continue to slow as consumers focus on home-relatedpurchases.  -- Retail bankruptcies will increase as the shakeout among discountersand off-price retailers continues.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B40-14IA060-000326-B018-408http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb56.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020027 text/html 71653HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:58:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:49 GMTContent-length: 71464Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb56.html Sample Issue Copyright CONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES JETSKI SURVIVORS CAN SEEK STATE LAW DAMAGES, HIGH COURT CONCLUDES (912 words) IN SUPREME CT.: AIRBAG NEGLIGENCE CLAIM NOT PREEMPTED BY SAFETY ACT (947 words) MICHIGAN JURY FINDS NO DEFECT IN THREE-WHEEL ATV (317 words) ALABAMA JURY AWARDS $120,000 ON DEFECTIVE SUZUKI FOUR-WHEEL ATV (319 words) HIGH CT. REJECTS CROSS-PETITIONS FOR REVIEW OF RISK-UTILITY RULING (461 words) B.F. GOODRICH PETITIONS CA HIGH COURT ON IMPROPER SERVICE OF SUMMONS (417 words) 8TH CIR. FINDS LAWN MOWER DESIGN DEFECT CLAIMS NOT PREEMPTED BY CPSA (626 words) MO CT. APP.: CASUAL LENDER OF NAIL GUN NOT STRICTLY LIABLE OR NEGLIGENT (362 words) MA CT. REFUSES ROWING MACHINE SUPPLIER BID FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT ON MARKET SHARE ARGUMENT (430 words) EVIDENCE OF SUBSEQUENT REMEDIAL MEASURES CAN BE EXCLUDED, 11TH CIR. HOLDS (584 words) CA JUDGE DENIES POST-TRIAL MOTIONS OF LORILLARD, H&V (883 words) LORILLARD, FILTER MAKER ADDED TO ASBESTOS CASE IN MICHIGAN (316 words) FORMER CIGARETTE MODEL, 10 OTHERS SUE CIGARETTE MAKERS, SELLERS IN FL (313 words) KS SMOKELESS TOBACCO CASE WITHDRAWN; NATIONAL CLASS SUIT TO FOLLOW (310 words) D MA DISMISSES MERCURY POISONING SUIT AGAINST TUNA CANNER ON CAUSATION (294 words) CIBA ARGUES CONTACT SOLUTION NEGLIGENCE CLAIMS ARE PREEMPTED BY FEDERAL LAW (965 words) PA SUP. CT.: LANDLORDS HAVE NO DUTY TO INSPECT FOR LEAD PAINT HAZARDS (690 words) 1ST CIR: INSURANCE CO. FAILS TO PROVE LANDLORD INSURED FOR KNOWN RISK (1016 words) CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996JETSKI SURVIVORS CAN SEEKSTATE LAW DAMAGES,HIGH COURT CONCLUDES     The U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 9 unanimously affirmed theThird Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' November 1994 determinationthat the damages recoverable by a jetski accident victim'ssurvivors are not limited to those available under the generalmaritime cause of action for wrongful death.  Yamaha Motor Corp.U.S.A. et al. v. Calhoun et al., No. 94-1387 (U.S.); see ConsumerProduct Litigation Reporter, September 1995.     In an opinion authored by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, thehigh court agreed that the cause of action established in Moragnev. States Marine Lines (U.S. 1970) does not displace stateremedies in maritime wrongful death actions where no applicablefederal statute controls and the decedent was not a seaman orotherwise engaged in the maritime trade.     Twelve-year-old Natalie Calhoun was killed in a 1989accident while piloting a "Wavejammer" jetski manufactured by thepetitioner Yamaha Motor Corp. U.S.A.  Natalie had rented theproduct while vacationing in Puerto Rico, and died when thevehicle struck a vessel anchored off her hotel's frontage.     Her parents brought suit in the U.S. District Court for theEastern District of Pennsylvania the following year, basing theirclaims in Pennsylvania's wrongful death and survival statutes anddemanding damages including lost future earnings, loss ofsociety, loss of support and services and punitive damages.Yamaha sought partial summary judgment, arguing that Moragnedisplaced state frameworks for awarding maritime wrongful deathdamages.     The trial court agreed, but held that the Calhouns couldstill viably make demand for loss of society and loss of supportand services.  The parties cross-appealed; the Third Circuitruled on Nov. 2 that Moragne would not preempt state wrongfuldeath statutes on claims over non-seamen within territorialwaters.  The high court agreed to review the decision inMay 1995.     In its affirmance, the Supreme Court stated that"[t]raditionally, state remedies have been applied in accidentcases of this order " maritime wrongful death cases in which nofederal statute specifies the appropriate relief and the decedentwas not a seaman, longshore worker, or person otherwise engagedin a maritime trade.  We hold, in accord with the United StatesCourt of Appeals for the Third Circuit, that state remediesremain applicable in such cases and have not been displaced bythe federal maritime wrongful death action recognized inMoragne."     As a preliminary matter, the high court held that thefederal appellate courts have jurisdiction in an interlocutoryappeal "over any question that is included within the order thatcontains the controlling question of law identified by thedistrict court."  Justice Ginsburg found the text of 28 U.S.C.Section 1292(b) to indicate that "appellate jurisdiction appliesto the order certified to the court of appeals, and is not tiedto the particular question formulated by the district court."     In turning to the substantive issue, the Supreme Court foundthat "[t]he exercise of admiralty [jurisdiction] 'does not resultin automatic displacement of state law'....  Indeed, prior toMoragne, federal admiralty courts routinely applied statewrongful death and survival statutes in maritime accident cases."     The court engaged in a review of wrongful death claims undermaritime law that reached back to its 1886 decision in TheHarrisburg.  The court had then concluded that general maritimelaw did not recognize a cause of action for wrongful death;subsequently, Justice Ginsburg wrote, "[f]ederal admiralty courtstempered the harshness of The Harrisburg's rule by allowingrecovery under state wrongful death statutes."     With the publication of Moragne in 1970, the high courtoverruled The Harrisburg and concluded that an action "lie[s]under general maritime law for death caused by violation ofmaritime duties."     Here, the high court found Yamaha's contention that Moragneencompasses all deaths in state territorial waters to be "notwithout force; in several contexts, we have recognized thatvindication of maritime policies demanded uniform adherence to afederal rule of decision, with no leeway for variation orsupplementation by state law."     Ultimately, the high court wrote, the concerns foruniformity that prompted the scuttling of The Harrisburg "were ofa different order than those invoked by Yamaha.  Moragne did notreexamine the soundness of The Harrisburg out of concern thatstate damage awards in maritime wrongful death cases wereexcessive, or that variations in the remedies afforded by theStates threatened to interfere with the harmonious operation ofmaritime law."               The inconsistencies in maritime law that prompted theMoragne court, Justice Ginsburg concluded, "relate to ships andthe workers who serve them, and to a distinctly maritimesubstantive concept " the unseaworthiness doctrine."  The courtconcluded that Moragne "centered on the extension of relief, noton the contraction of remedies.  The decision recalled that 'itbetter becomes the humane and liberal character of proceedings inadmiralty to give than to withhold the remedy, when not requiredto withhold it by established and inflexible rules.'"     The opinion lastly cited at length to the reasoning below ofthe Third Circuit, which had noted that "Congress has notprescribed remedies for the wrongful deaths of nonseafarers interritorial waters."     Jonathan Dryer and William R. Hoffman of Wilson, Elser,Moskowitz, Edelman & Dicker, Philadelphia and James W.Bartlett III and Francis P. Manchisi of Wilson, Elser's Baltimoreoffice represent Yamaha Motor Corp. U.S.A. and Yamaha Motor Co.Ltd.     Thomas A. Masterson Jr. of Manchel, Lundy & Lessin,Philadelphia and William J. Taylor Jr. of Taylor & Taylor,Philadelphia, represent Lucien and Robin Calhoun.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996IN SUPREME CT.: AIRBAGNEGLIGENCE CLAIM NOTPREEMPTED BY SAFETY ACT     The Indiana Supreme Court on Dec. 28 overturned a lowercourt's grant of summary judgment favoring General Motors anddetermined that the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Actdoes not preempt a common law negligence claim based on failureto install airbags.  Wilson et al. v. Pleasant et al., No. 64S03-9506-CV-693 (IN Sup. Ct.).     The lawsuit was lodged by the estate of James Wilson, whodied in a 1988 head-on collision while driving a 1986 Chevrolet.Wilson had not been wearing a seat belt at the time of theaccident.  The suit, which named the driver of the other vehicleas well as GM, alleged that the manufacturer was negligent indesigning, manufacturing and selling a car that wasn'tcrashworthy due to the lack of an airbag passive restraintsystem.     GM sought summary judgment from the Porter County SuperiorCourt, arguing that the estate's common law claims were federallypreempted by the Safety Act and certain safety regulationspromulgated thereunder.  The trial court granted the motion; theIndiana Court of Appeals subsequently affirmed, declaring thatwhile the Safety Act did not expressly preempt the negligenceclaim, implied preemption could be found.               In its review, the state high court preliminarily noted thelanguage of the Safety Act's preemption clause (Section 1392[d])and state common law savings clause (Section 1397[k]); the panelalso observed Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, whichgave the manufacturer three options for providing passenger crashprotection.  The court acknowledged that the manual seat beltsystem in Wilson's car fully complied with the third option.     The court agreed with the Court of Appeals' assessment thatthe Safety Act did not expressly preempt the estate's claim."The pre-emption clause found in the Safety Act explicitlyrefers, with respect to 'any motor vehicle or item of motorvehicle equipment,' only to state 'safety standard[s] applicableto the same aspect of performance of such vehicle or item ofequipment which is not identical to the federal standard,'" thepanel wrote.     As to the finding of implied preemption, however, the courtobserved that the "clear weight of authority prior to 1992supported General Motors's view that the Safety Act impliedlypre-empts state common law claims like the one asserted byWilson."  The panel then engaged in a review of the alterationsto the federal preemption analysis wrought by the U.S. SupremeCourt's rulings in Cipollone v. Liggett Group (1992) andFreightliner Corp. v. Myrick (1995).     "[W]e cannot help observing that Myrick did not overruleCipollone," the court concluded.  "Rather, the Supreme Court heldthat interpretations of Cipollone to the effect that impliedpre-emption cannot exist when Congress has chosen to include anexpress pre-emption clause were incorrect interpretations."     The court read Cipollone/Myrick to establish the followinganalysis in order to establish implied preemption:  "First, ifthe federal statute at issue contains pre-emption language, wedetermine whether that provision alone provides a reliableindication of congressional intent with respect to itspre-emptive effect," the panel wrote.  Such determination wouldbe made, the court stated, "by employing canons of statutoryconstruction and by examining the other provisions of the statute" and the statute as a whole " to see if they offer any cause tolook beyond the express pre-emption language."     If a reliable indication of congressional intent is found,the panel wrote, there is no need to look beyond the preemptionlanguage itself.  Otherwise, the court continued, "we mustdetermine whether the state law in question is in actual conflictwith federal law, [i.e.,] (1) whether it is impossible for aprivate party to comply with both state and federal requirements,or (2) whether the state law stands as an obstacle to theaccomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectivesof Congress."     In turning to the facts at hand, the court found it"immediately obvious that the Section 1392(d) pre-emption clausein the Safety Act, taken alone, does not provide a reliableindication of congressional intent with respect to itspre-emptive effect."  The panel also found that the language ofthe Section 1397(k) savings clause indicated that the SafetyAct's preemptive scope is not governed entirely by the Act'spreemption language.     The court concluded, however, that the language of Section1392(d) and Section 1397(k) read together foreclosed anapplication of an implied preemption analysis.  "[W]e see only aprohibition on state motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipmentsafety standards not identical to federal safety standardsapplicable to the same aspect of performance of the motor vehicleor item of motor vehicle equipment," the court wrote.     Although the panel determined a full implied preemptionanalysis to be unnecessary, it engaged in such a review and stillfound no preemption of the claims.  "[W]e conclude that there isno conflict between state common law in this case and the choicespresented by Rule 208," the panel wrote.  "Assuming, arguendo,that Indiana common law requires airbags, there would be noconflict with Rule 208 because Rule 208 does not prohibit airbags" it only permits some other alternatives."     The court also found that a finding of implied preemptionhere "would be inconsistent with the purpose of and policiesunderlying the Safety Act....  It would defeat the purpose of thestatute if manufacturers were not discouraged from utilizing asafety system that would otherwise be considered negligent understate common law tort theories."     James W. Myers III, Valparaiso, IN, and David H. Knobel,Merrillville, IN, represent the appellant.     David M. Heilbron and Leslie G. Landau of McCutchen, Doyle,Brown & Enersen, San Francisco, and Alex Dimitrief of Kirkland &Ellis, Chicago, represent General Motors.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996MICHIGAN JURY FINDS NODEFECT IN THREE-WHEEL ATV     A Michigan federal court jury returned a unanimous verdictfor Honda Motor Co. defendants Dec. 7, finding that a 1985 HondaATC-125M three-wheel all-terrain vehicle was not defective.Carwile v. Honda Research & Development Co., Ltd. et al. (ED MI).     The jury also found that the Honda defendants were notnegligent with respect to the design and marketing of the ATV orthe warnings that accompanied the vehicle.     The accident occurred in April 1991 on a sandy trail nearJensen Beach, FL.  Plaintiff Manford Carwile, who was not wearinga helmet, careened into a tree after entering an S-curve andsuffered a severe closed head injury.     Plaintiff claimed that design defects made it difficult toturn the ATV, and also alleged that Honda failed to adequatelywarn about the risks of operating the vehicles.  Honda counteredthat Carwile's accident was caused by excessive speed,inattention and inadequate vehicle maintenance.     Expert witnesses for the plaintiff were engineer DavidRenfroe; Edward Karnes on the adequacy of warnings; Werner Spitz,M.D., on toxicology and helmet injury-prevention; GaryLustgarden, M.D., a neurosurgeon; Robert Ancell, a vocationalrehabilitation expert; Eric Amberg, a neuropsychologist; andeconomist Michael Thompson.     Honda called Kevin Breen, an expert on vehicle design,accident reconstruction and off-road vehicle riding; Harry H.Hurt Jr., on the design and protection offered by motorcyclehelmets; and Dr. Philip Haber, on vocational rehabilitation.Honda also called Masayuka Tanaka, an employee of Honda R&D Co.,Ltd., to discuss ATV development and design, and Edward Glynn, anemployee of American Honda Motor Co., to discuss Honda's ATVsafety efforts and the Consumer Product Safety Commissioninvestigation of the vehicles.     Honda was represented by Robert K. Miller, Larry C. Mann andTimothy J. Mattson of Bowman and Brooke in Minneapolis andDetroit.  Carwile was represented by Steven Leuchtman and FrankMafrice of Sommers, Schwartz, Silver & Schwartz in Detroit.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ALABAMA JURY AWARDS$120,000 ON DEFECTIVESUZUKI FOUR-WHEEL ATV     An Alabama state court jury awarded $200,000 in damages toplaintiff Bobby G. Norman, who claimed that a defective throttlecable in his Suzuki four-wheel all-terrain vehicle led to a loss-of-control accident in which he suffered serious injuries.Norman v. Longshore Cycle Center et al., No. CV-93-56(AL Cir. Ct., Lauderdale Cty.).     Norman bought the ATV from co-defendant Longshore CycleCenter.  When riding away from a neighbor's house, he turned thehandlebars of the ATV as far to the right as he could, at whichpoint the throttle went wide open and the vehicle flew over anembankment.     The plaintiff went airborne, coming to rest after hitting atree and having the ATV flip over with him underneath.  Hesustained numerous cuts and abrasions on his arms and legs, andtore his right shoulder rotator cuff.  The treating orthopedicsurgeon gave him a 50-50 chance that surgery could alleviate hiscondition.     At the time of the accident, the ATV had only 50 miles ofuse.  Norman's expert witness, Michael Burleson of Tyler, TX,tested exemplar throttle cables manufactured by Suzuki, Honda,Kawasaki and Yamaha to determine how much force was needed tocause a separation.  All of the other brands not only out-performed the Suzuki cable, but were more substantial inappearance, he opined.     The defendants argued that the accident was caused byoperator error and Norman's failure to take the offered freesafety course.  Their expert witness, Kris Kubly of Madison, WI,tested the exemplar throttle cables and the actual cable involvedin the accident and found no possibility of malfunction asclaimed by the plaintiff.     Norman was represented by Debra H. Coble and Frank B. Pottsof Potts & Young in Florence, AL.  Longshore Cycle Center wasrepresented by Danny D. Henderson of Huntsville, AL.  Suzuki wasrepresented by John Bergquist of Parsons, Lee & Juliano inBirmingham, AL.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996HIGH CT. REJECTSCROSS-PETITIONS FOR REVIEWOF RISK-UTILITY RULING     The U.S. Supreme Court on Jan. 8 denied the separate bids ofHonda Motor Co. and a Mississippi plaintiff to overturn the FifthCircuit U.S. Court of Appeals' May 1995 determinations in amotorcycle product liability action.  Honda Motor Co. et al. v.Satcher, No. 95-653 (U.S.); Satcher v. Honda Motor Co. et al.,No. 95-674 (U.S.); see Consumer Product Litigation Reporter,November 1995.     The manufacturer had asserted that the appellate panel hadinfringed its due process rights in refusing a new trial, andJames Satcher had averred that the Fifth Circuit had no basis onwhich to vacate his $2 million award for punitive damages.     Satcher, who had been driving the defendant's Nighthawkmotorcycle in the 1985 traffic accident that cost him his leg,obtained $1 million in compensatory damages following a 1991 jurytrial in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District ofMississippi.  In its initial review of the case in 1993, theFifth Circuit reversed.  The panel concluded that as a matter ofstate law, the product's claimed defect (lack of leg guards) wasopen and obvious to the ordinary consumer.     Following the Mississippi Supreme Court's issuance ofSperry-New Holland v. Prestage (1993) shortly thereafter, theFifth Circuit vacated its prior ruling and ordered the districtcourt to reconsider in light of Prestage (which held that therisk-utility analysis superseded the consumer expectations testin product liability actions) and the state's recently enactedproduct liability statute.  The trial court found for Satcher onremand.     In its affirmance of last May 30, the Fifth Circuit rejectedHonda's contentions that it was entitled to a new trial asPrestage caused a substantive alteration to Mississippi law.  Thepanel did strike Satcher's punitive award, concluding that thedefendant's conduct in not including leg guards in its productdesign was not so extreme or outrageous as to support it.     Both litigants filed petitions for writ of certiorari in thehigh court late last October.  Honda contended that it wasentitled to new trial in order to defend on a risk-utilitytheory, rather than under the consumer expectations test.Satcher argued that under the Fifth Circuit's punitive damagesstandard, such awards may be reversed on a showing of "meredisagreement in the scientific community as to whether thedefendant's conduct was reasonable."     Mack E. Barham and Robert E. Arcenaux of Barham & Arcenaux,PLC, New Orleans; Peter K. Smith, Quitman, MS; Wilton L.Strickland, Fort Lauderdale, FL; and Ray Ferrero Jr. of Ferrero &Middlebrooks, P.A., Fort Lauderdale, represent James Satcher.     Linda J. Hamilton Mowles of Lewis, King, Krieg, Waldrop &Catron, P.C., Knoxville, TN; and Ronald G. Peresich of Page,Mannino & Peresich, Biloxi, MS, represent Honda Motor Co. Ltd. etal.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996B.F. GOODRICH PETITIONSCA HIGH COURT ON IMPROPERSERVICE OF SUMMONS     In a petition for review filed Dec. 11 with the CaliforniaSupreme Court, B.F. Goodrich Co. contends that it was notproperly served with a summons in an exploding-tire case, andthat the trial court disregarded long-standing case authority inadopting the "substantial compliance rule" and refusing to quash.B.F. Goodrich Co. v. CA Super. Ct., Monterey Cty., No. S050529(CA Sup. Ct.).     Goodrich says plaintiff Joseph Dinner has conceded thatservice was improper in that:     " Goodrich was not named in the complaint or by amendment;     " there was no notice pursuant to California Code of Civil     Procedure Section 412.30;     " if service was attempted, no designation was made;               " the summons fails to identify on behalf of whom the person     who received the summons was served;     " no date of delivery was noted; and     " the summons failed to indicate the name and capacity of     the person who allegedly received service.     Dinner claims he was injured when a Goodrich tire explodedwhile being inflated at a gas station.  He then served whatGoodrich calls an "admittedly defective summons" and complaint on"The B.F. Goodrich Company," not the named defendant "B.F.Goodrich."     The Monterey County Superior Court judge refused to quashand the state appeals court denied review.  In its petition tothe California Supreme Court, Goodrich argues, "As the law isclear that 'the substantial compliance rule' does not apply wherethe summons fails to identify the individual being served onbehalf of a corporation, the trial court's ruling exceeded itsjurisdiction.  Therefore, based on the evidence before it, theSuperior Court abused its discretion in denying petitioner'smotion to quash."     Goodrich also argues that with the advent of "fast-track"rules, courts must guard against any tendency to "move the casealong" at the expense of a potential defendant's rights.  "Wecannot trade these rights for expediency, no matter how noble thecause may be," the petition states.  "The impact of fast trackrules on trial court rulings (such as here) cannot be minimized.This case presents clear issues of first impression concerningadequate service, defective pleading and service, and the effectof fast track rules on the trial court's interest in moving casesto trial within the fast track limitation framework even againstentities that are not proper parties."     Goodrich is represented by David B. Paynter, Paul EllisBaron and Valerie L. Leatherwood of Lewis, D'Amato, Brisbois &Brisgard in San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 19968TH CIR. FINDS LAWN MOWERDESIGN DEFECT CLAIMSNOT PREEMPTED BY CPSA     The Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 27partially reversed a Minnesota federal court's determinations andfound that a family's design defect claims against a lawnmowermanufacturer were not preempted by the Consumer Product SafetyAct (CPSA).  Moe et al. v. MTD Products Inc., No. 95-1938(8th Cir.).     The panel did affirm the defense judgment on the balance ofthe plaintiffs' claims, holding the remaining theories ofrecovery preempted by the CPSA.     In July 1992, the fingers of 17-year-old Brian Moe wereamputated when he reached into the side grass chute of a self-propelled walk-behind mower manufactured by MTD Products Inc.The mower was equipped with a safety device called a bladebrake/clutch system (BBC), which allows the cutting blade torotate only when the control lever of the operator handle isengaged.  Brian was an experienced operator of the mower, and hadremoved grass from the side chute twice on the morning of hisaccident without incident.     It was subsequently discovered that the BBC's control cablehad been broken.  In their action against MTD, Brian's parentsasserted that the mower was defectively designed in that thecontrol cable was routed in such a manner that it rubbed againstthe throttle control housing, causing it to fray and ultimatelybreak.  In its response, MTD pointed to the fact that in 1991,the mower's handle had broken from the base, and Thomas Moe hadit reattached by a welder.  The repaired handle was 1-3/8 incheslonger than the original, and MTD claimed that the resultantincrease of stress on the BBC control cable caused its breakage.     The Moes also alleged that an additional label warning thatthe cable may fray should have been placed on the mower's handle.While the owner's manual advised that the control cable should beinspected, the plaintiffs asserted that this was insufficientnotice of the potential hazard.  The U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Minnesota determined that all of the Moes' claimswere preempted by the CPSA.     On appeal, the Moes contended that their failure to warn anddesign defect arguments were not federally preempted.  MTDconceded that the design defect allegations were not preempted,but argued that summary judgment in its favor was appropriatebecause the product had been substantially altered.     In its review, the Eighth Circuit noted that the ConsumerProduct Safety Commission has promulgated a safety standard forwalk-behind power motors, which provides that a label warningagainst blade contact injury must be placed on each mower's bladehousing.  In considering the Moes' contention that a warning thatthe BBC cable may fray is required, the court stated that the"risk of injury contemplated by such a warning is the same asthat addressed by the labelling requirements in the MowerStandard " injury to the hands by the cutting blade."  The Moes'claim, the panel wrote, "would create a state standard requiringadditional warnings on lawn mowers or in owners manuals relatedto the same risk of injury addressed by the federal standard."     The panel did find the plaintiffs' design defect claims tobe contemplated by the CPSA's savings clause.  "A successful tortaction based on the defective design of an installed BBC wouldnot create a different standard for mower safety or imposedifferent requirements on the manufacturer," the court wrote.     As to MTD's substantial alteration argument, the courtstated that the "record here shows that issues of material factexist as to whether the BBC design caused Brian's injury....Based on the evidence in the record, it would not be 'sheerspeculation' for a jury in this case to find that the design,rather than the alteration, caused the fraying and the accident."Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996MO CT. APP.: CASUAL LENDEROF NAIL GUN NOT STRICTLYLIABLE OR NEGLIGENT     The owner who loaned an allegedly defectively designed nailgun to someone cannot be held liable on theories of strictliability or negligence if the user injures somebody, theMissouri Court of Appeals has ruled.  Bailey v. InnovativeManagement & Investment Inc., No. WD 50922 (MO Ct. App.).     In a unanimous Dec. 19 decision, the panel upheld summaryjudgment against a man injured when a nail was accidentallydischarged into his head.     Innovative Management & Investment loaned a nail gun andother tools to an employee who was building his own home on hisown time.  Plaintiff Ron Bailey volunteered to help with theproject.  The employee's brother was using the nail gun whenBailey inadvertently hit the bottom of the device, causing it todischarge.     A petition was filed in Boone County Circuit Court allegingproduct defect and failure to warn strict liability counts, plusa claim for negligently furnishing a dangerous instrumentality.Judge Ellen S. Roper granted the defense motion for summaryjudgment.     The Court of Appeals, Western District, affirmed in anopinion by Judge James M. Smart Jr.  The panel found no basis forthe strict liability causes of action because InnovativeManagement did not inject the nail gun into the stream ofcommerce and because the employee did not receive the nail gunfor the mutual benefit of the company and himself.  InnovativeManagement supplied the nail gun as an isolated, non-commercialtransaction without financial or other compensation, it said, andthe company was not in the business of selling or furnishingtools.     As for the negligence count, the court said the company'smere furnishing of the nail gun was insufficient to support theclaim because only a gratuitous bailment was involved.Innovative Management owed Bailey no duty to protect him frominjury because the company received no benefit or advantage fromloaning the instrument to the employee, it said.  The court alsocited uncontradicted testimony that the company president wasunaware of any defect or dangerous condition when the employeeborrowed the nail gun.     Debbie S. Champion of St. Louis represented Bailey.  JeffreyO. Parshall of Columbia represented Innovative Management.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996MA CT. REFUSES ROWING MACHINESUPPLIER BID FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENTON MARKET SHARE ARGUMENT     Justice Francis X. Spina of the Berkshire, MA, SuperiorCourt on Dec. 12 rejected the attempt of a rowing machinesupplier to obtain summary judgment on a seller's third-partyclaim for market share liability.  Mahar v. Hanover HouseIndustries Inc. v. Etna Products et al., No. 88-0156(MA Super. Ct., Berkshire).     The judge found the present facts distinguishable from thosein a 1982 diethylstilbestrol (DES) case in which the state highcourt declined to adopt the market share liability doctrine foridentifying a liable manufacturer defendant.     The litigation was brought by David Mahar, who alleged thathe sustained injuries in 1987 while using a rowing exerciserpurchased through the mail from Hanover House Industries.Hanover brought a third-party complaint against three of itssuppliers; one supplier was later voluntarily dismissed.     In the two-week period before the product was shipped toMahar, Hanover received some 58,199 rowing machines from supplierE. Mishan & Sons and another 35,686 from Etna Products.  Themachines were indistinguishable as to their supplier, and Hanoverhad no inventory control in place that could identify thesupplier of the product Mahar purchased.  Etna sought summaryjudgment for failure to identify the actual supplier.     Justice Spina wrote that "[n]o Massachusetts appellate casehas ever held that a 'market-share' approach may be used toestablish the requisite element of the 'identity' of themanufacturer or supplier in a product liability case," and notedthe Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court's refusal to do so inthe DES case Payton v. Abbott Labs (1982).     "Several factors are present in this case which were notpresent in Payton," the judge continued, "and factors whichcaused the Payton Court concern are not present here."  He notedthat all probable suppliers of the product had been named to thecase; he found that the suppliers "were equally as able as thedefendant to identify the unit shipped, and may still inspect theunit to try and determine the route of its delivery to theplaintiff."               The judge further observed that Etna may still offer proofthat it did not supply the unit in issue, and that both suppliersmay implead the product's manufacturer.  He lastly noted that"there is no public policy supportive of research and developmentof new drugs/medicine impacted here."     Justice Spina concluded that the dispute was "an appropriatecase to allow a plaintiff to proceed with and develop a theory ofliability which is in the formative stages in this Commonwealthand which has a reasonably good chance for recognition by theappellate courts."Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996EVIDENCE OF SUBSEQUENTREMEDIAL MEASURES CAN BEEXCLUDED, 11TH CIR. HOLDS     The 11th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals on Dec. 18 ruled upona matter of first impression and held that evidence of subsequentremedial measures in strict product liability cases may beproperly excluded under Rule 407 of the Federal Rules ofEvidence.  Wood v. Morbark Industries Inc. et al., No. 93-3472(11th Cir.).     The panel did reverse a Florida district judge's denial ofnew trial to the plaintiff/appellant, however, determining thatthe evidence in issue below had been properly admitted forimpeachment purposes.     Morbark Industries Inc. had been sued by Ruby Wood, whosehusband, Ginger, died in a 1989 accident involving an "EegerBeever" wood chipper of the defendant's manufacture.  GingerWood, a municipal employee, was pulled into the device up to hisupper torso.  In arguing that the product was defective andunreasonably dangerous, she asserted that the chipper's 17-inchinfeed chute was too short to adequately protect the machine'soperator.     Morbark was granted a motion in limine to exclude evidenceof post-accident design changes to the chipper that lengthenedthe infeed chute.  In its review, the 11th Circuit noted thatdefense counsel still "sought to imply to the jury that theseventeen-inch chute was the safest length chute available andwas still in use by [Ginger's employer] as well as othergovernment agencies."     In the course of a 1993 trial in the U.S. District Court forthe Northern District of Florida, plaintiffs' counsel cross-examined Norvel Morey, Morbark's president and designer of theEeger Beever, on the issue of subsequent design changes.  Thetrial judge admonished the attorney before the jury, and directedthe jury to disregard any comment concerning the sale of longerchutes.               The panel ultimately found for Morbark, determining theEeger Beever not to be unreasonably dangerous as designed andmarketed.  Ruby Wood sought new trial, claiming that the trialjudge had committed reversible error by admonishing plaintiff'scounsel before the jury.  In rejecting the motion, the trialjudge found that the admonition had not been unduly prejudicialto the plaintiff's case.     In its analysis, the 11th Circuit first rejected Wood'scontention that Rule 407 should not be applied in strict productliability cases.  "We are persuaded that Rule 407 is necessary insuch cases to focus the jury's attention on the product'scondition or design at the time of the accident," the panelwrote.  The panel rejected Wood's entreaty to follow the 10thCircuit's reasoning in Moe v. Avions Marcel (1984), which statedthat federal courts must apply state evidentiary principles ifthey conflict with FRE 407.     Wood next argued that if FRE 407 was deemed controlling,then the trial court should have applied one of the exceptions tothe rule and held the evidence admissible either to show thefeasibility of precautionary measures, or for impeachment.  Woodhad specifically pointed to Morey's testimony that the 17-inchchute was the "safest length chute you could possibly put on themachine."     The court stated that "[w]hile we do not find that thistestimony put feasibility at issue, we do find that it opened thedoor to impeachment....  Wood's counsel should have been allowedto ask why the supposedly safest design possible was modifiedafter the accident involving Ginger Wood."     The panel found that the refusal to allow impeachment of thewitness did not in and of itself substantially affect Wood'srights, but did have such an impact when considered inconjunction with the court's direction to the jury.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CA JUDGE DENIESPOST-TRIAL MOTIONSOF LORILLARD, H&V     California Superior Court Judge Winton McKibben, withoutelaboration, on Nov. 6 denied the motions of Lorillard, Inc. andHollingsworth & Vose Co. for a new trial of Milton Horowitz'ssuit alleging mesothelioma from asbestos contained in Kent brandcigarettes.  Horowitz v. Lorillard, Inc. et al., No. 965-245(CA Super. Ct., San Francisco); see Consumer Product LitigationReporter, September 1995.     Horowitz and his wife, Shirley Horowitz, won jury verdictsfor $2 million against the companies on Aug. 31 after a trialbefore Judge McKibben.  The award includes $700,000 in punitivedamages.               Milton Horowitz, 72, is a retired university professor fromBeverly Hills, CA.  He was still active as a clinicalpsychologist when he was diagnosed with mesothelioma in June1994.  His suit alleges that his cancer was caused by theasbestos-containing Micronite filters used on Kent cigarettesbetween 1952 and 1956.  The suit named Lorillard, Inc. as themanufacturer of the Kent cigarettes and Hollingsworth & Vose Co.as the manufacturer of the Micronite filters.     During the trial, Horowitz claimed that the Kent Micronitefilter was defective and that it rendered the Kent cigarettesdefective by releasing asbestos fibers which he inhaled.  He alsocontended that the defendant companies were negligent and failedto warn about the asbestos health hazard associated with Kentcigarettes.  He further asserted that the companiesmisrepresented the cigarette and filter by claiming that thefilter was "totally harmless" and that the Kent cigarette"offered the greatest health protection of any cigarette."     Lorillard and Hollingsworth & Vose defended by arguing thatthe filter did not release asbestos fibers.  They also assertedthat Horowitz did not smoke Kent cigarettes in the time periodbetween 1952 and 1956, when the filter contained asbestos, andthey suggested that he was either mistaken or lying when he saidthat he did.     The jury found for the plaintiffs on all theories ofliability except for the intentional fraud claim " it found thatthe defendants made their health representation without knowingone way or the other whether the filter was "totally harmless."It awarded $350,000 in economic damages and $700,000 in non-economic damages to Milton Horowitz, and it awarded $250,000 on aloss of consortium claim by Shirley Horowitz.  It also found thatLorillard and Hollingsworth & Vose were each 50% responsible forthe plaintiffs' injuries and damages.     The jury further determined that Milton Horowitz hadsuffered appreciable harm before June 4, 1986, a finding requiredby California's Proposition 51, the statute requiringapportionment of non-economic damages for actions accruing afterJune 4, 1986.     Lastly, the jury found that the plaintiffs had shown byclear and convincing evidence that each defendant acted withmalice, oppression or fraud, thus entitling the plaintiffs topunitive damages.     After a brief supplemental argument, the jury retired onAug. 31 to further deliberate the amount, if any, of punitivedamages to award.  It returned with a verdict on Sept. 1,awarding punitive damages of $560,000 against Lorillard and$140,000 against Hollingsworth & Vose.     In its post-trial motion, Hollingsworth & Vose argued thatthe court had erred by admitting the deposition testimony ofElise Comproni, an inspector with the Massachusetts Department ofLabor and Industries, Division of Occupational Hygiene.  Compronitestified that in 1953 he was "appalled" when he learned thatasbestos was being used in the Kent cigarette filters.Hollingsworth & Vose argued that he was not qualified to give anopinion concerning the potential hazards of an asbestos-containing filter in the early 1950s and that it was prejudicedby repeated references to the testimony by counsel for theHorowitzes.     The filter maker also argued that the weight of the evidencepresented at trial was insufficient to justify the jury's findingthat it had been negligent.  "[P]laintiffs were required todemonstrate by a preponderance of evidence that defendants knewor should have known of the harmful health effects associatedwith an asbestos-containing filter between 1952 and 1956.Plaintiffs offered no testimony or studies which suggested thatmedical science believed such a danger existed during thisperiod," it asserted.     Hollingsworth & Vose also contended that it had beenprejudiced by the court decision to allow the jury to considerfraud claims against it.  The Horowitz complaint, it noted, onlyasserted fraud claims against Lorillard, and the plaintiffsfailed to present any evidence of fraud against it.     Lorillard has prevailed in four previous lawsuits alleginginjury from the filters, largely by raising doubts about whetherthe plaintiffs' illness was caused by Kent cigarettes or otherpossible exposures to asbestos.  The company is currentlyinvolved in 10 other lawsuits involving the Micronite filters.     The plaintiffs were represented at trial by Madelyn J.Chaber with Wartnick, Chaber, Harowitz, Smith & Tigerman in SanFrancisco.     Hollingsworth & Vose is represented by Andrew J.McElaney Jr., Stephen J. Brake and Daniel R. Harris with Nutter,McLellan & Fish in Boston and by Donald F. Zimmer Jr. and CynthiaC. Roenisch with Preuss Walker & Shanagher in San Francisco.Lorillard is represented by Lewis L. Fenton, Larry E. Hayes andRonald F. Scholl with Fenton & Keller of Monterey, CA, and byDavid K. Hardy, William S. Ohlemeyer and Mark J. Evans withShook, Hardy & Bacon of Kansas City, MO.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996LORILLARD, FILTER MAKERADDED TO ASBESTOS CASEIN MICHIGAN     The plaintiffs in an occupational exposure asbestos casefiled an amended complaint in Michigan state court Dec. 4 to addLorillard Inc., Hollingsworth & Vose Co. and Macco Chemical Co.as defendants in their personal injury product liability suit.Sorise et al. v. 20th Century Glove Corp. of Texas et al.,No. 95-521238 NP (MI Cir. Ct., Wayne Cty.).     The amended complaint filed in Wayne County Circuit Courtnamed the additional defendants because the lead plaintiff smokedKent cigarettes with "Micronite" filters in the 1950s.  In theoriginal July 25, 1995 complaint, retired tile setter NelsonSorise alleged his mesothelioma resulted from on-the-job exposureto a variety of asbestos products.  Nearly 60 defendants werenamed.     The amendment added the three Kent defendants, alleging thatasbestos fibers in Micronite filters were also a proximate causeof Sorise's mesothelioma.  According to the complaint, whichalleged failure to warn, Sorise smoked Kents between 1952 and1956, the time when Micronite filters were used.     According to Sorise's attorney, Michael B. Serling ofBirmingham, MI, Kents were marketed heavily as being safer thantheir competitors on the basis that the Micronite filters removedtar and nicotine.     Kent's Micronite filters have been the focus of two recentactions, one of which ended in a $2 million award in favor of aCalifornia professor who alleged mesothelioma from the asbestosin the Micronite filters (Horowitz v. Lorillard, Inc. et al.,No. 964-245 [CA Super. Ct.]; see story this issue).  In theother, a federal court jury in Chicago returned a defense verdictin a suit brought by the family of an Encyclopedia Britannicaexecutive who died from cancer allegedly caused by the asbestosin the filters (Braun v. Lorillard Inc. et al., No. 94-C-976[ND IL]; see Consumer Product Litigation Reporter, December 1995,P. 5,285).     The Sorise case has been assigned to Judge Robert J.Colombo Jr.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996FORMER CIGARETTE MODEL,10 OTHERS SUE CIGARETTEMAKERS, SELLERS IN FL     A former Winston cigarette model and 10 other people filed aproducts liability suit against tobacco companies and cigarettesellers Dec. 11 in Florida state court, alleging injury fromcigarette smoking.  Levine et al. v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. etal., No. CL 95-9806-AH, (FL Cir. Ct., 15th Jud. Cir., Palm BeachCty.).     Lead plaintiff Alan Landers, also known as Allan Levine,worked as a model in Winston print advertisements in the 1960s.He has undergone two surgeries for lung cancer that he attributesto smoking cigarettes.               The complaint stated that the defendants' tobacco products,when used as intended, were highly likely to cause, or contributein substantial fashion, to illness and injuries, includingbronchogenic carcinoma, chronic bronchitis, cardiovasculardisease and other conditions.     "So likely were the serious health consequences ofdefendants' tobacco products that over one in three foreseeableusers would be expected to suffer premature death or seriousimpairment," the complaint said.  Further, the plaintiffsmaintained, tobacco products, when used as intended, "were highlylikely to induce in foreseeable users a state of addiction."     The complaint contains counts of negligence, strictliability and civil conspiracy.     The plaintiffs claim that the tobacco firms had a duty todesign a safe product, but sold the cigarettes in their currentform knowing that they would probably cause disease andaddiction.     Named defendants are R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., Brown &Williamson Tobacco Corp., American Tobacco Co., Philip MorrisInc., Lorillard Tobacco Co., Liggett Group Inc., United StatesTobacco Sales & Marketing Co. Inc., Culbro Corp. (formerly knownas General Cigar Co. Inc.), and retailers ABC Liquors Inc.,Publix Supermarkets Inc. and Winn-Dixie Stores, Inc.     The plaintiffs are represented by Tracy E. Tomlin andMichael T. Tomlin of Otero, Mullin & Tomlin of Coral Gables, FL,and by Norwood S. Wilner of Spohrer, Wilner & Maxwell ofJacksonville, FL.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996KS SMOKELESS TOBACCOCASE WITHDRAWN; NATIONALCLASS SUIT TO FOLLOW     A lawsuit filed on behalf of Kansas residents against themakers of smokeless tobacco products was withdrawn Dec. 18 byattorneys who filed the suit because they plan to refile onbehalf of a nationwide class of smokeless tobacco users.  Hammersv. United States Tobacco Co., No. 95-1335-MLB (D KS); seeConsumer Product Litigation Reporter, August 1995.     The lawsuit was filed July 24 in U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Kansas, in Wichita, alleging that the manufacturersof smokeless tobacco products have designed sales campaigns thatspecifically set out to lure users of their products to"graduate" to products containing higher concentrations ofnicotine.     The complaint was filed on behalf of all users of smokelesstobacco products in Kansas.  The plaintiffs were seeking classaction status and had the potential of involving approximately30,000 Kansas residents.     Plaintiff attorney Derek Casey of Hutton & Hutton in Wichitasaid he expected to file a new lawsuit on behalf of a nationwideclass by mid-February.     The suit named as defendants United States Tobacco Co.,Pinkerton Tobacco Co., Conwood Co., L.P., Helme Tobacco Co.,Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., The Smokeless Tobacco Council,Inc., The Smokeless Tobacco Research Council, Inc., The TobaccoInstitute Inc. and The Council for Tobacco Research, Inc.     The smokeless tobacco industry has been free from litigationduring a time when lawsuits against cigarette manufacturers havebeen filed across the country.  In 1989, the 10th Circuit U.S.Court of Appeals upheld a 1986 jury verdict that the evidence ina case brought by the family of an Oklahoma teenager had failedto show conclusively that the manufacturer's smokeless tobaccowas the cause of the teenager's death (Marsee v. United StatesTobacco Co., No. 86-2094 [10th Cir.]).     The Marsee case turned on causation rather than addiction,which was the basis for the Kansas lawsuit.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996D MA DISMISSES MERCURYPOISONING SUIT AGAINSTTUNA CANNER ON CAUSATION     A U.S. District Court judge sitting in Boston grantedsummary judgment dismissing a personal injury complaint against atuna fish canning company on Nov. 30, because he concluded thatno genuine issue of any material fact would permit a jury to findeither that the plaintiff suffers from mercury poisoning or thatthe cannery's product was the cause of any such poisoning.  Kernv. Nozaki America Inc., No. 94-12272-RGS (D MA).     Alice Kern filed a personal injury suit in 1994 allegingnegligence and breach of warranty.  She claimed that shecontracted mercury poisoning from eating five to seven cans ofGeisha brand canned tuna per week for 24 years.  Geisha brand issold by defendant Nozaki America Inc., which moved for summaryjudgment.     U.S. District Judge Richard G. Stearns found that whilethere is no question that Kern is ill, the only disease that shehas been diagnosed as having is rheumatoid arthritis.  Her doctortested her blood for mercury in 1991 and found her mercury bloodlevel to be slightly above normal.  It returned to the mid-rangeof normal after Kern stopped eating Geisha tuna and underwentchelation therapy, Judge Stearns said.     To prevail in her suit, Kern would have had to establishthat eating the amounts of tuna she claims to have ingested cancause mercury poisoning and that Geisha brand tuna containsmercury at levels sufficient to have caused the poisoning.  JudgeStearns found that she could establish neither.     "Viewing all inferences in the light most favorable to Kern,there are no disputed facts in the record that would permit ajury to find that Kern suffers from mercury poisoning, much lessthat any such poisoning resulted from her consumption of Geishabrand tuna," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CIBA ARGUES CONTACT SOLUTIONNEGLIGENCE CLAIMS AREPREEMPTED BY FEDERAL LAW     Approved labels and warnings on medical devices are"specific requirements" of federal law that preempt causes ofaction brought under state law, respondent Ciba Vision Corp.argued in its answer to a petition filed by a California womanasking the state Supreme Court to overturn a lower court's rulingthat all of her claims against Ciba are preempted by the MedicalDevices Amendments.  Scott v. Ciba Vision Corp., No. S049608(CA Sup. Ct.); see Consumer Product Litigation Reporter, December1995.     In its Nov. 15 answer, Ciba contended that the CaliforniaCourt of Appeal, Sixth District, was aligned with a majority ofjurisdictions that have held that federal law preempts causes ofaction brought under state law.     Appellant Leslie Scott brought suit in California statecourt against Ciba, alleging claims of strict liability,negligence, failure to provide adequate warnings and breach ofimplied warranty.  Scott claimed she had difficulty indistinguishing Ciba's AOSEPT solution, which contains hydrogenperoxide, from its saline solution.  She claimed that as a resultof her failure to distinguish between the bottles, she sufferedchemical burns to her eyes when she rinsed her contacts in theAOSEPT solution instead of the saline solution.     Scott argued that, around the time of her injury, Ciba hadbegun to market its AOSEPT solution with a red cap, but alsocontinued to market it in the old bottle, knowing that personsnot wearing their contacts would have difficulty indistinguishing the two.     The Santa Clara County Superior Court granted Ciba's motionfor summary judgment, finding Scott's claims preempted by theMDA.  On appeal, the California Court of Appeal, Sixth District,affirmed the trial court.     The Court of Appeal cited to Evraets v. IntermedicsIntraocular, Inc., 29 Cal.App.4th 786, and 21 C.F.R. Section808.1(b), in holding that the "requirement" the Food and DrugAdministration refers to in Section 360k includes "anyrequirement having the force and effect of law 'whetherestablished by statute, ordinance, regulation, or courtdecision.'"     Examining Scott's argument that the MDA contains no specificcounterpart regulations regarding AOSEPT, the Court of Appealheld that all Class III medical devices are subject to therequirements of the MDA, which include the FDA's stringentpremarket approval process.     In her petition to the California Supreme Court, Scottargued that the only other state Supreme Court that has addressedthe issue of federal preemption concerning Class III devicesfound that the plaintiff's claims were not preempted (Larsen v.Pacesetter Systems, Inc. [Hawaii 1992], 837 P.2d 1273, 1281).     Some of the leading cases that have expounded on the issueof preemption have recently been criticized, Scott said.  Forexample, the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' 1984 ruling inMartello v. Ciba Vision Corp. gave Section 360k(a), the MDA'spreemption provision, an expansive reading, but was criticized inthe Ninth Circuit's ruling in Kennedy, Scott said.  "The...NinthCircuit in Kennedy...stated that the language of Section 360k(a)does not create the broad, sweeping preemption found by the'strained reading of the statute' by the court in Martello,"Scott argued.     And, Scott said, state actions that attempt to enforcefederal standards are not preempted.  Citing to Evraets, theappellant said, regarding a claim of negligence per se, since thestate requirements are equal to the federal requirements becausethey adopt the federal standards, they are not preempted.     On the other hand, Ciba argued in its answer that aconsistent line of cases holds that state law tort and warrantycauses of action are preempted because the pre-market approvalprocess envelops the approved product in specific requirements offederal law.     "Scott makes no claim of any defect in the design ormanufacture of AOSEPT," Ciba said.  "Rather, she contends thatCalifornia tort and warranty law required that Ciba Visionpackage and label AOSEPT differently in order to warn usersagainst accidental placement of deneutralized solution in theeye."     Ciba argued that this is a "strong case for MDA preemption"because of AOSEPT's premarket approval and Scott's singular focuson warning deficiencies in the product.     The respondent said that the court's decision in Evraets,which Scott cited in her petition, does not warrant review by thestate Supreme Court.  Ciba said Evraets does not deal with adevice that received FDA premarket approval.     "Evraets contains a discussion of the preemption of statelaw claims for breach of warranty that is consistent with thedecision in Scott," Ciba said.  "Evraets only reaches the issueof preemption in relation to a claim of breach of an expresswarranty."     Ciba concluded that by enacting the MDA, Congress interposedthe FDA as an expert watchdog and preempted certain state lawcauses of action.  A jury should not be allowed to rethink thesufficiency of labels and packaging that the FDA endorsed, saidCiba.     In her Nov. 27 reply, Scott said the Court of Appeal citedtwo cases in its decision that are not relevant to this case.  InEvraets and Powers v. Optical Radiation Corp. (1995) 37Cal.App.4th 1444, the cases involved experimental products forwhich adequate warnings were not yet known, Scott said.     Ciba's statements that this case is a "pure label andwarning case" and that Scott "makes no claim for any defect inthe design" are disingenuous and completely inaccurate, Scottargued.     "Respondent is well aware that Leslie Scott claims that thedesign of the two virtually indistinguishable white productcontainers containing harmful and harmless ingredientsrespectively are defective under both negligence and strictliability theories," she stated.     Scott is represented by Jonathan D. Gordon of the LawOffices of Jonathan D. Gordon in Denver.  Ciba is represented byThomas M. Peterson and Diane S. Rice of Brobeck, Phleger &Harrison in San Francisco.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1996PA SUP. CT.: LANDLORDSHAVE NO DUTY TO INSPECTFOR LEAD PAINT HAZARDS     The Pennsylvania Supreme Court on Nov. 22 reaffirmed a 27-year-old ruling that landlords cannot be held to haveconstructive notice of the dangers of lead paint to youngchildren occupying their premises and, therefore, that they haveno duty to test for and remove lead paint from their properties.Felton v. Spratley et al., No. 7 East. Dist. App. Dkt. (PASup. Ct.).     The one-page per curiam decision stated that the appeal isdismissed "as having been improvidently granted," with JusticeJohn P. Flaherty dissenting.  It offers no further commentary noris Justice Flaherty's dissent explained.               Lucretia Felton and her daughter, Shakeema, petitioned forrehearing on Dec. 6, and a ruling on that request is stillpending.  Their attorney, Edwin L. London of Matkoff & Shengold,said he was "terribly disappointed" by the dismissal, especiallysince the lower court ruling was a 2-1 split decision, and sincethe Supreme Court had been briefed and had heard oral argumentsin October.     The Supreme Court's dismissal lets stand a ruling affirmingthe dismissal of this suit by the trial court on the grounds thatthe landlord had no actual notice of the lead paint hazards inthe apartment she rented to the Feltons.     The Feltons resided in an apartment leased from MarieSpratley in 1988; Shakeema was diagnosed with lead poisoning thefollowing year.  When Spratley was notified of the chipping andpeeling lead paint by the Philadelphia Health Department, she hadthe paint removed and the apartment repainted within a month.     The Feltons then filed suit in the Philadelphia County Courtof Common Pleas, alleging negligence and carelessness in failingto test for and remove the paint prior to Shakeema's poisoningaround May 1989.     The trial court granted summary judgment to Jessie andMollucye Spratley Pearson, the executors of Marie Spratley'sestate, based on the grounds that Spratley was unaware of thehazardous condition and, therefore, had no obligation to correctit.  The defendants had argued that Lucretia Felton was aware ofthe peeling paint for several months before Shakeema wasdiagnosed, but never reported it to them.     On appeal to state Superior Court, the Feltons conceded thatthe defendants lacked actual knowledge of the presence of leadpaint in the apartment, but, they contended, knowledge about leadpaint poisoning had become widespread among the public by thelate 1980s and, therefore, Spratley should have had constructiveknowledge of the hazard and should have eliminated it.     The Superior Court panel ruled 2-1 that it remained bound bythe state Supreme Court's holding in Kolojeski v. Deisher Inc.,429, Pa. 191, 239 A.2d 329 (1968), which stated that where thelandlord had no notice that the walls were painted with leadpaint until after the plaintiffs had been treated for leadpoisoning, he had no affirmative duty to inspect the premises forlead paint and he could not be held liable for the injuries.     The Feltons argued that public knowledge of lead painthazards had increased substantially since 1968 when Kolojeski wasdecided and, therefore, that the defendants should be held tohave had constructive notice of the dangers of lead paint.  TheSuperior Court majority ruled that the Feltons failed to cite anystate law case or to otherwise persuade it to expand the law ofnegligence between landlord and tenant.               In a New York case in May, a five-judge appellate courtpanel ruled that New York City's landlords do have an affirmativeduty to search out and remove lead paint in apartments occupiedby children, but that ruling was based on a city ordinance thatexplicitly spells out that duty.  In October, the ResidentialLead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (Title X) went intoeffect.  That federal law requires landlords throughout thecountry to inform potential tenants of the presence of lead paintin rental properties or to abate the hazard if the tenantsinclude young children.     In addition to London, the Feltons are represented by MerylCohen of Matkoff & Shengold in Philadelphia.  Spratley isrepresented by Josh M. Greenbaum of Cozen & O'Connor, also inPhiladelphia.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONSUMER PRODUCT LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 19961ST CIR: INSURANCE CO.FAILS TO PROVE LANDLORDINSURED FOR KNOWN RISK     A landlord who knew his apartments were contaminated withlead paint is still entitled to indemnification from his insurerbecause the insurance company failed to show that when thelandlord took out the policy, he either knew the lead paint inhis building was the source of a tenant's lead poisoning or knewthat she would suffer further injury after the effective date ofthe policy, according to a Nov. 28 ruling by the First CircuitU.S. Court of Appeals.  United States Liability Insurance Co. v.Selman et al., No. 95-1435 (1st Cir.).     Livingstone Selman owns an apartment house in Roxbury, MA,where Robin Razza and her infant daughter, Carol Ann, resided.Carol Ann was diagnosed with lead poisoning late in 1984.  Selmanbegan removing the lead paint on March 7, 1985, and by March 29,an inspection of the Razzas' apartment showed it to be 95% lead-free.     In May 1985, Selman changed insurance carriers and insuredthe apartment house with United States Liability Insurance Co.(USLIC).  The insurance company renewed the policy in May 1986.The Razzas moved from Selman's apartment building in September1986 and subsequently brought a state law personal injury suitagainst Selman that is still pending.     USLIC, attempting to escape liability, brought a diversityaction seeking a declaratory judgment in U.S. District Court forthe District of Massachusetts.  After a bench trial, the districtcourt ruled that USLIC had no duty to indemnify Selman for claimsfor injuries resulting from Carol Ann's ingestion of lead paintprior to May 4, 1985 (the inception date of the first policy).However, the court ruled, USLIC does have a duty to indemnifySelman with respect to claims arising while the policies were ineffect " from May 4, 1985, to May 3, 1987.               On appeal, USLIC advanced three alternative grounds forreversing the district court judgment:  (1) coverage was nevertriggered because Carol Ann sustained no discernible injurieswhile the insurance policies were in effect; (2) Carol Ann'sinjuries were the result of her initial ingestion of lead paintbefore the policies went into effect; and (3) Selman knew aboutthe liability before the policies went into effect and,therefore, is precluded from coverage under the "known risk"doctrine.     Circuit Judge Bruce M. Selya, writing for a unanimousappellate panel, ruled first that the appeal had to be decided onthe "clear error" standard because the issues revolved around theinterpretation of substantial extrinsic evidence and not solelyon questions about the clear meaning of contract provisions.     The district court was correct in determining that coveragehad been triggered because Razza's expert witness, Dr. JohnGraef, testified that "at least a portion" of Carol Ann's claimedinjuries occurred during the policy periods, the appellate courtfound.  Graef's testimony was supported by data showing sharpincreases, or "spikes," in Carol Ann's blood toxicity levelscorresponding to incidents of lead paint ingestion during thepolicy period.     Further, Graef testified that the new incidents of leadpaint ingestion resulted in further injuries that occurred duringthe period covered by the policies because, unlike many otherdiseases such as measles or chicken pox, lead poisoning injuriesare cumulative, the circuit court ruled.     "[T]he district court had before it compelling evidence thatCarol Ann Razza ingested several 'big meals' of lead paint chipswhile the appellant's policies were in force, and Dr. Graeftestified that each such ingestion caused (or potentially couldcause) discrete injury.  On this basis, the district courtwarrantably found a clear nexus between Carol Ann's 'big meals'and the spikes in her toxicity levels," Judge Selya wrote.     On the issue of known risk, Judge Selya said, the centralquestion on appeal is:  "What did Selman know and when did heknow it?"  The known risk doctrine precludes coverage when theinsured knows in advance of the policy's effective date that aspecific loss has already happened or is substantially certain tohappen.     "[T]he presence of risk runs to the very essence of aninsurance contract.  Where there is no risk of loss " as where aloss has already occurred before a policy takes effect "insurance ceases to serve its socially utile purpose of risk-spreading," he said.     Finding that the test for asserting the known risk doctrineis subjective and that the insurer has the burden of proof, theFirst Circuit ruled that nothing in the court record showed thatthe lead paint in Selman's building was the source of Carol Ann'sillness (or that he knew of the connection), nor that Selman knewthat Carol Ann would suffer further injury from continuedexposure to lead paint.  Further, the panel said, given theinspection report that the Razza apartment was 95% free of leadsix weeks before the first policy became effective, Selman couldeasily have assumed that Carol Ann was no longer exposed to anysignificant amount of lead paint and therefore would suffer nofurther injury.     "The district court's finding is strengthened by the utterlack of any evidence that Selman attempted to conceal ormisrepresent the presence of lead paint in his apartment housewhen he applied for insurance.  To the extent that theappellant's application form did not request such information,the appellant was the author of its own misfortune," Judge Selyawrote.     Finally, the panel ruled, the district court did not commitreversible error in declining to interpret a clause in the policylimiting the company's liability to $300,000 per occurrence asmeaning that USLIC's total potential liability is capped at$300,000.  While the district court did not spell out itsreasoning, it seems self-evident that the basis for the rulingwas that the policy does not define the operative terms of thatclause, Judge Selya concluded.     USLIC was represented by Alice Olsen Mann and Mark P. Baileyof Morrison, Mahoney & Miller.  Selman was represented by KennethH. Soble of Soble, Van Dam, Pearlman & Gittelsohn.  Clyde D.Bergstresser and Angela M. Vieira of Bergstresser & Associatesrepresented Razza.  All are Boston firms.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-15IA060-000326-B019-4http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb49.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020150 text/html 37229HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:59:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:45 GMTContent-length: 37040Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb49.html Sample Issue Copyright CORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNet June 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HANDBOOK URGES JAPANESE COMPANIES TO GET INVOLVED (455 words) REEBOK TAKES STEPS TO COMBAT RACISM (392 words) *QUICK TAKES* Look for possible enhancement of Dayton Hudson's charitable (114 words) Adele D. Hazel, 60, a newly licensed real estate agent in (87 words) Street News, a bi-weekly tabloid in New York whose motto is (127 words) A Boston charity that raises money for literacy programs (70 words) According to a new independent survey commissioned by Save (102 words) Over the past five years, AT&T has given more than $2 (61 words) Inc. magazine's annual list of the fastest-growing small (53 words) PRUDENTIAL FUNDS HEALTH CARE FOR URBAN YOUTH (215 words) THE PRUDENTIAL: HOW MUCH THEY GIVE, WHERE IT GOES (123 words) D.C. SCHOOL BOARD ACCEPTS $1 MILLION FROM PHILIP MORRIS (167 words) CORPORATE SUPPORT OF READING PROGRAMS EXPANDS (266 words) CAUSE-RELATED MARKETING: SIX TIPS FOR SUCCESS (248 words) *IN THE NEWS* At its April board meeting, AT&T share-holders (115 words) Earth Day organizers raised about $2.5 million to celebrate (174 words) Gillette Co. dropped plans to acquire the Wilkinson blade (49 words) *RESOURCES* Corporate Foundation Profiles (Sixth Edition) contains (86 words) Besides raising funds, a special event promotes your (68 words) Social Investment and Corporations, a recent report from the (77 words) *RECENT GRANTS* >>>Bell Atlantic Charitable Foundation<<< (27 words) >>>Bell Atlantic Charitable Foundation<<< (41 words) >>>Binney & Smith<<< (25 words) >>>duPont Committee on Educational Aid<<< (26 words) >>>Hewlett-Packard Company<<< (24 words) >>>Hitachi Foundation<<< (26 words) >>>Hitachi Foundation<<< (35 words) >>>Hitachi Foundation<<< (26 words) >>>IBM Corporation<<< (31 words) >>>Merck Company Foundation<<< (16 words) >>>Nomura Securities Company<<< (20 words) >>>Norwest Foundation<<< (24 words) >>>Norwest Foundation<<< (22 words) >>>Norwest Foundation<<< (24 words) >>>Sears Roebuck<<< (20 words) >>>Western Digital Corporation<<< (24 words) TAFT'S "NONPROFIT COMPUTER SOURCEBOOK" IS USER FRIENDLY (135 words) BURGER KING COOKS UP WAYS TO HELP KIDS STAY IN SCHOOL (126 words) CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990HANDBOOK URGES JAPANESE COMPANIES TO GET INVOLVED     Corporate giving and volunteerism are significant elementsof life in the United States that the Japanese community mustcome to terms with, says a handbook published by New York'sJapanese Chamber of Commerce.     Published with Japanese and English text on facing pages,the book is titled Joining In! A Handbook for Better CorporateCitizenship in the United States.  Its 85 pages contain advice toJapan-based companies in America on how to participateeffectively in communities where they have built plants, bysupporting local charities and volunteering to work for localorganizations.     In the preface, Hisao Kondo, president of the JapaneseChamber of Commerce, emphasizes that Joining In! was not writtenjust to expand Japanese understanding of American philanthropy,but as a "call to action."  As such, it urges Japanese executivesin the United States to take the initiative in getting involvedin their communities without waiting to be asked.     "This is a vital means of gaining acceptance and therebyimproving American community perception of the Japanesetransplant company," says the handbook.  It emphasizes thatcommunity involvement can promote a Japanese corporation'sbusiness interests in several ways:     o  by improving its ability to recruit and retain skilledlocal employees;     o  by fostering good working relationships with local andstate government officials;     o  by providing tax deductions; and     o  by improving the company's image.     Language and cultural barriers have prevented many Japaneseexecutives from joining boards and volunteering for othercommunity activities, according to the handbook.  One result ofthis is that some Japanese-based corporations have suffered fromthe image of being uninvolved.     To change this perception, the handbook recommends thatJapanese corporations take a number of steps toward becoming moreinvolved in their local communities:     o  Establish a company policy on volunteering and communityinvolvement, after first seeking suggestions from all employees.     o  Create a program budget.     o  Appoint a community involvement coordinator who, ideally,should be Japanese; alternatively, a Japanese and an Americancould be joint coordinators.     o  Select an initial project for special attention andpublicize it in the company and community.     o  Recognize and reward volunteerism by employees.     "Volunteer programs are a way for corporations todemonstrate moral leadership, `doing the right thing,' whichcomes back to benefit the company by enhancing its image and itsinfluence in the community," says the handbook.  "Communityinvolvement and volunteer programs are ultimately good forbusiness."     Next month CGW will look at areas in the United States whereJapanese companies have a strong presence for an overview oftheir giving policies.     Joining In! is available for $40 from the Japanese Chamberof Commerce and Industry of New York, The Galleria, 115 East 57thStreet, New York, NY 10022.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990REEBOK TAKES STEPS TO COMBAT RACISM     Three recent grants by the Reebok Foundation illustrate theathletic shoe manufacturer's long-term commitment to humanrights.     The largest gift, $750,000, went to the Center for the Studyof Sport in Society at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, for aprogram to combat racism.     The three-year program, called "Project Teamwork," plans tosend teams of athletes to schools and community groups around thecountry, starting this summer.  Four cities, Boston, Los Angeles,New York, and Washington, DC, will be targeted in the first year.     The founders of the project say it is necessary because theyfeel civil rights progress has slowed and that racism andanti-Semitism are on the rise.  They believe athletes are key tothe program's success because athletes are among the strongestblack role models.     Project Teamwork will also include elements of a programstarted five years ago to help former college athletes who failedto get their degrees after their athletic eligibility expired.  In the schools and community centers they visit, theathletes will talk about the dangers of racism, the value ofstaying in school, and the fallacy of going through school withthe idea of making a career of professional athletics.     Reebok also announced a $375,000 grant to TransAfrica, aspart of a campaign to discredit rumors that Reebok Internationaldoes business in South Africa.  (Reebok stopped selling itsproducts in South Africa in 1976.)     The grant will help build TransAfricare's new library andresearch center in Washington, DC.  When completed, the centerwill be the primary resource for historical and educationalmaterials on the role of African Americans in the shaping of U.S.foreign policy.     A third grant, for $50,000, went to the NAACP for thegeneral fund of the civil rights group.     The grants exemplify Reebok's long-term commitment to thecause of human rights, says Paul Fireman, chairman and CEO of thecompany.  The foundation is also interested in supporting "theunderserved" children and youth, the handicapped, and theelderly.  It also occasionally assists capital campaigns orbuilding projects "where the result would make a world ofdifference in the lifestyle of the people served," according tofoundation guidelines.     Reebok's total contributions in 1987 were $285,500,increasing to $1.5 million in 1988.  The foundation acceptsproposals year-round; the contact person is Jean Mahoney,executive director, Reebok Foundation, 150 Royall Street, Canton,MA 02021, (617) 341-7361.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Look for possible enhancement of Dayton Hudson's charitable     Look for possible enhancement of Dayton Hudson's charitablegiving policies since the corporation's $1.04 billion acquisitionof Marshall Field's, announced in April.  Marshall Field's 24stores, located in Illinois, Wisconsin, Texas, and Ohio, willbring Dayton Hudson's total number of department stores to 61.It is too soon to speculate on changes in corporate giving, aDayton Hudson spokesman said, "but if the merger is successful,Marshall Field's will become a part of our culture, and thefoundation is a big part of that culture."  The Dayton HudsonFoundation gave $17.4 million in 1988, chiefly to the arts andhumanities and social services.  Cynthia Mayeda was recentlynamed director of the foundation (CGW, April).Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Adele D. Hazel, 60, a newly licensed real estate agent in     Adele D. Hazel, 60, a newly licensed real estate agent inAnnandale, VA, has established a fund to which real estateagents, brokers, and others can donate money to help house thehomeless.  She has pledged to donate to the fund all commissionsshe receives from selling houses.  Hazel joined Pyon Realty inAnnandale in March and has already persuaded two agents there todonate part of their commissions to the fund.  "There's been moretalk than action on solving the plight of the homeless," Hazelsaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Street News, a bi-weekly tabloid in New York whose motto is     Street News, a bi-weekly tabloid in New York whose motto is"Helping America's Hungry," is being sold by a homeless salesforce recruited from shelters and the benches of Grand CentralStation.  The hawkers keep $.50 of each $.75 sale, earning up to$250 a week.  Street News was launched with significant corporatesupport.  Its office and warehouse space are donated by realestate companies; AT&T/Bell Labs contributed the computers;Stratocom, the office machines; and businesses such as Ben &Jerry's ice cream underwrite a page of job-training listings.  Adagencies and corporations have bought full-page ads (at $3,500)to help the newspaper cover its costs.  Future plans are forStreet News to hit the streets of Washington, DC, San Francisco,CA, Newark, NJ, and Philadelphia, PA.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     A Boston charity that raises money for literacy programs     A Boston charity that raises money for literacy programsobtained more than $100,000 with a spelling-bee competition amonglocal business leaders.  Forty-two companies representing 16industries competed in the Boston Adult Literacy Fund's firstBusiness Spelling Bee.  Every team but the winner had to donate$2,000 to the literacy fund.  For more information, contactJoanne Appleton Arnaud, Executive Director, Boston Adult LiteracyFund, 241 St. Botolph Street, Boston, MA 02115.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     According to a new independent survey commissioned by Save     According to a new independent survey commissioned by Savethe Children, 84% of all heads of companies polled feel thatchildren's education is a world problem of extreme or greatimportance, even more than pollution, energy shortages, anddisease.  More than half (58%) of the business executives polledthink that corporations should participate in charity-sponsoredefforts to help disadvantaged children worldwide.  According tothe survey findings, the three most important factors whenconsidering a corporate contribution to a charity are geographicareas served, cited by 77%; concrete results, cited by 76%; andthe percentage of revenues spent on administration, cited by 69%.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Over the past five years, AT&T has given more than $2     Over the past five years, AT&T has given more than $2million in grants to 75 theater groups through its "OnStage"program to encourage the production of bold and innovative plays.It provides nonprofit theaters with funds for production costs,as well as extensive help with advertising and publicity.  Write:AT&T Foundation, 550 Madison Avenue, Room 2717, New York, NY10022-3297.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Inc. magazine's annual list of the fastest-growing small     Inc. magazine's annual list of the fastest-growing smallcompanies in the United States, "The Inc. 100," included 31located in California.  Runners-up by geographic region were thestates of New Jersey and Florida, which are each home to eight ofthe fastest-growing companies, followed by Florida (seven),Minnesota (six), and New York (six).Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990PRUDENTIAL FUNDS HEALTH CARE FOR URBAN YOUTH     In response to health care delivery gaps and high infantmortality rates in its corporate office host city of Newark, NJ,the Prudential Foundation will fund two initiatives that willincrease access to medical and social programs for the city'schildren.     The school-based initiative, "Cities in Schools," (CIS) willoffer an array of on-site social services to 135 students whoattend Newark's Central High School, where the dropout rate is 22percent. Services will include medical and dental care, pre- andpost-natal care, academic counseling, and job training.     CIS, which received $100,000 from the Prudential Foundation,is supported nationally by private-sector funding and the federalJustice, Labor, and Health and Human Services departments. Ifsuccessful, the program may be replicated in Newark's four otherhigh schools.     The foundation also gave the University of Medicine andDentistry of New Jersey $65,000 to support a mobile pediatrichealth clinic that will make house calls to children in Newark'slow-income housing projects. About 100 children a week will visitthe unit.     The two grants are among $4.5 million the foundationallocated to health care and education programs in 1990.     "The projects are classic examples of how addressing theneeds of particular populations and communities can have largerimplications for society and business," said PrudentialFoundation president Peter Goldberg.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990THE PRUDENTIAL: HOW MUCH THEY GIVE, WHERE IT GOES     The Foundation gave $14.3 million in 1989 and $13.34 millionin 1989.  The company's direct giving in 1988 totaled about $1.74million, which does not include non-monetary support of $252,000.     Primary concerns are improving basic education skills,including math, science, language arts, and computer literacy inpublic schools, and supporting increased educationalopportunities for the disadvantaged, minorities, women, anddisabled people.  Health care is also a priority.     A number of education contributions are disbursed asemployee matching gifts to colleges and universities, privatesecondary schools, and schools for people with disabilities.Contact: Elisa D. Pazzuoli, Secretary, PrudentialFoundation, Prudential Plaza, 745 Broad Street, 15th Floor,Newark, NJ 07101.  Requests for nonmonetary support should beaddressed to William E. Brooks, Vice President, CommunityRelations.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990D.C. SCHOOL BOARD ACCEPTS $1 MILLION FROM PHILIP MORRIS     The Washington, DC, school board recently approved a $1million grant from the Philip Morris tobacco conglomerate,overturning its original decision to delay acceptance of themoney because of "moral" concerns.     The uncertainty about whether or not to accept the granthighlights the concerns that school systems in cities with largeminority populations have in accepting gifts from tobaccocompanies.  There is growing anger locally about industry tacticsto promote a product linked to about 900 deaths a year in theDistrict, a rate that far exceeds the national average.     But company officials say the criticism would be worse andmore deserved if they failed to share their wealth.  "If we gave$1 million to Mother Teresa, critics would find something wrongwith it," said Tom Ricke, Philip Morris spokesman.  "We do itbecause it's the right thing to do."     The grant will help finance learning centers at several cityschools chosen as sites for a school-improvement model created byYale University child psychiatrist James P. Comer.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990CORPORATE SUPPORT OF READING PROGRAMS EXPANDS     Encouraging children to read is one of corporate America'sfavorite ways of disbursing charitable funds.  There is a doublepayoff: reading programs address companies' own needs forliterate employees and also enhance their public image.     Jello Desserts, a division of General Foods Corporation,which began its Reading Rocket program two years ago in ten cityschool systems, will offer the program nationally in 1990-91. Launched with a grant of $2.5 million, Reading Rocket is aimedat children in grades 2-4 and addresses three majorconcerns: motivating children to enjoy reading, encouragingparental participation, and providing teachers and librarianswith additional books.     Another successful program, Pizza Hut's "Book It!" wasstarted five years ago to encourage children in grades 1-6 toread more by rewarding them with pizza vouchers.  This programhas proved so popular that in 1990-91 it will be offered tochildren in kindergarten, too.  Because many kindergartnerscannot read, teachers will set reading goals that involveparents, grandparents, and siblings in reading to the child.Steven S. Reinemund, president and CEO of Pizza Hut, a divisionof Pepsico, explains his company's motivation for the project:"As an employer, we believe an investment in education is aninvestment in our future."     Currently the company's annual budget for literacyinitiatives is $20 million.     Contact: Eunice Ellis, Pizza Hut, Inc., P.O. Box 2999,Wichita, KS 67201.     Early childhood education is also a priority of the GeneralFoods Corporation, which merged with Kraft in 1988.  Before themerger, General Foods gave about $10 million annually.  Contact:Ronald J. Coman, administrative director, Kraft General FoodsFoundation, Glenview, IL 60025.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990CAUSE-RELATED MARKETING: SIX TIPS FOR SUCCESS     The word is out that corporations can sell products, makemoney, and do good at the same time through a well thought outcause-marketing campaign, William H. Lembeck, president of RyanCause Marketing, a consulting company in Westport, CT, told aninternational conference of the National Society of Fund RaisingExecutives in Orlando, FL, in March.     But a lot of nonprofit organizations don't understand theneeds of corporations or how they go about marketing theirproducts, and therefore miss out on this "huge pot of money,"Lembeck noted.     Here are Lembeck's six tips for nonprofits who want to reapthe benefits of cause-related marketing:     o  Think like a marketer.  Identify your organization'smarketable assets.  These may include your name, communityawareness of your programs, and your board members.     o  Learn as much as you can about the companies you wish toapproach.  Read the business press; check the companies' annualreports; watch their ads and promotions.     o  Try to figure out what their target is before youapproach them.     o  Address their needs in your presentation; show them thatyou're on their side and that working with your organization willhelp them sell more products (and incidentally benefit yourcause).     o  Identify key decision makers.  For cause-marketingdecisions, the person to approach is not the head of thefoundation, it's the vice president of marketing and sales.o  Follow up a proposal personally by phone and in letters untilyou get an answer.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     At its April board meeting, AT&T share-holders     At its April board meeting, AT&T share-holdersoverwhelmingly turned down a proposal that sought to bancorporate funding for organizations endorsing abortion.  The votefollowed the AT&T Foundation's decision to cut off donations toPlanned Parenthood because of complaints from anti-abortionists.In a letter to Robert E. Allen, chairman of the board and CEO ofAT&T, Faye Wattleton, president of Planned Parenthood, said thatthe company's actions, "have damaged corporate philanthropy ingeneral.  You have demonstrated that a small band of zealots cansuccessfully harass a major corporation."  Wattleton's letter,written before the shareholders' meeting, pointed out that AT&Tmanagement advised share-holders to vote against the proposal,"an enlightened position now undercut by the foundation."Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Earth Day organizers raised about $2.5 million to celebrate     Earth Day organizers raised about $2.5 million to celebrateits 20th anniversary in April.  Among corporate donors that metEarth Day's strict environmental standards were Esprit clothingcompany; Shaklee, which manufactures biodegradable andphosphate-free detergents; and Church & Dwight, which makes Arm &Hammer products.  Organizers say they turned away $4 million fromcorporations that did not meet their exacting standards.  Butbeing rejected as sponsors of Earth Day has not preventedcompanies such as GM, AT&T, Mobil, Shell Oil, and Dow Chemicalfrom latching onto the environment as a marketing gimmick intheir advertising.  Ad executives predict consumer backlash.The Soviet national airline, Aeroflot, has agreed to buy jetengines from General Electric Co., the first time Western-madecommercial aircraft engines have been sold to the Soviet Union.GE said the sale could be worth as much as $150 million and opensthe door to further sales to the Soviet airline, the world'slargest.  The purchase comes on top of $131 million in ordersfrom state-owned airlines in Czechoslovakia, East Germany, andPoland.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Gillette Co. dropped plans to acquire the Wilkinson blade     Gillette Co. dropped plans to acquire the Wilkinson bladeand razor business in the United States, as part of an antitrustsettlement with the federal government.  The Justice Departmenthad filed an anti-trust suit in January, saying the deal couldreduce competition in the United States and hurt consumers.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Corporate Foundation Profiles (Sixth Edition) contains     Corporate Foundation Profiles (Sixth Edition) containsdetailed profiles of 251 of the largest corporate foundations inthe United States, including the foundations' purposes, givinglimitations, names of officers and directors, financial data,analyses of recent grants, and application guidelines.  Data arealso provided for an additional 600 corporate foundations withassets of at least $1 million or annual giving of $100,000 ormore.  The book costs $125, plus $2 for postage.  Order it fromThe Foundation Center, 79 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10003, (800)620-4230.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Besides raising funds, a special event promotes your     Besides raising funds, a special event promotes yourorganization, furthers its goals, and recruits volunteers.  MakeYour Events Special, a manual published by Folkworks, a nonprofitorganization that helps other nonprofits raise funds throughspecial events, offers down-to-earth, bottom-line advice.Folkworks also maintains a free special events resource bank foruse by nonprofits.  Order the manual, price $24.95, fromFolkworks, 39 West 14th Street, New York, NY 10011.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990     Social Investment and Corporations, a recent report from the     Social Investment and Corporations, a recent report from theCouncil on Foundations, indicates that social investing by U.S.corporations, especially for low-income housing, is increasing.Social investing is the use of concessionary-rate loans, loanguarantees, and equity investments in high-risk projects focusedon social and economic improvement.  The report is available fromthe Council on Foundations for $20 for nonmembers and $10 formembers.  Order it from the Council on Foundations, P.O. Box00021B, Washington, DC 20055.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Bell Atlantic Charitable Foundation<<<>>>Bell Atlantic Charitable Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Bell Atlantic Charitable Foundation<<<>>>Bell Atlantic Charitable Foundation<<<$5,000 each to 26 public libraries in VA, DC, WV, MD, DE, NJ, andPA to support the Bell Atlantic/American Library AssociationFamily Literacy Project, designed to create a network ofcommunity libraries providing family reading programsBack to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Binney & Smith<<<>>>Binney & Smith<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>duPont Committee on Educational Aid<<<>>>duPont Committee on Educational Aid<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Hewlett-Packard Company<<<>>>Hewlett-Packard Company<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Hitachi Foundation<<<>>>Hitachi Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Hitachi Foundation<<<>>>Hitachi Foundation<<<$99,000 over three years to New Jersey Institute of Technology,Newark, NJ, to fund a pilot project to develop a cross-culturalcurriculum and an international communications network that willaddress global environmental concernsBack to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Hitachi Foundation<<<>>>Hitachi Foundation<<<$30,000 to the National AIDS Network, Washington, DC, to providemanagement skills training to staff and volunteers ofcommunity-based AIDS organizations serving minority populationsBack to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>IBM Corporation<<<>>>IBM Corporation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Merck Company Foundation<<<>>>Merck Company Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Nomura Securities Company<<<>>>Nomura Securities Company<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Norwest Foundation<<<>>>Norwest Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Norwest Foundation<<<>>>Norwest Foundation<<<$15,000 to Seward Redesign's Job Development Program,Minneapolis, MN, to help match job opportunities for low-incomepeople with industry needsBack to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Norwest Foundation<<<>>>Norwest Foundation<<<$15,000 to Minnesota Indian Women's Resource Center, Minneapolis,for Second Stage Housing program for mothers enrolled in avocational or educational programBack to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Sears Roebuck<<<>>>Sears Roebuck<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Western Digital Corporation<<<>>>Western Digital Corporation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990TAFT'S "NONPROFIT COMPUTER SOURCEBOOK" IS USER FRIENDLY How best to use computers in the non-profit workplace is thesubject of Taft's newest publication, "Nonprofit ComputerSourcebook". Edited by Alex Norsworthy, director of development atCatholic University of America in Washington, DC, the bookpresents a basic outline of the steps and the pitfalls involvedin selecting and maintaining an information system, followed by acomprehensive and current list of computer information sourcesand services. "NCS" includes a listing of computer software of particularinterest to non-profit organizations, ranging from"A1-Fundraiser," a system that tracks biographical and financialinformation on constituents, to "ZDS," which tracks, among otherthings, donor gifts and pledges, major gifts and grants, andspecial events and ticket sales. Order the Nonprofit Computer Sourcebook for $145 from TheTaft Group, 12300 Twinbrook Parkway, Suite 450, Rockville, MD20852 (800) 888-8238.Back to Headline List CopyrightCORPORATE GIVING WATCH NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJune 1990BURGER KING COOKS UP WAYS TO HELP KIDS STAY IN SCHOOL To help combat the nation's chronic school dropout rate,Burger King has opened Burger King Academies in seven cities;three more will be announced in September. The academies, run by the dropout-prevention organizationCities in Schools, offer academic instruction to dropout-pronehigh school students, along with counseling, job training, andaccess to social services such as child care and publicassistance. The U.S. Department of Justice helped launch the projectwith a $1 million grant. Burger King added $350,000 seed money,plus $45,000 a year per academy for budget expenses. Academies are located in Long Beach, Inglewood, andSacramento, CA; San Antonio, TX; Palm Beach and Miami, FL; andPhiladelphia, PA. Contact: Gina Craig, Director, Corporate Affairs, BurgerKing Corp., P.O. Box 520783, Miami, FL 33152.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-16IA060-000326-B019-46http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb50.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020217 text/html 36321HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:00:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:45 GMTContent-length: 36132Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb50.html Sample Issue Copyright FOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNet June 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FUNDING CHANGES EXPECTED AT PEW AFTER REORGANIZATION (747 words) WOODRUFF FOUNDATION JOINS TOP 20 U.S. FOUNDATIONS (312 words) A U.S. district court has determined that the IRS properly (169 words) The Fred Meyer Charitable Trust, Portland, OR, has changed (124 words) The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Greenwich, CT, has announced (101 words) The William T. Grant Foundation will award up to five (93 words) At its February 1990 trustee meeting, the Skillman (149 words) KNIGHT FOUNDATION EMPHASIZES FLEXIBILITY (276 words) GANNETT FOUNDATION TO SELL COMPANY STOCK (271 words) NEW SOURCES OF EDUCATION FUNDING (536 words) COMMUNITY FOUNDATIONS (111 words) *RESOURCES* The Funding Information Center, San Antonio, TX, has (100 words) Florida Funding Publications, Inc., Miami, FL, has released (57 words) A survey of community foundations located throughout the (103 words) *RECENT GRANTS* >>>Otto Bremer Foundation<<< (18 words) >>>Otto Bremer Foundation<<< (20 words) >>>El Pomar Foundation<<< (20 words) >>>William and Flora Hewlett Foundation<<< (24 words) >>>Independence Foundation<<< (20 words) >>>Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation<<< (39 words) >>>Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation<<< (35 words) >>>W.K. Kellogg Foundation<<< (40 words) >>>W.K. Kellogg Foundation<<< (32 words) >>>Kresge Foundation<<< (20 words) >>>Kresge Foundation<<< (20 words) >>>Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation<<< (25 words) >>>Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation<<< (25 words) >>>Charles Stewart Mott Foundation<<< (38 words) >>>Northwest Area Foundation<<< (39 words) FORD FOUNDATION EXPANDS GRANT MAKING (168 words) FORD FOUNDATION PROGRAM BUDGETS, 1988-1991 (99 words) CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990FUNDING CHANGES EXPECTED AT PEW AFTER REORGANIZATION     The Pew Charitable Trusts, Philadelphia, PA, recentlyconcluded a major organizational restructuring in an effort torespond to increases in the foundation's assets and grant makingthat occurred during the 1980s.  In 1990, with assets that nowexceed $3.2 billion, the foundation expects to make grantstotaling roughly $145 million.  Along with the expanded grantmaking will come a program that emphasizes increased foundationinvolvement with grantees as well as with other grant makers anda stronger commitment to interdisciplinary funding.  Here is aprogram-by-program look at some of the changes at the foundation.     Health and human services.  According to Drew E. Altman, whonow heads Pew's health and human services program, "A naturalrole for foundations is to provide the seed funds for [health andhuman services] programs that ultimately get picked up andintegrated into government funding streams."  In addition to acloser collaboration with the government, Altman predicts morepartnerships with other foundations.  While Altman says heexpects the process of developing a new agenda for the foundationto take several years, he is certain that the problems ofchildren living in poverty will be "a top concern."     Education.  Pew's new program director for education, RobertB. Schwartz, believes there is potential for increasedpartnerships between the government, the corporate sector, andfoundations in education, with foundations providing the "initialrisk capital to test innovative programs."  While highereducation will continue to be a primary focus of the trusts,Schwartz expects to direct increased attention towardintervention programs that will focus on the middle-school years.     According to Schwartz, the foundation will encourageeducators who are taking a broader view of their role, one whichcuts across traditional service lines and includesresponsibilities such as nutrition and health care.  Schwartz isalso interested in exploring the role of private philanthropy inencouraging a more centralized national educational agenda.     Culture.  Marian A Godfrey, the foundation's new programdirector for culture, says she "would like to explorepartnerships at the local and national levels" with corporations,the government, and other foundations.  Godfrey predicts that anumber of existing priorities are likely to receive greaterattention, such as support for individual artists andmulti-cultural programing.  Pew is also looking intoopportunities for funding programs to increase publicappreciation of the arts and culture.     Religion.  Joel A. Carpenter, the new program director forreligion, believes the importance of religious scholarship hasbeen underestimated by American academics.  "An anthropologistgoing to New Guinea would never think of trying to understandthat culture without also studying its religion," explainsCarpenter, "but somehow American scholars have gotten into theframe of mind that they can understand Western culture withoutthis critical component."  In addition to providing continuedsupport for religious scholarship, Carpenter says Pew will alsoexpand its support of church-based community service.  As abeginning, Carpenter says Pew recently initiated a national smallgrants program through World Vision that will support localreligious programs in housing, leadership development, and jobtraining.     The environment.  The foundation recently hired Joshua S.Reichert as its new program director for conservation and theenvironment.  According to Reichert, the trusts look forward to,and expect to encourage, a "groundswell of community-basedactivism" on behalf of the environment.  Reichert says he will beconsidering a wide range of opportunities to promoteenvironmentally sustainable economic development, strengthengrass-roots environmental organizations, increase publicawareness, and encourage new public policy ideas for addressingimportant environmental problems.     Public policy.  Kevin F.F. Quigley is the trusts' newprogram director for public policy.  While Quigley says theprogram's basic priorities will remain the same, he adds thatsome areas will receive greater emphasis in the coming years.  "Iwill be exploring ways to build on our existing Economics andNational Security program to further strengthen the integrationof the two fields at the policy level," says Quigley.  "Also,given the trusts' historic interests in supporting free marketsand democracy, we will be taking a closer look at how Pew mightmore actively promote these values around the world, beginning inEastern Europe."     In 1989, the Pew Charitable Trusts made grants totalingroughly $146.7 million.  Of this amount, 46% went to health andhuman services, 24% went to education, 14% went to culture, 8%went to religion, 5% went to conservation and the environment,and 4% went to public policy.  For more information about thetrusts, contact Deidra A. Lyngard, Communications Manager, PewCharitable Trusts, Three Parkway, Suite 501, Philadelphia, PA19102, (215) 587-4057.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990WOODRUFF FOUNDATION JOINS TOP 20 U.S. FOUNDATIONS     The Robert W. Woodruff Foundation, Atlanta, GA, has seen itsassets and giving levels skyrocket during the past year as itcontinues to receive assets from the estate of Robert W.Woodruff.     At the end of 1987, the foundation had assets of $66.2million.  By 1988, that figure had more than tripled, withyear-end assets of $194.5 million, and by 1989, assets hadreached $755.7 million.  The foundation estimates assets in thearea of $890 million by the end of this year, which puts it amongthe top 20 U.S. foundations in terms of assets.     Meanwhile, giving levels have bounded from almost $3 million(1987), to $3.9 million (1988), up to $8.7 million (1989).Projected total grants for 1990 reflect the foundation's newwealth, with a contributions figure in the area of $25 million.Background.  The foundation was established in 1937 by the lateRobert W. Woodruff.  Woodruff became president of the Coca-ColaCompany in the 1920s, and was instrumental in building the softdrink company into an international business.  He had no childrenand left most of his estate to the foundation when he died in1985.     The Woodruff Foundation's major priorities are education,health care, the arts, social services, and the environment.Most grant recipients are Georgia-based organizations such ascolleges and universities (Emory University has been a majorbeneficiary), hospitals, and arts centers.  The foundation alsomakes grants to out-of-state organizations for the benefit ofGeorgia residents.  For example, the foundation has providedfunds for scholarship programs for students from Georgia.     In 1988, the foundation gave 41% of total funding to thearts, 27% to health organizations, 17% to civic groups, 12% toeducational institutions, and 3% to social service organizations.     Contact Charles H. McTier, President, Robert W. WoodruffFoundation, 230 Peachtree Street N.W., Suite 1400, Atlanta, GA30303, (404) 522-6755.****************************************FOUNDATION GIVING WATCH'S IN THE NEWS****************************************Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     A U.S. district court has determined that the IRS properly     A U.S. district court has determined that the IRS properlyimposed a $64,000 excise tax on the Charles Stewart MottFoundation for failure to file annual reports on the progress ofa program-related investment (PRI).  In Charles Stewart MottFoundation v. U.S., the court found that the regulation requiringannual reports on PRI grants was ambiguous.  However, the courtagreed with the IRS that requiring annual reports for the entirelife of the grant was more consistent with the overall regulatoryscheme.  The case concerned a $320,000 PRI grant made by Mott toa community organization in 1976.  After filing annual reports onthe grant for the years 1976 to 1980, the foundation discontinuedits reports, believing that Treasury regulations required reportsfor only the first three years of PRI grants.  In its decision,the court noted that PRI grantees are required to report to thegrantor throughout the life of the PRI, making it consistent torequire that the grantor report to the IRS during the sameperiod.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     The Fred Meyer Charitable Trust, Portland, OR, has changed     The Fred Meyer Charitable Trust, Portland, OR, has changedits name, effective April 23 of this year, to Meyer MemorialTrust.  According to the foundation, the name change results fromthe foundation's desire to make it clear that the trust is aprivate foundation, "not a company foundation related in any wayto Fred Meyer, Inc."  When Fred Meyer died in 1978, he left thebulk of his estate to the trust, which provides funding forsocial welfare, arts and humanities, education, and healthorganizations.  The Meyer Memorial Trust has never owned stock inor received any contributions from the company.  The streetaddress and telephone number for the trust have not changed: 1515S.W. Fifth Avenue, Suite 500, Portland, OR 97201, (503) 228-5512.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Greenwich, CT, has announced     The Annie E. Casey Foundation, Greenwich, CT, has announceda 50% increase in grants to aid disadvantaged children.  Thefoundation, which accepts funding proposals only from preselectedorganizations, will achieve the increase by allocating theinterest on its capital to grants rather than to its endowment.As a result, funding for programs will increase from about $30million next year to $45 million in 1993.  According to thefoundation, the extra funds will be used to increase support forsuccessful grassroots programs which are having difficulty withfund raising.  Contact the foundation at 31 Brookside Drive,Greenwich, CT 06830, (203) 661-2773.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     The William T. Grant Foundation will award up to five     The William T. Grant Foundation will award up to fiveWilliam T. Grant Faculty Scholars grants to researchers whosework contributes to understanding the development and well-beingof children, adolescents, and youth.  Each award will be for fiveyears and will total $175,000, including indirect costs.  Theaward competition is open to young established researchers whosewritings have been published but who do not hold tenuredpositions.  The application due date is July 1, 1990.  ContactRobert Haggerty, M.D., President, William T. Grant Foundation,515 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10022-5403, (212) 752-0071.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     At its February 1990 trustee meeting, the Skillman     At its February 1990 trustee meeting, the SkillmanFoundation, Detroit, MI, made grants totaling more than $1.6million to 25 organizations.  Grants were approved in thefollowing areas: educational programs received $896,000; programsserving children, youth, and young persons received $582,000; andbasic human needs programs received $122,000.  In 1989, thefoundation reported record grants paid of almost $11.3 millionand saw its assets increase from $240.6 million to $285.3million.  In other news, the foundation on January 1, 1990,eliminated most deadlines for the submission of grant proposals.Except for proposals from culture and arts organizations, whichmust submit grant applications by April 1, grant requests can nowbe submitted when all of the grant application information iscomplete.  Foundation trustees meet in February, April, June,September, and November to consider grant proposals.  Contact thefoundation at 333 West Fort Street, Suite 1350, Detroit, MI48226, (313) 961-8850.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990KNIGHT FOUNDATION EMPHASIZES FLEXIBILITY     The Knight Foundation, Akron, OH, introduced a number of"firsts" in 1989, including the following:     o  the approval of 276 proposals for total grant commitmentsof more than $21.8 million, both of which represent new annualhighs for the foundation;     o  new program categories for the funding of arts andculture and undergraduate education;     o  the creation of a blue-ribbon commission to propose areform agenda dealing with abuses in intercollegiate athletics;and     o  the use of outside consultants to evaluate howeffectively foundation money is being used.     According to the foundation's 1989 annual report, year-endassets were $581 million, an increase of almost $100 million over1988.  Distributions were $16.7 million.  Out of this amount, thearts and culture received 30% of funding; journalism received21%; education, 19%; welfare, 16%; health, 8%; and otherprograms, 6%.  Grants were made to nonprofit organizationslocated in eligible cities across the nation, and they ranged insize from $5,000 to $5 million.  The foundation's target fordistributions in 1990 is $23.5 million.     The Knight Foundation will consider grant applications fromanywhere in the United States for the journalism and arts andculture programs.  Applications for the education program are byinvitation only.  To apply for grants through the "Cities"program for educational, cultural, economic, social service, andcivic organizations, applicants must be located in one of 26designated cities within the states of CA, CO, FL, GA, IN, KS,KY, MI, MN, MS, NC, ND, OH, PA, SC, or SD.     For a more complete description of the foundation's fundingprograms, contact Sarah S. Wright, Program Officer, KnightFoundation, One Cascade Plaza, Suite 800, Akron, OH 44308, (216)253-9301.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990GANNETT FOUNDATION TO SELL COMPANY STOCK     Only a few months after a highly publicized headquartersmove to Arlington, VA, the Gannett Foundation is attractingattention again with the announcement of plans to sell itsGannett Company stock.  The foundation, headed by former GannettCompany chairman Allen H. Neuharth, announced on April 25 thatits trustees had voted unanimously to retain an investmentbanking firm to negotiate a possible sale of its 10% block of stock.     The Gannett Foundation, which ranks in the top 20 U.S.foundations in terms of assets, is currently the biggest GannetCompany shareholder.  The Gannett stock represents thefoundation's only asset.     According to a statement from foundation chairman Neuharthand president Charles L. Overby, the foundation's decision tosell its Gannett Company stock was motivated by IRS regulationsrequiring foundations to pay out 5% of their assets each year.The Gannett stock's annual dividend is $1.20 a share, which comesto an annual yield of roughly 3.3%.     At current market rates, the Gannett Foundation's 15,940,185shares are worth between $550 million and $600 million.  Neuharthand Overby said in their joint statement that "we will expand thework of the USA's largest information-based foundation,especially broadening programs in education, literacy, and FirstAmendment freedoms."     The foundation spent about $30 million on grants, programs,and operations in 1989.  Areas of giving included journalism(education, minority advancement, and professionalism); adultliteracy; special grants; local and community grants (for avariety of nonprofits located in areas served by Gannett media);philanthropy and volunteerism; and disaster relief.     For further information, contact Tracy Quinn, Vice Presidentof Communications, Gannett Foundation, 1101 Wilson Boulevard,Arlington, VA 22209, (703) 284-2800.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990NEW SOURCES OF EDUCATION FUNDING     New foundations are constantly being created, andestablishing relationships with them early can yield long-termbenefits.  This article, the third in a series of four, profilesfoundations established in the Midwest since 1985 that devotesignificant portions of their funding to educationalinstitutions.  Next month's article will cover new foundations inthe far West.     Les and Anne Biederman Foundation, 124 N. Division Street,Traverse City, MI 49684, (616) 947-7834.  Contact person: HelenGetty, Secretary.Foundation profile: The foundation was established in 1986.  In1988, the foundation provided total funding of $70,959 toorganizations located within Michigan.  Out of this amount, atotal of $46,200, or 65%, was divided between the University ofMichigan, Ann Arbor, and Northwestern Michigan College, TraverseCity.  The foundation reported assets in 1988 of $998,292.E.W. Hallett Charitable Trust, First National Bank ofMinneapolis, P.O. Box A55, Minneapolis, MN 55480, (612)370-4632.  Contact person: Paul Schliesman, Administrator.Foundation profile: Established in 1985, the foundation's majorpriority is higher education.  In fiscal 1988, the foundationmade grants totaling $344,085, of which $252,314, or 73%, went toseven institutions of higher education.  Most of the grantrecipients were religiously affiliated schools, and thefoundation also gave significant support to seminaries.  A largeportion of the trust's total funding supports organizationslocated within Minnesota.  At the end of its 1988 fiscal year,the foundation had total assets of just over $5.4 million.Hiawatha Education Foundation, 2001 Thuerer Boulevard, Winona, MN55987, (507) 454-5374.  Contact person: Robert Kierlin, President.Foundation profile: Established in 1987,the foundation gave100% of its 1988 funding to educational organizations.  During 1988,the foundation made grants totaling $109,140, with year-endassets of over $8 million.  Almost all of the funding went toCatholic precollege education, including a grant of $92,277 toWinona Area Catholic Schools.     Michael W. Louis Foundation, 2840 Sheridan Road, Evanston,IL 60201, (312) 256-5150.  Contact person: Orley R. Herron,President.Foundation profile: Established in 1985, the foundationemphasizes giving to educational institutions, primarily inIllinois.  With year-end assets of just $22,162, the foundationmade grants totaling more than $1.7 million in 1988.  Of thisamount, a total of $1.6 million went to a preparatory school, ascholarship foundation, an education college, and a university.The major portion of education funding went to the NationalCollege of Education, Evanston, IL.     Peter C. and Dr. Jeanette P. Reilly Foundation, 3777 BayRoad Drive, Indianapolis, IN 46240, (317) 841-8414.  Contactperson: Peter C. Reilly, Director.Foundation profile: Established in 1985, the foundationemphasizes giving to educational institutions, primarily inIndiana.  With year-end assets of $174,833, the foundation madegrants totaling $93,975 in fiscal 1988.  Of this amount, a totalof $61,025, or 65%, went to education, including grants toseveral Indiana-based universities.     Barre Seid Foundation, 334 W. Wisconsin, Chicago, IL 60614,(312) 337-7689.  Contact person: Barre Seid, President andTreasurer.Foundation profile: Established in 1985, the foundation's majorpriority is education.  In 1988, the foundation made grantstotaling $210,124, of which $155,000, or 74%, went to nineinstitutions of higher education, including a music conservatoryand an art institute.  The bulk of the education funding went toschools located in the Chicago area.  The foundation's 1988year-end assets came to just $2,367.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990COMMUNITY FOUNDATIONS     The Columbus Foundation has released its spring newsletter.Highlights: assets of more than $150 million and distributions of$12.8 million in 1989 were the foundation's highest ever; therecent election of Eldon W. Ward, president of the E.E. WardMoving and Storage Company, as chairman of the foundation'sGoverning Committee; and the receipt in 1989 of nearly $15.2million in contributions.  The foundation's deadlines for itsvarious program areas are as follows: education, November 1990;health, January 1991; social services, February 1991; arts andconservation, April 1991; social services (second round), July1991; and civic affairs, September 1991.  Contact the foundationat 1234 E. Broad Street, Columbus, OH 43205, (614) 251-4000.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     The Funding Information Center, San Antonio, TX, has     The Funding Information Center, San Antonio, TX, hasannounced the publication of the Supplement to the Tenth EditionDirectory of Texas Foundations.  According to the center, Texasfoundations control over $8 billion in assets, and gave away morethan $542 million in grants in 1988.  The Supplement summarizesdata from 1988 or early 1989 tax returns for 1,857 Texasfoundations, including 90 foundations never before listed.  A setincluding the directory and the supplement is available for $100.For more information or to order, contact Mary Elizabeth Webb,Editor, Funding Information Center, 507 Brooklyn, San Antonio, TX78215-1799, (512) 227-4333.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     Florida Funding Publications, Inc., Miami, FL, has released     Florida Funding Publications, Inc., Miami, FL, has releasedThe Complete Guide to Florida Foundations, Third Edition.  Theguide offers a comprehensive look at over 1,500 grant-makingfoundations in Florida.  Cost: $63, plus $4.40 postage andhandling.  For more information, contact Debra Blair Carlton,Publications Manager, Florida Funding Publications, Inc., P.O.Box 561565, Miami, FL 33256, (305) 253-0714.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990     A survey of community foundations located throughout the     A survey of community foundations located throughout theUnited States is available from the Columbus Foundation,Columbus, OH.  The survey lists the foundations' market value,grants paid, and gifts for recent fiscal years.  According to thesurvey, the top five community foundations in terms of recentgrants paid are as follows: Communities Foundation of Texas,Dallas, TX ($44.1 million); New York Community Trust, New York,NY ($42.8 million); Marin Community Foundation, Larkspur, CA ($30million); Cleveland Foundation, Cleveland, OH ($22.3 million);and Chicago Community Trust, Chicago, IL ($22 million).  Contactthe Columbus Foundation at 1234 E. Broad Street, Columbus, OH43205, (614) 251-4000Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Otto Bremer Foundation<<<>>>Otto Bremer Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Otto Bremer Foundation<<<>>>Otto Bremer Foundation<<<$20,000 West Side Citizens Organization, St. Paul, MN, to supportan economic education program for low-income familiesBack to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>El Pomar Foundation<<<>>>El Pomar Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>William and Flora Hewlett Foundation<<<>>>William and Flora Hewlett Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Independence Foundation<<<>>>Independence Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation<<<>>>Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation<<<>>>Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation<<<$90,000 (over two years) Fremont Counseling Center, Wind RiverReservation, Fremont County, WY, to encourage healthy lifechoices among American Indian young people, focusing on alcoholand substance abuse preventionBack to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>W.K. Kellogg Foundation<<<>>>W.K. Kellogg Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>W.K. Kellogg Foundation<<<>>>W.K. Kellogg Foundation<<<$202,000 (over three years) Earthwatch, Watertown, MA, incollaboration with the Michigan Science Teachers Association, forprofessional development scholarships for Michigan elementaryteachers to participate in Earthwatch scientific projectsBack to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Kresge Foundation<<<>>>Kresge Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Kresge Foundation<<<>>>Kresge Foundation<<<$200,000 Asian Neighborhood Design, San Francisco, CA, towardpurchase of a site and construction of a new facilityBack to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation<<<>>>Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation<<<>>>Eugene and Agnes E. Meyer Foundation<<<$25,000 United Seniors Health Cooperative, Washington, DC, forexpansion of health insurance education and counseling servicesto low-income seniorsBack to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Charles Stewart Mott Foundation<<<>>>Charles Stewart Mott Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990>>>Northwest Area Foundation<<<>>>Northwest Area Foundation<<Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990FORD FOUNDATION EXPANDS GRANT MAKING The Ford Foundation's two-year budget for 1990-91 calls fora 13.2% increase in grant making compared to 1988-89, accordingto the foundation. Most giving programs, including urbanpoverty, human rights and social justice, governance and publicpolicy, education and culture, and international affairs, willincrease grant making significantly. In addition, the foundation has sharply increased fundingfor program-related investments (low-interest loans tononprofits) and for its general reserve fund, which thefoundation uses to meet unanticipated needs or respond to programactivities outside its usual categories. The foundation hasslightly decreased funding for its rural poverty and resourcesprogram. Approximately 35% of the Ford Foundation's program budget isallocated for work in selected developing countries. Thefoundation recommends that grant applicants begin by sending ashort letter of inquiry to determine whether the foundation'sinterests permit consideration of a formal proposal. Grant inquiries should be addressed to Barron M. Tenny, VicePresident, Secretary, and General Counsel, Ford Foundation, 320East 43rd Street, New York, NY 10017, (212) 573-5000.Back to Headline List CopyrightFOUNDATION GIVING WATCH via NewsNetJune 1990FORD FOUNDATION PROGRAM BUDGETS, 1988-1991(fiscal years October 1-September 30, in millions of dollars)--------------------------------------------------------- 1988-89 1990-91Major Program Areas: Urban Poverty 82.7 87.2 Rural Poverty and Resources 59.7 56.9 Human Rights and Social Justice 58.7 63.0 Governance and Public Policy 46.5 54.5 Education and Culture 73.5 79.4 International Affairs 41.9 43.3Other Program Allocations* 46.2 61.5Program Related Investments 25.0 30.7Program Support 45.8 53.2General Reserve 50.0 70.0 ----- -----Totals 530.0 599.7* Includes allocations for population activities, special programactivities, and unanticipated needs within each program area.Source: "Current Interests of the Ford Foundation," FordFoundation, Office of Communications.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-17IA060-000326-B019-98http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb46.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020240 text/html 62076HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:00:47 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:44 GMTContent-length: 61887Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb46.html Sample Issue Copyright INDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPECIAL SECTION: TECNOLOGY OUTLOOK/1996 (40 words) ELECTRONICS (465 words) INTSTRUMENTS (406 words) SEPARATIONS (486 words) TELECOMMUNICATIONS (511 words) MEMBRANES (421 words) PLASTICS (276 words) BIOTECHNOLOGY (525 words) CERAMICS (322 words) ECONOMIC TRENDS Sewing Up 1995 Figures, Projecting into 1996 (315 words) MNCs to Change Basic Structure (373 words) Commerce Department Reduces Export Controls (336 words) HEALTHCARE Managed Care Is Really Here (294 words) Rapid Change In Device Market (151 words) CHEMICALS Fluorine Compounds Surge Past Problems (329 words) Carbon Nitride: A Designer Abrasive (368 words) COMPUTERS Home Office Workers Are a Dynamic Market (382 words) 'Ghost Sites' On The World Wide Web (301 words) Virtual Reality Is No Illusion (431 words) EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES Mid-IR Laser Likes it Warm (377 words) Display Panels Made from Plastic Wrap (366 words) Interactive Holography Will Be Evaluated (228 words) Low Temperature Growth Method (310 words) Building a New Flat Panel Video Screen (349 words) CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SPECIAL SECTION: TECNOLOGY OUTLOOK/1996BCC's technology/marketing analysts spend their time tracking thetrends in their areas of expertise. For this issue, IIT  askedthese specialists to pinpoint the key changes and take a look aheadin a number of key technologies. Their analyses follow.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ELECTRONICSLook for a Slowdownin the Coming YearAccording to the Semiconductor Industry Assn.s preliminarynumbers, the worldwide semiconductor device markets grew anunprecedented 43.7% to well over $145 billion in 1995, afterpredicting a growth rate of less than 15%.  The question of whethermarket growth of this magnitude can be sustained at the 1995 levelor not remains.  In short, our reply is, no.  A look at themarkets driving forces in 1995 will fill in the blanks.First, dynamic random access memory (DRAM) devices accounted fornearly 30% of the total market, up from 17% as recently as 1993.The major factor this past year, of course, was the release ofWindows 95 PC operating (OS) system, and its requirement of up to16 megabytes of RAM for smooth operation.  Since 1993, the influxof graphics-intensive software had pushed memory requirements tothe 8 megabyte range, where it remains for applications of thistype.  No new wunderkind software applications or OSs are on thehorizon to push RAM requirements up further.  Look for a levelingof DRAM demand in particular to soften the market somewhat.This is not to say the market will not experience healthy growth.While the PC market, still the main silicon device driver, may havematured in North America, other areas in the world are seeing PCsales growth in the 20% per year range.  However, hardwarerequirements have stabilized for the time being.  We see thesemiconductor market approaching $180 billion in 1996, which is anincrease of just over 23%.  Major beneficiaries of the overallmarket are manufacturing equipment suppliers, who will ride forfree in 1996, with many companies reporting up to nine-monthbacklogs in orders.A market for which we see little potential is that for cheap, dumbPC terminals under development for World Wide Web access.  Underthe concept, these machines would lack the standard hard drive,floppy disks, and extensive software systems, but would stillrequire RAM and processor power.Anyone who has cruised the Web will tell you that moving from site-to-site is a tedious process, and speed is of the essence.  Inaddition, online time is money, and for any system designed tocruise the Web to be successful, it must provide the processingpower and memory needed to smoothly handle the graphics-intensiveWeb.  At current prices, a powerful, 8 megabyte machine cannot bebuilt and sold with the hoped-for price tag of $500.  A systembuilt for more than that price will collect dust on warehouseshelves (right alongside PDAs)![Marc Favereau is editor of BCCs Electronic Materials TechnologyNews. He also researches and manages strategic and marketingstudies on the electronics industry, specializing in computerelectronics, electronics packaging, and materials.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INTSTRUMENTSThe Analytical IndustrySharpens Its FocusFor instrument makers, 1995 was a year of recovery from poorperformance during 1993 and part of 1994.  A number of categorieshave improved appreciably due to increased demand in segments ofindustrial process applications and biomedical research.Environmental applications are flat to shrinking, so a number ofsuppliers are developing new strategies to reach other markets.Instrument makers continue to find more ways to improve theirmanufacturing methods by reducing the number of parts, simplifyingassembly steps and implementing more stringent testing of keycomponents.  The net result, in some cases, is a product that ismore reliable, and features more capabilities, while actuallycosting less.More importantly though, for future sales, a growing range ofsophisticated technologies are being adapted to variousinstrumentation.  New detectors, more powerful computers, improvedmethods of analysis, new reagents and other factors are pushingmany instruments to new levels of performance.  Also, other typesof hybrid instrumentation are finding new market niches and arehelping to expand the suppliers product lines.Examples of new types of instrumentations that may find significantmarkets in the future are the Smart Nose instruments, field-flowfractionation (FFF),  and newly configured ion mobilityspectrometers.  Also, some product segments that were thought to betechnologically mature are showing surprising new innovations thatare reinvigorating those instrument segments.BCC report G-181 The New Generation of Analytical Instruments, isan upcoming report that surveys the 1995 analytical instrumentmarket, as well as international markets and projects units andsales through 2005 for over 30 instruments.The BCC estimate of the 1995 U.S. market for analyticalinstruments, as defined by the Dept. of Commerce, was approximately$5.1-$5.8 billion in shipments.  Related measuring instrumentswould bring the figure closer to $6.5-$7.5 billion .  ProjectedU.S. sales growth is projected to be approximately 5-7% through2005.It  is worth noting that of those shipments, $1.2-1.4 billion wasjust in parts, components and accessories.  While the overallmarket appears to have grown in the U.S. , the parts segment hasstayed flat.  For 1995, pending further data, the estimated valueof exports of analytical instruments from the U.S. was an estimated$1.90-$2.1 billion, and imports were an estimated $1.2-$1.3billion.[Cort Wrotnowski has managed and conducted strategic and marketingresearch in biotechnology with specific expertise in specializedproduct lines, new market feasibility, scale-up economics, and costanalyses.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SEPARATIONSAdvances Point toSteady GrowthThe various ways of separating materials from mixtures are acritical but little known part of industrial production.  Frompharmaceuticals to food and even waste treatment, producers rely onthese rapidly developing technologies. These techniques are alsokey to research and analysis.Lately, we are seeing increased interest in magnetic separations,both on the research front and by commercial concerns.  Developingtechnologies will advance this high tech market. Los AlamosNational Lab (Los Alamos, NM 87545) researchers are using high-gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) to extract slightly magneticradioactive contaminants from soil or water.  The process primaryadvantage is the lack of secondary waste produced.In the pharmaceutical industry, PerSeptive Diagnostics (500 OldConnecticut Path, Framingham, MA 10701; Tel: 617/499-1433) havesimplified the process of isolating GAC repeats using BioMagStreptavidin and magnetic agarose.  While scientists report the useof magnetic particles specifically for the isolation of CAGrepeats, in principle, the same techniques could be used to isolateany gene for which a biotinylated PNA probe could be synthesized.Diagnostic test maker, Ohmicron Environmental Diagnostics Inc. (375Pheasant Run, Newtown, PA 18940; Tel: 800/544-8881), hascommercialized two new magnetic particle-based RaPID Assayimmunoassay test kits-cyclodienes and metribuzin.Older processes have also advanced. Researchers continue to testthe boundary of capillary electrophoresis (CE) applications.Recently, considerable attention has been focused on a highlypromising technique for metal ion analysis.  Andrei Timerbaev hasbeen developing a number of migration models based on a generallyvalid equation for electrophoretic mobility as a function of chargedensity.  Two major obstacles affecting CE are electroendosmoticflow (EOF) and sample adsorption onto the capillary wall.Researchers at the University of Uppsala (Dept. of Biochemistry,Uppsala, Sweden) have developed a method of coating the capillariesthat eliminates both problems for a considerable length of time.Beckman Instruments (2500 Harbor Blvd., Fullerton, CA 92634; Tel:800/742-2345)  Chia-Hui Shieh has recently patented coatedcapillary columns and a method for their use.Supercritical fluids technology has also expanded its applicationshorizons.  Two separate studies recently compared supercriticalfluid extraction (SFE) with liquid extraction as methods forremoving labile vitamins from creams, lotions, and tablets.  As aresult of their work, the researchers recommended SFE as a methodfor quality-control analysis of pharmaceutical tablets.Supercritical carbon dioxide is now being used as a method torecover uranium and plutonium from nuclear wastes and spent fuels.And Los Alamos National Lab (Chemical Science and Technology Div.,Los Alamos, NM 87545) has used supercritical CO2 as a method ofprecision cleaning that reduces hazardous waste.  The primaryadvantage of this technique is the elimination of chlorocarbons andchlorofluorocarbons as solvents.[Karen Lindsey is editor of BCCs Membrane Technology Reviews,Waste Treatment Technology News and High Tech Separationsnewsletters.  She has also authored market research reportsanalyzing specialty and commodity chemicals and chemicalprocesses.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TELECOMMUNICATIONSWatch the FiberOptic MarketMarket growth for fiber optic materials will increase at a rapidpace, but not as fast in some segments as many industry sourcespredicted a few years ago, says a new BCC business opportunityreport, Fiber Optic Materials.  The predicted market surge forfiber optic materials in interexchange, or long distance carrierapplications and in networks involving a single building or a groupof buildings continues unabated.  On the other hand, theuncertainly now creeping into the market revolves around the speedwith which the local exchange carriers (LECs) will upgrade theirresidential networks.Fiber optic materials represent much of the physical structureneeded for existing telecommunications systems, as well as for thevast networks envisioned for installation during the remainder ofthis decade and the 21st century. Telecommunications systemscapable of providing voice, data, text, and video to a variety ofusers will require large increases in the ability to transmit anenormous number of signals over both long and short distances.Technical advances in erbium-doped amplifiers, plastic opticalfiber (POF), and asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) technologies, toname only a few, are spurring the deployment of fiber opticnetworks.Two segments of the fiber optic material market, fiber from localexchanges to the curb and fiber from the curb to the home, were thesubject of very (some would say wildly) optimistic growth estimatesas recently as 1994.  Now many industry sources believe that forthe next 5-10 years, in most cases, fiber optic service will end atthe neighborhood level.There are several regions for the new uncertainty in these marketsegments.  First, the expected merging of and blurring of thedistinct lines between regional telephone companies and cabletelevision operators is not occurring nearly as fast as previouslypredicted.  Second, although legislation opening up competition inlocal communications markets is certain, the pace of itsimplementation may be slower than previously thought.  Finally,despite huge drops in the cost of fiber optic network components,the rush to replace copper and coaxial cable in these applicationshas been slower than forecast.The BCC Fiber Optic Materials report presents a detailed view ofworld market size, growth, and trends for this industry.  The majorproduct lines and applications are identified, and the market sizefor each product line and application is estimated for the nextfive years.  Significant global technological trends anddevelopments in materials and applications are identified andanalyzed, and the structure of the industry is addressed.  Profilesof the major fiber optic materials suppliers are provided.This BCC report provides in-depth information and technologicalevaluations for decision making by those involved in the supply offiber optic materials to the telecommunications industry.  Thisstudy can assist users in strategic planning, acquisition analysis,technology analysis, commercial development of new products, andanalysis of competitors strategies, strengths, weaknesses,pricing, market share, and profitability.[Richard Hilton is completing the new Fiber Optic Materials report.Hilton also edits Optical Materials And Engineering News, a monthlyBCC newsletter.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MEMBRANESA Technology ThatIs Coming of Age1996 is expected to see membrane based technologies increasinglyincorporated into large scale industrial processes.  Progress isexpected to continue in an evolutionary mode with newer membranesand devices overcoming earlier shortcomings such as flux, fouling,and scalability. Some of the new concepts up for trial during theyear might include contained liquid membranes, membrane basedstripping, extraction and adsorption. Hybrid process will bring inmembrane separations to augment what cannot be attainedeconomically by either process on a stand alone basis.Ultrafiltration (UF) is up for a greater variety of materials tohelp out the reliable polysulfone. Zirconia on alumina or someother type of inorganic may find wider acceptance. PVDF andmodified PANs can find their niche. Crossflow operational modes forUF and MF (microfiltration) will increasingly be the norm.Pervaporation (PV) will continue its commercial acceptance, but itis a hard sell.  Potential users do not know what this versatilemoney maker can really do for them. Removal of organics from watervia hydrophobic silicone membranes on a microporous substrate inthe spiral wound configuration is being commercialized.  Hollowfiber units with transverse feed flow have been developed. Yet tobe commercialized is the Exxon process to separatearomatics/saturates in the same boiling range into an aromatics-lean retentate for diesel and an aromatics-rich permeate for highoctane gasoline using a polyimide/polyadipate copolymer membrane.Membrane processes that remove VOCs from air or nitrogen should bebetter accepted.  Cation exchange membranes for continuousdeionization should find wider use in deionized water production.Condensation has been integrated with vapor permeation for VOCremoval and additional hybrids such as cryo-membrane permeation,membrane-PSA, and cryogenic-membrane-PSA have been patented. Arelatively new commercial development is the membrane phasecontactor for use in extraction, absorption, and stripping. Anexample of the absorption application of the membrane phasecontactor is used in the beverage industry to add carbon dioxide toaqueous solutions for carbonation.Non-separating functions of membranes are expected to advance intotal usage.  Artificial skin, controlled release applications,biomemitic devices, and breathable fabrics are all examples. Bagfilters still dominate the particulate/air entrapment market, butlow cost membranes could take market share.  An entire market areacould open up if a really low cost membrane material for disposablediapers could be produced.[Anna Crull has 25 years consulting experience in the membrane andseparations industry. She is managing director of Membrane &Separation Technology News and High Tech Separation News.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PLASTICSMarket Turns tothe Pacific RimThe plastics industry has been able to absorb some overcapacitybecause of increased demand.  However, the spectre of overcapacitystill plagues the industry for many commodity resins because ofrapid expansion in capacities in Pacific Rim countries.Continuance of this scenario will result in lower prices, andoperating rates along with reduced profits.Opportunities for plastics consumption are strong in Asia, Africa,and the Mideast, with Eastern Europe still lagging behind theglobal pace.  However, only the Asian market is of significantvolume.Main driving forces for plastics consumption still reside withtraditional markets led by automotive, consumer products, andelectrical/electronic. In addition to new polymerization advancescharacterized by metallocene technologies, other aspects stillbeing pursued include alloying/blending, and use of reinforcementsto enhance existing properties.Metallocene-based resins have expanded from polyethylene topolypropylene with polystyrene versions expected in a year or two.The high cost of producing metallocene resins will probably beminimized by converting existing reactors (retrofitting).  Inaddition, it is expected that metallocene catalysts will be used inconjunction with traditional catalysts combining advantages ofboth.Foamed resins have been at the center of the environmental scenewith replacements of CFCs by HCFCs as blowing agents.  Theworldwide agreement to ban CFCs (Montreal Protocol) has been movedup to the year 2000.  Recycled plastic markets are still dominatedby PET bottles and HDPE.  Packaging will remain the largest marketfor recycled resins for the next few years.[Mel Schlechter is the editor of Medical Materials Update and hasover 30 years in the chemical industry, and specialized in plasticsmarket research.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BIOTECHNOLOGYStill Survivalof the FittestSeeing into the future can be a bit tricky.  We're reminded of theConey Island fortune teller who predicted we'd soon take a journeyover water.  The next day it rained and in the course of ourperegrinations we stepped over a puddle, fulfilling the prophecy.Predicting this year's unfolding of biotechnology events issomething like that Coney Island experience: if they're generalenough, predictions surely will come to pass, like saying somebiotechnology companies in 1996 will probably succeed while otherswill probably have to pack it in. Some products in clinical trialswill pass, while others will fail.But which ones?  If that could be known ahead of time, one couldmake a fortune.  Some people of course believe that test tubeexperiments and preclinical studies with animal models can foretellthe future, can tell how the candidate drugs will behave in humans.And a lot of bets are placed on such forecasts.One of the big events of the year just past is the recognition thatsome biotechnology efforts may fail, just as surely as some willsucceed. We may not know precisely which category any particularventure may fall into, but just the mere recognition that failuremay occur represents a far cry from biotechnology's earlier, headydays of overconfidence. Building in plans for the unexpected"impossibilities" provides companies with mechanisms in place tolet them cope with uncertainty, and survive.Forecasting is not all speculation, of course, although it can bewishful thinking.  If a product passes its trials, and if itreceives regulatory approval, and if  it captures an assumedpercentage share of its available market, then a reasonableforecast of its possible sales can be made and the manufacturingcapacity to fulfill that demand can be rationally planned.  The"trick" lies in being as objective (at least with oneself) inmaking business forecasts as in designing laboratory experiments.Some forecasting is done by extrapolating from the past andpresent, in light of unfolding forces for change. On this basis,predicting biotechnology events in 1996 is made a little easier byconsidering several discernible trends.    Virtualization of the pharmaceutical industry will accelerate.Big pharma surrounds itself with drug discovery firms to fulfillits research needs, while biotechnology companies surroundthemselves with contract manufacturers. It's cheaper and lesscommittal than hiring in these functions. Marketing may become thenext function to be outsourced.    Differentiation of the biotechnology industry will become moretransparent. Companies divide into those seeking to commercializebiomolecules and those seeking to commercialize chemical moleculesacting on biological targets. They also divide into discoverers ofcandidate targets for therapeutic intervention and developers ofactual drug candidates.    The struggle to survive will become more intense. Not only isit getting harder to raise money to sustain research, in view ofcoming cuts in the federal budget, but biotechnology companies willincreasingly be judged on their ability to actually deliverproducts for sale.[Philip Rotheim has published numerous reports and is also theeditor of BCC newsletters Applied Genetic News and StereochemicalTechnology News.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CERAMICSLess Hype--andSome Real GrowthOne important aspect of the U.S. advanced ceramics industry now isthat the Ceramics Fever of the early and mid-1980s has gone anda new realization has come among the suppliers of advanced ceramiccomponents. One good example was the hype over ceramic engines,thought to be a reality for the 1990s with the component supplierscompeting for shares of a market which failed to materialize.Another setback to the U.S. advanced ceramics industry has been thedrastic cuts in U.S. military programs.  A good example of this isthe militarys earlier plan to use ceramic armor on land-basedvehicles by the late 1980s.  This has been postponed to a laterdate and in some cases abandoned altogether.BCC has been studying the various advanced ceramics market segmentsfor the last 10 years.  The recession in the early 1990s hadseverely affected certain segments of the advanced ceramicsindustry such as structural ceramics and in a limited way, theceramic coating business.  Electronic ceramics has not been muchaffected by the last fact. The electronics segment has been growingat a faster rate than our own earlier forecast in 1990 and 1992.In a recent study to be published in March 1996 (DCD96, CompleteGuide to the U.S. Advanced Ceramics Industry), BCC has attempted toanalyze the overall market potential in the U.S.  BCC has furtherestimated the size of the 1995 and future market potential for thevarious advanced ceramics market segments in the U.S.  The totalvalue of the U.S. advanced ceramic components market for 1995 isestimated to be $5.5 billion.  This will increase to $8.7 billionby the year 2000 with a growth rate of 9.5% from 1995 to 2000.[Thomas Abraham has published reports on new ceramics, industrialdiamonds and diamond films and advanced materials..  He is also theeditor of BCC newsletter High Tech Ceramics News.]Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Sewing Up 1995 Figures,Projecting into 1996Economists participating in the Blue Chip survey of the FederalReserve Bank of Cleveland, anticipate a 2.4% rate of real economicgrowth in 4th quarter 1995--well below last quarters 4.2% advance.The recent flatness in industrial production and hours worked seemsconsistent with this slowdown.  For all of 1995, the Blue Chippanel foresees a growth rate of approximately 3.2%.  Economistsestimate the nations long-term growth potential at roughly 2.5%per year.A boom in business fixed investment has accompanied the currentbusiness expansion, but curiously, the underlying factors have notignited residential construction.  Despite some improvement in the3rd quarter of 1995, new home construction has been a relativelyweak component of GDP this year.  Real residential investment fell1.4% in the four quarters ending in quarter three of 1995.  Withsingle-unit housing starts remaining generally weak, residentialconstruction will most likely stay soft.  Housing starts declined1.7% in October, the second consecutive monthly drop.An interesting note, although probably nothing that will takeshape, is that the latest inflation indicators are showingsurprising volatility.  After a four-month gain of only 1.8%, theConsumer Price Index (CPI) accelerated to a 4.0% annualized rate inOctober.The median CPE--a measure of core inflation--slowed to 3.3%,hovering between its year-to-date and five-year rates.Taking a longer perspective, the 12-month change in the CPI and themedian CPI rose to 2.7% and 3.3%, respectively.  Both are higherthan 1994 rates, but are still within or below the central tendencyrange projected by the Federal Open Market Committee last July.The Blue Chip forecast paints a far more favorable picture ofexpected inflation.  The November 10 projection shows significantimprovement over forecasts made at the beginning of the year.  InJanuary, over 57% of economists were predicting that inflationwould reach 3.5% of more.  In November, that share fell to lessthan 5%.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MNCs to ChangeBasic StructureThe National Assn. of Business Economists (1233 20th St. NW, Suite505, Washington, DC 20036; Tel: 202/463-6223), forecastsinternational trade as a source of growth for 1996.  Net exportsshould average $116.4 billion, an improvement of $7.5 billion over1995.The largest consumer markets in the world--China, India, and themany countries that comprise the ex-Soviet Union--are in a state offundamental transition, and are potentially very lucrative markets.China, for example, is gradually letting other countries into itsmarkets.  Chinas electronics market has experienced an over 20%average annual growth rate during the 1990s, and is expected toreach $40 billion in semiconductor sales in 1996.  And the marketis far from mature.  Mexico is another tantalizing market,especially for U.S. companies to explore, provided CEOs can stomachthe dips, twists and turns that the Mexican market endures.As the world becomes a truly global marketplace, more risk is goinghand-in-hand with more opportunity.  Multinational corporations(MNCs) and companies looking to do business in foreign countrieswill need to make a switch in their organizations. One way tobetter position the organization is instead of just happening tohave expatriates in various countries around the world, companieswill start reorganizing their management structure to create aculture of international-savvy managers who will help in gettingthe most out of the outstanding economic opportunities that arepresenting themselves in foreign countries. This will make theorganization more flexible, with better understanding and abilityto handle the foreign markets.In the next year, MNCs will probably start to undertake changes inorganization.  After assessing opportunities around the world, andtaking into account technologies such as video conferencing, a flatorganizational structure will take hold. There will be switches toseveral headquarters, instead of one central one in the dominantcountry.  Each region that is economically important will receivean important group of professionals from the headquarters.In the world we will soon see, top management all from the samecountry will be a weakness of a MNC.  Managements understanding ofthe culture in a foreign market by persons either from or veryfamiliar with the country will prove to be the difference betweenthe most successful MNCs and the also-rans.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Commerce DepartmentReduces Export ControlsAction by the Commerce Department to reduce export controls thatcreate obstacles such as licensing burdens and delays for U.S.semiconductor companies drew nothing but praise from theSemiconductor Industry Association (181 Metro Drive, Suite 450, SanJose, CA 95110; Tel: 408/436-6600, Fax: 408/436-6646).  The newregulation, which went into effect Dec. 20, liberalizes exportcontrols on certain semiconductor devices shipped to China, therepublics of the former Soviet Union, and certain otherdestinations for civilian end uses.In a statement released to coincide with the start of the newpolicy, SIA President Thomas W. Armstrong said, "This modernizationof export controls on semiconductors will greatly reduce needlessand costly licensing delays and burdensome paperwork.  Thesereductions will lead to further export opportunities in areas withmajor growth potential over the next decade."The SIA notes that commercial semiconductors represent one of theleast controllable and most widely available high-technologyproducts in the world today.  Further maintenance of the old exportcontrols would have damaged U.S. industry without making anymaterial contribution to U.S. security.Armstrong added, "The Commerce Department has made substantialprogress in the reduction of outmoded export licensingrequirements.  Continuation of this export liberalization processto reflect the end of the Cold war will only stimulate businessopportunities and job creation."In a related development, SIA also reported that the foreign sharein the Japan market for semiconductors rose more than 3% in thethird quarter to 26.2%.  Though no specific figures regarding theU.S. share of the increase were available, Armstrong touted thecompetitiveness of domestic chip makers as well as the U.S.-Japanagreement as major factors.  SIA spokesman Jeff Weir said thatindications pointed to a substantial U.S. share in the increase.Armstrong also added that strong relationships between the U.S.and Japanese industries are being built, which would not have beenpossible without the agreement.  Weir emphasized the SIAs supportfor renewal of the pact, due this year, which is meeting someresistance in Japan.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Managed CareIs Really HereHealthcare delivery in the U.S. and in most countries throughoutthe world will experience significant change in 1996. The challengeof  boards, management and physicians, says Albert W. Herman,partner in charge of the Healthcare Services Group of globalaccounting, tax and advisory firm Arthur Andersen LLP, will be toprovide the right care, at the right time, in the right amount, inthe right way and be able to prove it.Market-based changes continue to challenge physicians, executivesand boards of directors in the healthcare industry.  Mergers,alliances and affiliations among and between providers willcontinue unabated in 1996, and managed care will continue itsmarket penetration across the country, according to Herman.Based on the latest data available, about 18% of the total U.S.population is enrolled in some type of managed care arrangement;about 9% of all Medicare beneficiaries are in a managed care plan,and about 23% of all Medicaid enrollees are in managed care aswell.  These percentages all will show marked increases in 1996.At the same time, the debate and decisions from Capitol Hill, theWhite House, and the state capitals will continue to influenceprovider decision-making as will the initiatives and investigationspursued by regulators such as the Dept. of Justice, InspectorGeneral, FBI, IRS, and the SEC.The managed care market will mature as employers encourage workersto switch to managed care, and as leading managed care groups andmedical groups begin to consolidate.  The momentum for directcontracting between the payer and the care provider will grow in1996, as will enrollee choice of their healthcare providers.Eventually, managed care risk will shift to integrated deliverysystems, purchasers will contract with these systems forcomprehensive services, and capitation will prevail.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Rapid Change InDevice MarketDaphne Allen, assistant editor of Medical Device & DiagnosticIndustry, has analyzed the growth in the number of registeredmedical device manufacturers in the U.S.  Data were obtained fromthe FDAs Division of Small Manufacturers Assistance, which is apart of the Center for Devices and Radiological Health.During the period between August 1994 and August 1995, the FDArecorded an increase of 1,737 registered medical device companies.Overall, however, the total number of medical device establishmentshas declined by 2%.  In addition to companies who leave the deviceindustry, the decline may be attributed to mergers, acquisitions,consolidation of sites, and business failures.The study indicated that six states provide the homes of nearly 47%of the registered manufacturers.  California led the pack with1,920 companies; New York, Illinois, Massachusetts, Florida, andTexas are also important locations for manufacturers.  The analysiswas published in Volume 17, No. 10Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Fluorine CompoundsSurge Past ProblemsFluorine compounds are all around us and we use them every day,despite the fact that most people do not know them as such."Performance chemicals" can be defined as those which do a specificjob, based on their physical and/or chemical properties, that otherproducts and materials do not do as well.As a market for potential growth, total sales for performancefluorine and chemical polymers should grow from a market value of$3.8 billion in 1994 to reach $4.1 billion by 1999, an averageannual growth rate (AAGR) of 1.8%.Chlorofluorocarbons are the largest segment of the total market aswell as the problem that needs to be untangled for the entiremarket to sustain growth, but other segments of the fluorine andchemical polymers market will see respectable growth at least up tothe next century.Aromatics, a segment of organic fluorochemicals used primarily forchemical processing, have a 1994 market value of $6 million,forecasted to grow to $7 million by 1999, resulting in an AAGR of5.9%Inorganic fluorochemicals perform many diverse uses, ranging fromfluorides for water treatment and toothpaste, to the large volumehydrogen fluoride and expensive, highly pure electronic etchants.The 1994 market value for all inorganics was $567 million,projected to reach $647 million by 1999, resulting in a 2.7% AAGR.Fluoropolymers consist of polymer resins such as PTFE and PVDF,fluoroelastomers, and low molecular weight polymers used assurfactants, functional fluids, textile finishing chemicals toimpart water and oil repellency, and as chemical intermediates.The 1994 market value for fluoropolymers is $1.35 billion and willbe $1.76 billion by 1999, reaching a 5.4% AAGR.Business Communications Co., Inc. has recently published a studytitled Performance Fluorine and Chemical Polymers: FutureProspects. Fluorine and Polymer Market($ million)                               1994      1999       AAGR%                                                    1994-1999Aromatics                      6         7          5.9Inorganics                     567       647        2.7Fluoropolymers                 1,352     1,761      5.4Source: BCC estimatesBack to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Carbon Nitride: ADesigner AbrasiveScientists at the Carnegie Institution (Washington, DC) have useda combination of state-of-the-art physics, supercomputers, andinsight gained from the study of minerals to predict the firstfeasibly synthesizable material that is more incompressible thandiamond. Their calculations show that this material, a cubic formof carbon nitride, C3N4, should be significantly less compressiblethan diamond at room conditions.Inasmuch as low compressibility is correlated with hardness, it ishighly possible that the new material could be harder than diamondand therefore of significant technological use as a superabrasivematerial and for wear-resistant coatings.These results, reported in the January 5 issue of Science , restupon state-of-the-art quantum-mechanical calculations. The levelsof speed and accuracy now attainable in such calculations enableinvestigators to design materials by doing experiments on thecomputer instead of in the laboratory. Scientists are thusbeginning to rationally design useful materials in a more efficientmanner than by the traditional "shake-and-bake" methodology offinding new materials.The investigators in the new work are David Teter and RussellHemley, both serving at Carnegie's Geophysical Lab and Center forHigh Pressure Research. Teter and Hemley's work grew fromwidespread interest in the possibility of finding new lowcompressibility materials. Various forms of carbon nitrides hadbeen proposed as possible superhard materials potentially exceedingdiamond in hardness. Teter and Hemley identified several favorablecandidate C3N4 prototype forms and calculated their energetics,structures and physical properties. They determined the cubic-C3N4form to be the most incompressible.Their calculations indicate that the cubic- C3N4 material can besynthesized at pressures and temperatures now attainable in thelaboratory. (The material would be formed at high pressure andtemperature, and then quenched stably to ambient conditions.)Scientists at the Carnegie institution and elsewhere are alreadyworking to accomplish this, employing insights gained from thetheoretical work now reported. Conceivably, the material caneventually be synthesized at an industrial scale using technologysimilar to that now used to synthesize industrial diamond.Teter and Hemley write that most experimental studies of carbonnitrides have been carried out at ambient or low-pressureconditions; their results indicate the importance of high-pressuresynthesis in the search for new carbon nitrides.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Home Office WorkersAre a Dynamic MarketHome offices have been in existence for years, from the employeeswho are scheduled to work at home, to the after hours workers, andincluding the self-employed home office worker.   Only recently,though, have the home office workers become in vogue, their needsjust beginning to be addressed by office equipment manufacturers.According to a new report from Business Communications Co., Inc.,home office workers are a market segment with purchasing powerneeding computers, peripherals, software,  office products andancillary services.In report G-189 The Home Office: Markets for Equipment, Suppliesand Services, despite marginal growth in the overall workforce bythe year 2000, the home office segment will expand from 45.7million individuals in 1995 to 60.9 million workers by 2000,resulting in an average annual growth rate (AAGR) of 5.9%.Computers are an essential part of many home offices.  In 1995,home office workers purchased over $13 billion worth of all typesof computers. The market is expected to grow to nearly $30 billionby the year 2000,  reaching a 17.5% AAGR.It is up to the manufacturers to recognize potential specializedequipment to target this consumer group. Fully configured products,such as computers or some peripherals, that can be accommodatedwithin smaller spaces would be the first logical product niche, asthe typical home office is in the basement or in the corner of theliving room, or may be in a spare bedroom.The peripheral market segment for the home office includesprinters, software, modems, ISDN, email,  and related technologiesand remote access.  In 1995, the peripheral market for home officeswas over $42 billion.  By the year 2000, the forecast for theperipheral market is for it to reach over $70 billion, resulting inan AAGR of 10.8%.The entire home office consumer purchases in 1995 was over $79billion worth of equipment for their office environment.  The 2000projection for this market is for the home office consumer to spendover $132 billion, reaching a 10.7% AAGR.Home Office Consumer Market(($ billion)                               1994      1995       2000 AAGR%                               1995-2000Total peripherals value         40.2     42.2        70.3     10.8Total computer value            10.0     13.2        29.5     17.5Total value of the homeoffice consumer segment        72.5      79.5       132.3     10.7Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996'Ghost Sites' On TheWorld Wide WebInternational Data Corp. (IDC, Five Speen St., Framingham, MA01701) has predicted 1996 to be a year of disappointment asinvestors and corporations suffer through the discouragingly slowdevelopment of a significant consumer base. By the end of the year,IDC predicts 20% of the Fortune 500 companies that have commercialWeb sites will close or stop maintaining them, resulting in ghostsites. The leading online information service providers will derivemore than one-half of their revenue from providing access to theWeb by mid-1997.IDC predicts that "In 1996 ... the Internet/World Wide Webphenomenon will shift from today's 'intoxication' stage to a'hangover' stage. The high-flying Internet suppliers will havedisappointing financial results, while technical capabilities ofthe Internet are stretched to the breaking point." Although IDCpredicts the overall growth in online subscribers will continue tobe very strong, they expect 1996 to show a high turnover rate asusers disappointed by the content on the Web cancel their onlinesubscriptions.But, they also predict that during the next five years, the numberof online users will rise to more than 200 million, and by 2010, itwill exceed 1 billion. Industry revenues will jump from $500billion to more than $2.5 trillion by 2010, and corporate spendingwill rise from 2 to 2.5% of revenues to more than 5%. In addition,IDC believes online commerce volume will hit $150 billion or moreby the year 2000 and more than $1 trillion by 2010.A full copy of IDC's 1996 predictions can be found on IDC's homepage. The address is http://www.idcresearch.com. Interested partiesare welcome to share views and insights with Frank Gens, senior VPof research at IDC, via email at fgens@idcresearch.com. For moreinformation, contact Hillary DeMello (Tel: 508/935-4282, email:hdemello@idcresearch.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Virtual RealityIs No IllusionVirtual reality (VR) has been identified as one of the 10 mostpromising technologies currently under development.  This newtechnology brings upon itself many problems, including the effectscience fiction has had on the perception of VR technology as wellas difficulties in defining the technology.  Nonetheless, thereremains a class of technology that can confidently be defined as"virtual reality" and analyzed like any other emerging high techindustry.  This technology is currently used on a routine basis ina number of markets, and has the potential to enter many more.At the end of 1995, over 300 companies will sell approximately $255million worth of VR products and services.  By 2000, the VRindustry will be posting annual sales of over $1 billion andreaching an annual average growth rate (AAGR) of 33%.  Althoughabout half of the 2000 market will go for home- and site- basedentertainment, VR products will be used by all facets of society,including commercial/industrial, the government, military, anduniversity and secondary schools.A comprehensive document from Business Communications Co., Inc.entitled The Virtual Reality Business, reports that theinstructional and developmental market for VR is expected to growfrom a $95 million 1995 market figure to $355 million by 2000,resulting in an AAGR of 31%.  This figure includes VR technologythat will be present in technical/engineering colleges anduniversities, and the "developmental" VR includes spending onadvanced, but as yet non-commercial applications, along with purescience and research systems not included in the other categories.Applications of design and development VR market are inengineering, architecture and chemical design and development.This market will grow from a 1995 market value of $30 million, to$150 million by 2000, reaching an AAGR of 40%.Entertainment uses account for the largest VR market value, and areexpected to continue growing at a 35% AAGR to the year 2000.  Amass-produced single-user entertainment VR system will be thedriving force behind the growth of this market growth, from a 1995value of $110 million to $500 million by 2000.Medical treatment VR market will also sustain growth.  The 1995market value of $20 million is projected to reach $50 million by2000, reaching a 20% AAGR.The Market for Virtual Reality($ million)                                  1994      1995  2000     AAGR%                                                           1995-2000Instructional & Developmental     70        95     355     31Design & Development VR            25       30     150      40Entertainment VR                   60       110     500    35Medical Treatment VR              10        20     50      20Total                             165        255           1055  33Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Mid-IR LaserLikes it WarmA team of scientists from the Naval Research Laboratory and theUniversity of Houston Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center (SVEC) hasdeveloped a mid-infrared solid-state laser that operates at nearroom temperature.According to Shin-Shem Steven Pei, SVEC's associate director forresearch (Tel: 713/ 743-3621, E-mail: spei@uh.edu), lasing wasobserved at temperatures up to 285K. "This is by far the highestoperating temperature for an interband transition laser at thiswavelength," he explained. "We now have a device that works with acompact thermoelectric cooler instead of a unwieldy cryogenicsystem, and room-temperature operation is just around the corner."The new laser is an optically-pumped InAs/GaInSb/AlInSb type-IIquantum-well structure producing light at a wavelength of 4microns. The device was fabricated from materials produced by SVECand then tested at the NRL. The NRL/SVEC team is now optimizing thematerial growth and device design for diode lasers that can producesufficient power at 3 to 5 microns without cooling. Currently, SVECscientists are also testing a more advanced quantum-cascade laserdesign, which should produce higher-intensity light with lesselectric current while emitting within either of two atmospherictransmission windows of 3 to 5 microns and 8 to 12 microns.Lasers emitting in these windows have many important industrial,medical, and military applications, such as IR radar for vehicleand air traffic control, medical diagnosis, eye-safe covertillumination for night vision, free-space communications, and IRcountermeasures.  Further, since many gases absorb strongly inthese windows, these lasers are ideal for remote chemical sensing.This large class of applications includes pollution and greenhouse-gas monitoring, drug and explosives detection, chemical processcontrol, and leak detection.  The projected market for these IRsystems will approach $1.5 billion by 2001 if efficient and compactIR sources are available.The semiconductor lasers used in most consumer devices emit at muchshorter wavelengths. Long-distance telephone networks use 1.3 and1.5 micron lasers in their optical fiber systems, and a 0.8 micronbeam reads music and data from CDs.  (By comparison, visible lightranges from about 0.4 to 0.7 microns.) However, water vapor readilyabsorbs light with wavelengths outside the atmospheric transmissionwindows, restricting its range.  Gas lasers operating within thewindows are too bulky and expensive for most commercialapplications.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Display Panels Madefrom Plastic WrapU.S. Patent 5,469,020 was issued on Nov. 21, 1995, to theMassachusetts Institute of Technology for a flexible large-screendisplay that has multiple light-emitting elements sandwichedbetween crossed electrodes.  The inventor is Bradley R. Herrick(Lincoln Laboratory, Cambridge, MA 02139; Tel: 617/981-3356).  Theresulting panels are especially well adapted to inexpensive flat-panel TV screens or exceptionally large flat-panel displays whosegeometry is not limited to flat surfaces, but may take on curved orcylindrical configurations.The patent abstract explains that active light-emitting componentsare integrated into a thin, flexible, plastic-wrap like film toprovide an exceptionally large continuous display in which the filmcontains densely distributed light-emitting elements that areaddressed by a grid of transparent conductors.  Inexpensive bulkprocessing techniques are used to produce plastic wrap withembedded components completely through the film to permitactivation via a row-column matrix.  The displays are comprised ofa flexible film having two opposing sides and a pair of crossedelectrodes on either side of the film.  A number of light-emittingelements are dispersed`ig the film and extend from one side of thefilm to the other, sandwiched between the crossed electrodes.  Thelight-emitting elements are small enough to permit numbers of theelements to exist at a crossover.The topological layout provides mass redundancy of components,spatial decorrelation of component yields, and dramatic reductionin registration problems of metallic interconnects.  The design canbe used for electroluminescent tape in automotive pin striping andsign applications, for flexible glue-on displays, and for videodisplays such as workstations, HDTV, theater screens, andbillboards.Herrick explained that the patent is based on theory for the timebeing, and that no working models currently exist.  He also saidthat calculations indicate that the thinner the plastic the better,and he would initially be working with films in the 10 to 100micron thickness range.  The concept involves placing up tohundreds of diodes in a single pixel, making the technology mostsuitable to displays larger than 60 inches diagonally and scaleableto even larger sizes.  He is currently assembling a production teamand says the only real problem is the same one faced industry-wide-- blue diodes.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Interactive HolographyWill Be EvaluatedAmerican Propylaea Corp. (555 S. Woodward, Birmingham, MI 48009;Tel: 810/642-7000) has been awarded a $100,000 research contract bythe U.S. Air Force to evaluate the integration of interactiveholography in manufacturing.  James Fischbach, president and CEO,reports that the contract represents Phase 1 of a projected 15-phase $200 million project if Phase 1 is successful.  Phase 2 wouldinvolve $750,000, and Phase 3 would be worth $5 million.American Propylaea, which developed the worlds first full colorcommercial hologram in 1993, scored a major breakthrough in 1994when it achieved a 42 inch x 45 inch, full motion, true colorholographic display system, the largest yet developed.  Fischbachpredicts that holography will be a $5 billion per year businesswithin 10 years and identifies the automotive, entertainment,medical, and retail markets as those with the greatest potential.Fischbach says that interactive holography could make it possiblefor automakers to cut design and development time by 50%, enablingthem to bring new car models to market in under 20 months, comparedwith the present 42 months in the U.S. and 36 months in Japan.Holography could also reduce the need for exploratory surgery andassist in the training of surgeons, enabling them to view 3-Dinformation in free space in front of a monitor screen to help themdetect and locate abnormalities and rehearse operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Low TemperatureGrowth MethodA chemist at Washington University in St. Louis (St. Louis, MO63130) has discovered a new method to grow semiconductor crystalsat temperatures far lower than ever reported.  The method is thefirst to use solution phase chemistry to grow the micrometer-sizedcrystals at low temperature.  The semiconductors made by the newmethod may be used in devices such as light emitting diode (LED)displays, laser pointers, grocery scanners, compact disc playersand computer components.  The breakthrough offers intriguingpossibilities of developing integrated devices consisting ofsemiconductors and polymers, plastics or composites.Present ways of growing semiconductor crystals prohibit combiningother materials with the semiconductors because of the very hightemperatures required to grow the crystals.  Crystals are currentlyproduced at temperatures of 500-1,200C, but the method William E.Buhro (Tel: 314/935-4269, email: buhro@wuchem.wustl.edu), associateprofessor of chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis, hasdiscovered allows growth at 200C.  Buhros technique, thesolution-liquid-solid (SLS) growth method, is similar to the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) gas phase growth method which has been used forsome 30 years.Buhro and other materials chemists had been stymied by thenonmolecular structures of the semiconductor materials, which donot allow crystal growth from conventional solvents at lowtemperatures.  Buhro made a solution suspension of indium andindium-gallium nano-sized metal droplets.  The droplets are thesites from which the semiconductor crystal compounds indiumphosphide, gallium arsenide and indium arsenide (type III-Vsemiconductors) nucleate and grow.Buhro explains, "We refer to this as the solution-liquid-solidmechanism, a three phase system where the chemistry occurs insolution, then elements of the semiconductors are deposited intothe liquid--the molten metal droplets--and the product crystallizesout as a solid."  An important goal in materials chemistry is toturn down the heat on solid state synthesis.  This new methodexpands the range of possibility for these semiconductors.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDUSTRIES IN TRANSITION via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Building a New FlatPanel Video ScreenA researcher at the Dept. of Energy (DOE) Brookhaven National Lab(Box 5000, Upton, NY 11973-5000) has invented a flat panel videoscreen that uses lasers as a light source.  Uses of the device mayinclude video advertising displays, television, computers,automotive dashboard and aircraft cockpit displays, as well asportable military maps and wall-sized displays for homeentertainment.  Since the Brookhaven device has advantages inbrightness, contrast, and viewing angle over the new generation ofliquid crystal cockpit displays, the U.S. Air Force is fundingdevelopment of the flat panel device for use in its new planes.In another project involving the new technology funded by the Dept.of Defense (DOD) Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA),Brookhaven also is working on a 5 ft. plastic television screen formilitary use.The Clinton Administration has identified developing flat paneldisplays as vital to the economic future of the U.S.  Brookhavenengineer James Veligdan (Tel: 516/282-5400) invented the device anddeveloped the display screen prototype, which is 9 in. wide by 5in. high and approximately 1 in. thick.  The new flat panel screenhas several advantages over current technologies.Many video display systems now on the market use cathode ray tubes(CRTs).  Although reliable, they are very large, heavy, and noteasily transportable.  Other than CRTs, the major current videodisplay technology is limited to liquid crystal displays (LCDs),which are comparatively difficult and expensive to manufacture.The Brookhaven technology works by directing light from a miniaturelaser to a scanner, which guides the light beam into the propersector of laminated wave guides.  Composed of multiple sheets oflaminated borosilicate glass or polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)plastic, the waveguides direct the light to the screen to displaythe video image."The system is totally eye safe, high-contrast, and offersexceptionally wide viewing angles.  Also, the screen can be used incold weather, whereas liquid crystals thicken and freeze astemperatures dip below freezing.  The technology can be adapted todisplay 3D images if the viewer wears polarized glasses.Maintenance is easy and inexpensive, says Veligdan.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-18IA060-000326-B019-121http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb07.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020250 text/html 491HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:01:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:44 GMTContent-length: 304Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb07.html Sample Issue Copyright NONPROFIT INSIGHTS via NewsNet March 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WT03-B40-19IA060-000326-B019-155http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gb52.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020304 text/html 25559HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:01:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:46 GMTContent-length: 25370Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gb52.html Sample Issue Copyright PRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *NEWS & ANALYSIS* COMMISSION TO DECIDE ON NEW YORK PETITION ON PLAYGROUNDS (251 words) CRACKING BIKE FRAMES LED TO BROKEN BONES AND RECALL (318 words) BREAKING OFF SMALL PARTS ON TOY TRUCK LEAD TO RECALL (213 words) CPSC TO RECEIVE DATA ON BATTERY ONCE DEEMED FLAWED (159 words) CARPET IRRITANT VERIFICATION SOUGHT VIA MOUSE STUDIES (104 words) OVERHEATED CANDLE HOLDERS THAT CAN SHATTER RECALLED (191 words) SQUEAKER TOYS HELD UP BY CUSTOMS GET RECALLED (185 words) TOO MANY LEAF BLOWER WARRANTEE CLAIMS ALERT RECALL (174 words) RATTLES BY GYMBOREE RECALLED FOR CHOKING HAZARD (178 words) CELLULAR PHONE CHARGERS CAN POSE ELECTRICAL SHOCK (160 words) HONG KONG PASSES NEW CONSUMER SAFETY REGULATIONS (139 words) EXTENDED PETITION PERIOD FOR CHILD RESTRAINT SEATS (142 words) *BRIEFS* CPSC ROLLS ON: With only 39 CPSCers classified as "excepted" from federal (26 words) RECALLS: Makita Lamirada, Calif., had 7,500 Makita Angle grinders and angle (86 words) HEATING PADS: CPSC and Food & Drug Administration warnings on hazards of (33 words) TOY TESTING: Besides testing electrically-operated toys, UL can classify (56 words) BILINGUAL LABELS: UL no longer requires product markings on C-UL certified (28 words) NEW ELECTRICAL STANDARDS: The National Electrical Contractors Assn. has (29 words) RECALLS: Time Magazine runner-up recall of the year was awarded (a (45 words) FIRE EXTINGUISHERS: UL announced the first clean agent portable (20 words) PRODUCT SAFETY RESEARCH: International conference, Feb. 15 to 16, Canberra, (21 words) AEROSOL: Federal Trade Commission repealed rule against quick-freeze (25 words) COSMETICS: Stargazer of London, England is subject of import alert for (50 words) CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Office of Government Ethics has granted extension to (36 words) CPSC MEETINGS: Electrical connectors, 1/10; Bethesda, Md., Bill King, (23 words) CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMMISSION TO DECIDE ON NEW YORK PETITION ON PLAYGROUNDSDeciding whether to deny a petition from the New York City Dept. of ConsumerAffairs for a mandatory standard on home playground equipment will be on theCPSC commissioners' agenda for January 1996.  The commissioners will receiveagency staff recommendations on the petition suggestions that go beyond ASTMstandards.Though there have been no injuries or deaths, the department wants to imposeits own standards that include requirements for handrails, surfacing, andprohibiting more than one activity on the same playground apparatus.  Thedepartment based its recommendations on a survey it conducted.  ASTM Chairfor Home Playground Equipment Terri Hendy told PSL she is not sure whetherthe commissioners will go ahead with the New York petition and said her grouphas been working on revising ASTM standards.While ASTM standards require home playground sets to not be placed on con-crete, asphalt or grass, 1996 revisions will go the extra mile by listingacceptable surfaces such as 8-10 inches of pea gravel, sand or wood mulch.Also, home daycare centers with 10 children or fewer will have to comply withASTM home playground equipment standards.Hendy said the current standard does not address small home daycare centers.Other standard modifications the group wants to beef up are guardrails forelevated platforms, determining the level of force that can be sustained by ahead when a multiple occupancy swing strikes it, and swing set packagingstating if anchoring is required and if an anchoring set is included.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CRACKING BIKE FRAMES LED TO BROKEN BONES AND RECALLMountain bicycle frames that can fracture in the front at the headlug led toinjuries ranging from cuts and bruises to broken bones and a recall.  Ridersare in danger of being thrown from the bike and can get injured or killed.Raleigh is recalling 300 Technium MT 400 and 24 Technium FT 500 bicycleframes that measure 16.5 inches from the center of the bottom of the frame tothe seat.  Bike shops and authorized Raleigh dealers sold the bicyclesnationwide from January 1993 through December 1993 for $500 to $700.  Raleighspokesman Pat McVey told PSL the firm initiated its own recall in May 1995and contacted CPSC "in order to increase publicity."  CPSC compliance stafferDavid Schmeltzer said firms are required under Section 15 of the ConsumerProduct Safety Act to report faulty products and injuries to the agency.Cracking mountain bicycle frames were also a problem for Cannondale, whichput stickers on all 1995 Cannondales reminding consumers to inspect theirbike frames for cracks (PSL, 1/30).  Schmeltzer said CPSC and other bikefirms have recalled bicycles for defective handlebars, suspension forks andbrakes.Cosmic brand bicycle wheels made for road bikes by Mavic, S.A. of France andits distribution facility in West Chester, Penn., were subjected to a Dec. 21recall.  The firm discovered the front wheel hub may fracture and cause thespokes to come loose resulting in the driver losing control.  Though therewere no injuries reported, Cosmic Marketing Manager Chris Zigmont said therecall was necessary.CPSC will continue examining generic problems of hybrid and mountain bikes."We are concerned," Schmeltzer said, adding the agency is trying to figureout why there have been problems with hybrid and mountain bikes.  Schmeltzertold PSL it could be due to the kind of use the bike is subjected to or thatthey are not designed to withstand abuse.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BREAKING OFF SMALL PARTS ON TOY TRUCK LEAD TO RECALLToy truck's driver and wheels that can break off and present choking hazardto young children have led to the recall of 44,000 wooden toy trucks fromDivision Sales of Itasca, Ill.  A spokesman told PSL the company received aletter from customs stating the problems were discovered during a routineexam of imported goods.The firm will not be purchasing any more trucks from the manufacturingcompany in China and will destroy any trucks it does have.  Posters in storeswill warn consumers of the potential danger.  The trucks were sold nationwidein 86 retail and dollar stores for $1 each from December 1993 throughDecember 1995.The trucks measure 5 inches long by 2 inches wide and are packaged with asmall wooden driver figure in a blue cardboard box labeled "Woodtoy...engineering truck educational toy" and were sold in six differentstyles:** two styles of dump trucks** cement truck** truck with a large, wooden, rotating cylinder** truck with crane** truck with ladderThe spokesman said there have been no consumer complaints and "other nationswith less strict standards than the U.S. may still have these toy trucks ontheir shelves."  Consumers will receive a full refund upon returning thetruck.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CPSC TO RECEIVE DATA ON BATTERY ONCE DEEMED FLAWEDCPSCers will be updated on a lithium battery that once suffered fromperformance problems relating to shelf life and field failure, now addressedby Ultralife of Newark, N.Y.  An Ultralife spokesman told PSL the firm planson talking to CPSC because "the battery has been getting so much attention."The U9VL Lithium Battery has a shelf life of 10 years and is for commercialand consumer use such as electronic parking meters, wireless securitysystems, portable blood analyzers, ambulatory fuse pumps, remote controls,digital thermometers, garage door openers, clock radios and smoke detectors.The battery meets all UL safety requirements, carries the UL componentrecognition mark and meets ANSI dimensional standards.Ultralife promotes the battery as being able to handle extreme temperaturesbetter than any other 9-volt battery from -40xF to 140xF.  CPSCer Jim Hoebelsaid Ultralife is the first battery company to seek CPSC's feedback about anew battery and called it a "breakthrough product."Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CARPET IRRITANT VERIFICATION SOUGHT VIA MOUSE STUDIESCPSC has identified some 100 chemicals emitted by carpets and carpet padding.The agency is doing animal testing to determine if those substances arepulmonary and/or sensory irritants.  The work is not intended to replicatestudies done by Anderson Labs of Dedham, Mass., which showed that certaincarpet chemicals affected mice.  When the current mouse trials are done, CPSClikely will assess chemicals' effect on humans.CPSC met Dec. 15 with Air Quality Sciences, which also is testing carpets forirritants, to discuss the timing and protocols for testing.  The agencyworked with the Environmental Protection Agency and industry in developingprotocols.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OVERHEATED CANDLE HOLDERS THAT CAN SHATTER RECALLEDGlass candle holders that can overheat and shatter have been recalled byGodinger Silver Art of Brooklyn, N.Y.  Spokesman Abe Freund told PSL the firmlearned problem from a customer who called in a minor hand injury.  The firmthen tested the product in its lab and it failed.  Silver Art immediatelycontacted CPSC and a recall notice was put out days later.  Freund said noother injuries have been reported.The "Tree Shaped 7 Light Votive Holder" measures 12.75 inches high and 13.75inches wide at the base and was packaged with four green and three red smallglass pots that votive candles can be placed in.  Major retail department andgift stores sold the candle holders nationwide from September 1995 throughDecember 1995 for $25 each.  About 19,000 silver-plated (item #1753) andbrass-plated (item #1753B) holders were recalled.International Silver of Boston, Mass., also recalled the same product (item#991194751) but sold it for $19 to $24 in nationwide in stores and on theHome Shopping Network.  International Silver got seven reports of the glasspots shattering including one in which the consumer's leg was injured.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SQUEAKER TOYS HELD UP BY CUSTOMS GET RECALLEDThe Customs Service held up squeaker toys by Accoutrements of Seattle, Wash.,from entering the U.S. since the squeaker device can separate from the toyand pose a choking hazard for young children.  Accoutrements AssistantManager Stacey Jones said the firm has never received a complaint about thetoy in its five-year history and this was a "just in case" precaution thefirm decided to take.The pickle toys sold for 35 cents from August 1991 through November 1995 whilethe $2.50 kangaroo toys sold from May 1990 through November 1995 in retail,toy, museum, chain and drug stores nationwide.  Squeak Pickles toy item S877were sold individually from bags of 12 labeled in part "***The CoralLine***Accoutrements***Not for children under three*** made in China."  Thegreen rubber pickles each measure 3.5 inches long.Squeak Kangaroo and baby kangaroo toys, item 9394, were sold as a set andlabelled in part "**Great Motherhood***For ages three and up***Squeaking***Kangaroo***Made in China***S.D.S. toys***."  The gray and black kangaroo is 5inches while the baby kangaroo is 1.5 inches and fits in the kangaroo'spouch.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOO MANY LEAF BLOWER WARRANTEE CLAIMS ALERT RECALLToo many customer warrantee claims for leaking leaf blower fuel tanks alertedTanaka America of Kent, Wash., to recall 11,000 Tanaka and Ariens leafblowers due to potential fire hazards.  A Tanaka America spokesman told PSLthat no injuries or complaints were reported, but the firm wanted to forgeahead with recalling models TBL-455, TBL-500 and BB-430.  The $400 to $460blower sold nationwide from January 1986 to December 1992.The Japan-made leaf blower is mounted on a metal backpack frame with paddedshoulder straps, an orange fuel tank and black blower tube with name andmodel numbers of the manufacturer are printed in the center of the blower'sfuel tank or on the recoil starter.The Tanaka spokesman said he was not sure how many blowers were on the marketbut that the firm is notifying consumers from its warrantee card files.Customers are being told to make returns to any authorized Tanaka servicedealer for a free fuel tank replacement.  Only new and improved leaf blowersare being manufactured.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RATTLES BY GYMBOREE RECALLED FOR CHOKING HAZARDRattles that can come apart and release a small bell and wooden pieces havebeen recalled by Gymboree of Burlingame, Calif., because they could posechoking hazards to young children.  Over 2,800 "GymRattles" infant rattlessold from July 26 to November.The wooden rattle is 4.5 inches long and has a circular wooden handle, andmulti-colored, cylinder-shaped cage with a small silver bell inside.  Therattle's hang tag reads in part "GYMBOREE...GymRattle...Crafted in solidmaple wood...Recommended for ages 3 to 18 months."The rattles sold nationwide at over 240 Gymboree stores for $8 each.Gymboree representative, George Rodriguez, told PSL the rattle problem wasdiscovered by one of Gymboree's retail stores and reported to CPSCimmediately.Though no consumer complaints were reported the firm decided to conduct therecall to prevent any possibility of injury.  Rodriguez said Gymboree ismostly known for its children's apparel, and the rattles make up a minutepart of the business.  The firm has asked consumers to return the rattles tothe place of purchase for a full refund.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CELLULAR PHONE CHARGERS CAN POSE ELECTRICAL SHOCKCellular phone charger plug prongs that can loosen and become lodged inelectrical outlets pose electrical shock hazards when consumers try removingthe prongs from the outlet.  No injuries have been reported.Mascot Electronic of Fredrikstad, Norway, is recalling 65,800 ACH-4U cellularphone chargers used with Nokia phones.  Nokia had received reports that thecharger's plastic cover can crack, thus leading to the plug prongs located onthe charger's back becoming loosened.  The recall applies to chargers withdate codes 9531 through 9546.  "Made in Norway," model number and date codeappear on the label affixed to the charger.The rectangular, black, plastic charger is three inches long, 2.5 incheswide, one inch tall and has grooves on the side.  The chargers were sold na-tionwide from July to November under the brand names Nokia and AT&T.  Phonedealers sold the chargers separately or as part of a basic sales package.Mascot manufactured the chargers for Nokia.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HONG KONG PASSES NEW CONSUMER SAFETY REGULATIONSConsumer goods in Hong Kong now will have to be "reasonably safe" under theOctober 1995 Consumer Goods Safety Ordinance.  Hong Kong's Secretary forTrade and Industry is responsible for approving safety standards and has theauthority to ban unsafe products from the marketplace.  Those violating thenew law face fines or jail.Hong Kong's Commissioner of Customs and Excise can require responsibleparties to issue a public notice, preventing the parties from supplying orselling unsafe products.  The commissioner can also order involved parties toinitiate a recall.Though labs must be approved by the director general of industry, thoseaccredited under the Hong Kong Laboratory Scheme (HOKLAS) can issue testcertificates that demonstrate compliance with applicable standards.  Relevanttest certificates can also be issued if the lab has a memorandum ofunderstanding with HOKLAS.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EXTENDED PETITION PERIOD FOR CHILD RESTRAINT SEATSMakers of portable child restraint systems will have until Sept. 1, 1996, tocomply with new size and weight requirements for test dummies.  The NationalHighway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) said the deadline shouldprovide needed leadtime for firms to make necessary design changes to conformto the new requirements.In July 1995, a final rule amending Standard 213 added three dummies to childrestraint testing including a newborn infant, 9-month-old and 6-year-old.The 6-month-old dummy has been removed from future testing.NHTSA deems the new testing provisions as a more thorough evaluation of childrestraint performance.  Petitions for reconsideration should be sent toAdministrator, Room 5220, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400Seventh Street S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590 by Jan. 11.  For nonlegal issues,contact George Mouchachoir at 202/366-4919, and for legal issues contactDeirdre Fujita at 202/366-2992.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CPSC ROLLS ON: With only 39 CPSCers classified as "excepted" from federalCPSC ROLLS ON: With only 39 CPSCers classified as "excepted" from federalshutdown, agency managed to put out 14 recalls from Dec. 18 to Dec. 29.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RECALLS: Makita Lamirada, Calif., had 7,500 Makita Angle grinders and angleRECALLS: Makita Lamirada, Calif., had 7,500 Makita Angle grinders and anglesanders, after spindle holding cutoff wheel broke and cutoff wheel separatedfrom tool....5,000 Moose brand security control panels for smoke detectorsmade by Sentrol of Tualatin, Ore., due to components that fail....Toddle TotsDinosaur Mountain playset by Little Tikes of Hudon, Ohio, detaching piecespose choking hazard....1,000 recliner chairs from Astro-Lounger of Houkla,Miss., the space between the seat and foot rest is a strangulation hazard andalready has caused the death of a 13-month-old.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HEATING PADS: CPSC and Food & Drug Administration warnings on hazards ofHEATING PADS: CPSC and Food & Drug Administration warnings on hazards ofelectric heating pads include never using on an infant, paralyzed person,sleeping person or using pins to hold pad in place.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOY TESTING: Besides testing electrically-operated toys, UL can classifyTOY TESTING: Besides testing electrically-operated toys, UL can classify widerange of toys to CPSC, ASTM and European norm standards.  UL's 1994 pact withHong Kong's toy testing agency HKSTC allows UL to review CPSC testing andissue the UL mark for toys that comply with standards.  But firms mustparticipate in UL's worldwide follow-up program.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BILINGUAL LABELS: UL no longer requires product markings on C-UL certifiedBILINGUAL LABELS: UL no longer requires product markings on C-UL certifiedproducts to be in English and French.  Firms are told to look at Canadianlaws for directions.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ELECTRICAL STANDARDS: The National Electrical Contractors Assn. hasNEW ELECTRICAL STANDARDS: The National Electrical Contractors Assn. has deve-loped voluntary installation standards giving "advice and guidance" toelectrical equipment contractors and installers.  Contact H. Brooke Stauffer,301/657-3110.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RECALLS: Time Magazine runner-up recall of the year was awarded (aRECALLS: Time Magazine runner-up recall of the year was awarded (a cigarettewas first place) to a Winnie the Pooh pull toy made by Michel of Culver City,Calif.  The wooden ball at the end of the toy's pull cord posed choking andstrangulation hazards.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FIRE EXTINGUISHERS: UL announced the first clean agent portableFIRE EXTINGUISHERS: UL announced the first clean agent portable extinguisheris good for ordinary combustibles, flammable liquids/grease and electricalequipment.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PRODUCT SAFETY RESEARCH: International conference, Feb. 15 to 16, Canberra,PRODUCT SAFETY RESEARCH: International conference, Feb. 15 to 16, Canberra,Australia.  Call Marion Bonneveld in Netherlands 31/20-511-4571, or fax to31/20-511-4510.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AEROSOL: Federal Trade Commission repealed rule against quick-freezeAEROSOL: Federal Trade Commission repealed rule against quick-freeze aerosolsprays used to frost cocktail glasses as federal law bars Flurocarbon 12 thatwas in spray.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COSMETICS: Stargazer of London, England is subject of import alert forCOSMETICS: Stargazer of London, England is subject of import alert for makeupkits after prohibited Red #7 and Red #2 were found during a shipment check.Other violators are Pupa Elypsis eye color compact kits from TouchstoneTrading of Keelung, Taiwan and eye shadow from Julia Limited of Seoul, Korea.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONFLICT OF INTEREST: Office of Government Ethics has granted extension toCONFLICT OF INTEREST: Office of Government Ethics has granted extension toCPSC andseveral other agencies until Aug. 7 for standards of conduct, dealing withfinancialinterest prohibitions and prior approval for outside employment andactivities.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRODUCT SAFETY LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CPSC MEETINGS: Electrical connectors, 1/10; Bethesda, Md., Bill King,CPSC MEETINGS: Electrical connectors, 1/10; Bethesda, Md., Bill King,301/504-0508,ext. 1296...CO detectors, 1/23-24; Bethesda, Elizabeth Leland, 301/504-0962,ext. 1321.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-20IA060-000326-B019-187http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt10.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020416 text/html 48927HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:01:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:53 GMTContent-length: 48738Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt10.html Sample Issue Copyright ACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * WASHINGTON FOCUS * One result of the recent intense focus on the budget (153 words) Agency Can't Glomarize Where Disclosure May Be in Public Interest (1008 words) *VIEWS FROM THE STATES* Arkansas (2296 words) * NEWS FROM CANADA * Ontario Government Proposes Changes to FOI, (1128 words) * IN BRIEF * The D.C. Circuit has ruled that the Secret Service (2741 words) CopyrightACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996          One result of the recent intense focus on the budget          One result of the recent intense focus on the budgetbattle has been that Congress has yet to pass some billsnot directly associated with the budget dispute.  Thetelecommunications bill, which includes the Exonamendment criminalizing the use of indecent language onthe Internet, probably will not be voted on for anotherseveral weeks.  Public interest advocates are trying touse that time to lobby against the Exon amendment.Recent incidents such as the shutdown of access to Usenetgroups by Compuserve at the behest of German prosecutorsmay play in favor of those critical of governmentintervention.  As access advocate Jim Warren noted: "Whenother nations' enforcers choose to inflict theirprejudices and dogmas on the global communications net,perhaps American leaders may finally understand thedanger of what Congress is attempting with its `decency'demands on all private and public speech and expressionif aided by any telecommunications device."Back to Headline List CopyrightACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Agency Can't Glomarize WhereDisclosure May Be in Public Interest          In a case that places some important restrictions onan agency's ability to categorically deny the existenceof information pertaining to individuals, the D.C.Circuit has ruled that the Customs Service actedimproperly when it told Max Holland of the Nation that itwould neither confirm or deny that it had recordsconcerning offers by H. Ross Perot to help the Servicewith drug interdiction activities.  Circuit Court JudgePat Wald, writing for the court, observed that "althoughReporters Committee and the precedent of this circuitmake clear that FOIA extends only to those records whichreveal something about agency action, the mere fact thatrecords pertain to an individual's activities does notnecessarily qualify them for exemption.  Such records maystill be cloaked with the public interest if theinformation would shed light on agency action."          Wald pointed out that District Court Judge CharlesRichey had erred when he concluded that Holland's requestpertained only to the activities of a private citizen.Wald noted that "as the language of the contested requestindicates, it would be disingenuous to suggest thatappellants are not interested in the actions of Perot.Unlike the private activities in Reporters Committee andthe cases. . .from our own circuit, however, what makesPerot's activities significant is their connection toagency conduct.  Appellants want to find out whetherPerot offered to help a federal agency fulfill itsstatutory duties to interdict drugs, and if so, how thatagency responded to his overtures.  Although Perothimself may be a target of their investigative work,appellants also expressed interest in the `privatizationof government functions,' particularly operations whichare covertly funded.  The district court acknowledged asmuch, in stating that appellants sought to determinewhether `Customs planned to privatize certain componentsof the nation's drug interdiction efforts.'  Theseconcerns are about `agency activity,' not just Perot'sprivate activities.  As such, their disclosure may servethe public's interest in knowing `what their governmentis up to.'"          Because the Nation had identified a public interestin the records, Wald found that Customs' use of a Glomarresponse was inappropriate because it swept too broadly."Because the range of circumstances included in Customs'categorical rule do not `characteristically support' aninference that all material in law enforcement fileswhich names a particular individual is exempt fromdisclosure to third parties, a more particularizedapproach is required."  Wald noted that one alternativewas for Customs to adjust its categorical rule.  "Customsis. . .free to articulate a revised categorical ruleregarding disclosure of law enforcement records if it canidentify more narrowly tailored circumstances under whichthe balance of privacy and public interestcharacteristically tips in the direction of exemption."          The court clarified its earlier decision in SafecardServices v. SEC, 926 F.2d 1197 (D.C. Cir. 1991), byreining in its application.   In Safecard Services, thecourt had established a categorical exemption for namesof third parties in law enforcement records unless theinformation was needed to "confirm or refute compellingevidence that the agency is engaged in illegal activity."Wald wrote that "to the extent any information containedin 7(C) investigatory files would reveal the identitiesof individuals who are subjects, witnesses, or informantsin law enforcement investigations, those portions ofresponsive records are categorically exempt fromdisclosure under Safecard.  But we do not read Safecardas permitting an agency to exempt from disclosure all ofthe material in an investigatory record solely on thegrounds that the record includes some information whichidentifies a private citizen or provides that person'sname and address.  Because such a blanket exemption wouldreach far more broadly than is necessary to protect theidentities of individuals mentioned in law enforcementfiles, it would be contrary to FOIA's overall purpose ofdisclosure, and thus is not a permissible reading ofExemption 7(C)."          An individual's privacy expectation could also betempered by their voluntary disclosure of their roledocumented in government files.  Wald noted that "Perothimself has made several public statements indicatingthat he has offered to aid the federal government inhostage rescue and drug interdiction operations.Redaction of Perot's name from any responsive documentsin the [Customs' investigatory] files that involve thesubject matter of those disclosures, if those records arenot otherwise exempt from disclosure under Exemption 7(C)or other exemptions set forth in [Exemption 7], would notserve any useful purpose in protecting his privacy.Perot's decision to bring information connecting himselfwith such efforts into the public domain differentiateshis privacy interest from the interest of unnamedSafecard witnesses who did not voluntarily divulge theiridentities; these public disclosures effectively waivePerot's right to redaction of his name from documents onevents that he has publicly discussed."          The court also found that Customs' search had beeninadequate.  Although Holland's request asked for recordsindexed or cross-indexed under Perot's name, "it alsoexplicitly seeks information `pertaining to' Perot andinformation regarding offers by Perot to assist Customsin drug interdiction efforts. . . Accordingly,appellants' request should be interpreted to includesubject matter files on topics of interest to appellants,in addition to files indexed under Perot's name orpersonal identifier."  Wald noted that "if we agreed withthe agency's position that appellants sought only thoserecords indexed under Perot's name, we might find thissearch adequate.  But we have construed the scope ofappellants' request more broadly than did Customs, toinclude `subject matter files.'  Customs did not describeits recordkeeping system in sufficient detail to permitus to identify what subject matter files, other thanthose in the Privacy Act System of Records, might holdresponsive information regarding Perot's offers to helpCustoms with its drug interdiction efforts.  In theabsence of this information, the agency's assertions aretoo conclusory to allow de novo review of the adequacy ofits search."  (The Nation Magazine, Washington Bureau andMax Holland v. United States Customs Service, No. 94-5275, U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of ColumbiaCircuit, Dec. 8, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ArkansasArkansas          The supreme court has ruled that the ArkansasDepartment of Human Services did not violate theAdministrative Procedure Act or the FOIA when it awardeda contract to provide obstetrical services under afederal waiver program.  National Park Medical Center, anunsuccessful bidder on the contract, claimed that staffmeetings held to develop the bid solicitation violatedthe open meetings requirements of the FOIA.  The courtdisagreed, noting that such meetings were not the typecovered by the statute.  The court also found thatNational Park failed to bring the alleged violation tothe attention of the agency before filing its courtaction.  (National Park Medical Center, Inc. v. ArkansasDepartment of Human Services, No. 95-411, Supreme Courtof Arkansas, Dec. 4, 1995)Illinois          A court of appeals has ruled that a political bodyhas standing to bring a suit under the Open Meetings Act,but that the mayor of the City of Northlake failed tofile his suit against the Board of Education of SchoolDistrict No. 87 within the statutory time limits.  Basedon a series of critical letters between the school boardand the mayor, the school board met in closed session --allegedly to discuss employment matters -- to draft aletter to the mayor in response to his recent letters.Several months later, the mayor sued the school board forimproperly conducting a closed meeting.  On the matter ofstanding, the court observed that "we find no compellingreasons to limit the word `person' [in the Open MeetingsAct] to an individual as opposed to a body politic.Indeed, creating an impediment to the explicit command ofthe statute that actions of public bodies be takenopenly, solely on the basis that a political body is notan individual person, ill serves the intent of thelegislature and frustrates the principles underlying theAct.  The deterrence of official misconduct is no lessimportant simply because it is the office of the mayorwhich challenges the infraction rather than the mayor inhis or her individual capacity."  But the court agreedthat the mayor had missed the 45-day deadline for filingthe suit.  The mayor argued that his suit was covered bya special provision allowing a suit to be filed 45 daysafter the state's attorney discovered the violationbecause he had informed the state's attorney prior tofiling the suit.  The court rejected that claim, notingthat "if, as contemplated by plaintiffs, any person couldfile suit as late as 45 days after the State's Attorney'sdiscovery of a violation the Act, then the 45-daylimitation period from the date of the meeting isrendered superfluous."  The court added that "to allowthat same person to file suit in his or her own namesolely upon notification to the State's Attorney would,no doubt, condone dilatory practices.  In fact, it wouldconfer upon persons other than the State's Attorney theopportunity to delay filing an action ad infinitum bysimply not notifying the State's Attorney of the allegedviolation until some future date."  (Reid M. Paxson,Mayor of the City of Northlake, v. Board of Education ofSchool District No. 87, Cook County, Illinois, No. 1-94-4294, Appellate Court of Illinois, First District, FifthDivision, Dec. 8, 1995)Indiana          A court of appeals has ruled that researchapplications for projects involving the use of animalsare protected under an exception to the Public RecordsAct pertaining to research.  The court noted that "theapplication seeks information about the researcher, thenature of the proposed or ongoing research project, andprocedures to be employed throughout the project.  Thesole subject matter of the application is a researchproject and related personnel and procedures.  Even inthe narrowest sense, the information sought by theapplication concerns research.  As such, it was notsubject to disclosure under the Public Records Act."(Scott Robinson, M.D. v. Indiana University, etal., No.49A02-9306-CV-253, Court of Appeals of Indiana, SecondDistrict, Dec. 11, 1995)New York          The Court of Appeals has ruled that a list oftextbooks for courses at the State University of New Yorkat Farmingdale are agency records even though they arecreated and maintained by a contractor.  The caseinvolved requests from Encore College Bookstores, acompetitor to the university-subsidized bookstore whichwas run under contract by Barnes & Noble.  Encore hadinitially gotten a copy of the textbook list from theUniversity, but after Barnes & Noble said its businesshad dropped as a result, the University stopped keepinga copy of the list.  The list was compiled by Barnes &Noble, which gathered the information through inquiriesto professors each semester.  Both the trial court and anappellate court had ruled that the lists were not subjectto disclosure because they were not agency records, butthe Court of Appeals disagreed.  It pointed out that thefunction of the Auxiliary Service Corporation, whichoperated the bookstore, was "to supply these essentialservices -- including the campus bookstore -- for SUNY.ASC's acts in discharging this delegated duty, then, areperformed on SUNY's behalf."  Applying this to thecircumstances, the court noted that "because ASC receivesa copy of the booklist compiled by its subcontractor,Barnes & Noble, to ensure that the campus bookstore isadequately maintained, it does so for the benefit ofSUNY, a government agency.  In other words, the booklistinformation is `kept' or `held' by ASC `for an agency'.Thus, the information falls within the unambiguousdefinition of the term `records' under the [Freedom ofInformation Law]."  The University urged the court toapply the more restrictive federal standard, which, asinterpreted, requires custody and control of records.But in rejecting that definition, the Court pointed outthat "to do so would undermine the legislative objectiveto provide maximum disclosure by enabling a governmentagency to insulate its records from public access bydelegating responsibility for creating or maintainingparticular information to a non-governmental entity."However, the court went on to find that the list wasprotected as commercial business information.  It notedthat "the booklist has obvious commercial value to Encoresince it would enable Encore to offer the preciseinventory that its target clientele -- SUNY-Farmingdalestudents -- is required to purchase and that is currentlyoffered by  Barnes & Noble. . .The likelihood of harm toBarnes & Noble is enhanced by the economic windfallconferred upon Encore were it to receive the booklist atthe mere cost of FOIL fees.  The information in thebooklist, accumulated by virtue of the effort and expenseof Barnes & Noble, is also directly available to Encore.Disclosure through FOIL, however, would enable Encore toobtain the requisite information without expending itsresources, thereby reducing its cost of business andplacing Barnes & Noble at a competitive disadvantage."(In the Matter of Encore College Bookstores, Inc. v.Auxiliary Service Corporation of the State University ofNew York at Farmingdale, No. 304, Court of Appeals of NewYork, Dec. 27, 1995)          The Court of Appeals has ruled that litigants whoprevail in exposing egregious violations of the OpenMeetings Law should be awarded attorney's fees as amatter of course.  Ruling in a case in which the Board ofTrustees of the Village of Monticello decided at a closedmeeting to play "musical chairs" with their jobs --rotating various village positions among themselves --and then affirmed their prearranged plan at a subsequentopen meeting, the Court of Appeals explained that "onthis record, denial of a request for attorneys' feeswould constitute an abuse of discretion. . ."  The courtrejected the concept that attorney's fees wereappropriate only for repeated violations of the statute,noting that "it is inconceivable that the Legislature hadonly such recidivist offenders in mind when it vestedtrial judges with the authority to award costs and feesin the first place.  In fact, it is very often thepossibility of recovering costs and attorneys' fees thatgives private citizens like plaintiffs the impetus theyneed to bring meritorious lawsuits to enforce the OpenMeetings Law thus advancing the statutory policy ofkeeping New Yorkers better apprised of the actions oftheir elected officials."  (In the Matter of Victor W.Gordon v. Village of Monticello, Inc., No. 276, Court ofAppeals of New York, Dec. 7, 1995)          An appellate court has ruled that the Department ofTransportation improperly withheld contract proposalseven after the contract had been awarded.  The courtnoted that the winning proposal "did not include anyintra-agency confidential information which would assistin DOT's negotiations."  It added that "once the contractwas awarded, the terms of [the winning bidder's] RFPresponse could no longer be competitively sensitive.  DOTimplicitly recognized the validity of petitioner'smodified request by releasing a redacted version of [thewinning] RFP response."  The court pointed out that thedepartment raised the trade secrets exemption for thefirst time at the appellate level, claiming that it hadno time to do so at the trial court level.  But the courtnoted that "respondents, however, offer no explanationfor why DOT did not raise this exemption when it gave theredacted version to the petitioner.  In our view, DOTshould, at that point, have given an explanation forproviding a limited version. . .Simply, this record doesnot provide any basis to support respondents' positionthat there was no opportunity for them to set forth theargument that there was a trade secret exemption."  (Inthe Matter of Cross-Sound Ferry Services, Inc. v.Department of Transportation, No. 73187, Supreme Court ofNew York, Appellate Division, Third Department, Dec. 7,1995)          An appellate court has ruled that the SaratogaEconomic Development Corporation is not a public agencysubject to the FOIL.  Although the town provided 50percent of the Corporation's revenues, the court foundthat the Corporation was not similar to the BuffaloEnterprise Development Corporation which the Court ofAppeals had earlier ruled was a public agency.  Theappellate court noted that the Saratoga Corporation was"an independent entity formed by private businessmen tofurther their own interests. . .It has never beenfurnished offices at County expense; no County employeehas ever served on its board; it receives some of itsfunding from private individuals and corporations; and itis not subject to most of the financial controls exertedover the [Buffalo Corporation].  Significantly, while theCourt of Appeals found that the BEDC described itself asan `agent' of the City, and that a substantial portion ofits activities consisted of the administration of loanprograms and, concomitantly, the disbursement of funds onbehalf of the City, respondent does none of these things;rather it has simply contracted with the County on a fee-for-service basis, much as any other independent businessentity might."  (In the Matter of Farms First v. SaratogaEconomic Development Corporation, No. 73053, SupremeCourt of New York, Appellate Division, Third Department,Dec. 14, 1995)Ohio          A court of appeals has ruled that drafts of proposedchanges to the collective bargaining sections of the OhioCode which were prepared by or received by the Office ofCollective Bargaining must be disclosed.  The court notedthat there was no exemption for the draft records andrejected the agency's suggestion that it adopt adeliberative process privilege.  The court pointed outthat "even if respondents' public policy arguments mayhave some merit, the legislature expresses Ohio publicrecords law and that statute permits no exemption for apre-decisional or deliberative privilege.  The GeneralAssembly has done all of the balancing needed in publicrecords law; public policy arguments should not sway ourinterpretation."  (State of Ohio ex rel. District 1199,The Health Care and Social Service Union, SEIU, AFL-CIOv. Stephen Gulyassy, Deputy Director, No. 95APD01-26,Court of Appeals of Ohio, Tenth Appellate District,Franklin County, Dec. 12, 1995)Wyoming          After federal courts have largely shut down unionaccess to payrolls of federal projects to be used formonitoring compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act, theWyoming Supreme Court has made clear that such recordsare subject to disclosure under state law.  TheDepartment of Transportation argued there was no publicinterest in disclosure, but the court disagreed, notingthat "the [plaintiffs] demonstrate the information can beused to audit WTD's, the [Federal HighwayAdministration's], and contractors' efforts to complyboth with federal requirements for a prevailing wagerate, as well as with Wyoming's parallel statutoryrequirements.  For that reason alone, any countervailinginterest of the workers in their privacy is outweighed bya public interest."  The court rejected the claim thatdisclosure was an invasion of privacy.  It explained that"the argument relies almost entirely on construction ofa federal exemption which is not found in Wyoming'spublic records act.  However, we are persuaded the recordmakes no suggestion that affected employees havecomplained about the potential of such a release, norwould it be likely such complaints, if made, couldovercome the mandate of the public records act to releaseinformation.  This is especially so because the workershave already released their names and addresses to thecontractor, who has in turn released them to the State ofWyoming, who has in turn released that information to thefederal government.  There is no indication in the recordthat if the [plaintiffs] did contact the workers at theirhomes that such would be significantly disruptive oftheir privacy.  The record simply does not provide anybasis for denying release of the contested information."(Wyoming Department of Transportation v. InternationalUnion of Operating Engineers Local Union 800, No. 95-47and No. 95-48, Supreme Court of Wyoming, Dec. 22, 1995)Back to Headline List CopyrightACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996        Ontario Government Proposes Changes to FOI,        Ontario Government Proposes Changes to FOI,                  Privacy Statutes          Ontario entered the world of access and privacy inthe latter 1980s with a carefully constructed statutethat combined access and privacy.  The statute createdthe Office of Information and Privacy Commissioner andwas generally seen as one of the most progressivestatutes of its kind.  While Ontario has had its share ofknotty problems under the statute, the law has generallystood the test of time and the Office of the Informationand Privacy Commissioner has emerged as a leader in itsthoughtful and capable implementation and analysis of thestatute.  But Ontario recently underwent a sweepingchange in political direction and now it seems almostcertain that the Freedom of Information and Protection ofPrivacy Act and the Municipal Freedom of Information andProtection of Privacy Act will be subjected to majorstructural changes in the name of more efficientgovernment.          An omnibus bill, the centerpiece of the province'snew "Common Sense Revolution," was introduced in thelegislature in late November and was slated for approvalby mid-December, all with very little legislative orpublic debate.  However, after a sit-in by oppositionmembers, public hearings were scheduled.  The legislativecommittee considering the omnibus bill was divided inhalf, with one half dealing solely with healthcareamendments and the other half dealing with everythingelse.          The amendments to the freedom of information andprotection of privacy statutes introduce the concept ofan application fee for the first time.  While the federalAccess to Information Act has always included a $5application fee, the provincial acts have largely treatedsuch fees as barriers to access and have never providedfor them.  However the new fees, which will be set byregulation, will apply not only to general information,but to personal information as well, blurring thedistinction that is made in the federal acts wherepersonal information requests are not subject to anapplication fee.  In another break with tradition, theamendments will also require an application fee forappealing an agency's determination to the Office of theInformation and Privacy Commissioner.  The amendmentswill also increase fees for search time, costs ofpreparing a record for disclosure, and computer and othercosts associated with locating, retrieving, processing,and copying a record; the amendments also provide forshipping costs and any other costs incurred in respondingto a request.          The final significant change will allow agencies torefuse requests that are considered frivolous orvexatious.  While multiple or large-scale requests havesometimes been seen by agencies as frivolous andvexatious, Information and Privacy Commissioner TomWright ruled this past summer directly on the issue as away of setting some guidelines for making suchdeterminations.  While Wright had decided that the issueneeded addressing on its own merits, part of therationale for dealing with the issue was to provideguidance which would result in consistent treatment ofsuch requests.  While Wright realized that one agency'sidea of what constituted a frivolous request could wellbe another requester's idea of a perfectly legitimateinquiry, he carefully restrained his decision to dealwith those instances where the request was a clear abuseof process.  Part of the fear that such determinationscan be made on an agency-by-agency basis is the potentialthat such determinations might be abused for no morelegitimate a reason than that the agency did not want toincur the time or cost involved in responding to arequest.  The new amendment allows a requester whoserequest has been rejected as being frivolous or vexatiousto appeal to the Commissioner; ironically, such appealswill be free.          While many governments, including the U.S.government and many state governments, are in the throesof budget-cutting battles, Ontario is the firstjurisdiction where freedom of information and privacyprotections have been singled out for reductions early inthe game.   On the federal level in the U.S.,implementation of such statutes has often been given lowpriority and agencies struggle with inadequate budgetsand staff, but Congress has not moved to trim them asstatutory rights.  If the current Ontario governmentactually views these potential changes as a way toincrease revenues, experience shows clearly that such agoal is very unlikely.  The nearly certain result of theproposed changes will be to lower the number of requests,which, in turn, may save institutions money if theirworkloads become small enough that staff can be let go ormoved to another office.  The addition of an applicationfee for personal information is likely to impact theprivacy rights of individuals to an even greater extentthan will application fees for information requested bysubject matter.  Not only will individuals pay a fee toaccess their personal information, other related rights,particularly the right of correction or amendment, willbe affected as well.  Since most individuals will notknow if their files are incorrect until they haveactually seen them, corrections will occur only afteraccess is made pursuant to the new fee regulations.Since this aspect of fair information practices is basedon the assumption that individuals are in a position tobe most knowledgeable about the accuracy of theirpersonal information and most concerned about ensuringaccuracy, the entire system is premised on the ability ofindividuals to access their files.  Roadblocksrepresented by fees may undermine that premise.          While access advocates are fond of making theconnection between principles of participatory democracy,freedom of speech and press, and the need for citizenaccess to government information, no court has ever quitemade that leap of faith.  But that doesn't mean theconnection doesn't exist.  When governments take measuresthat denigrate the ability of citizens to inquire abouttheir government for no other reason than to save moneyor make government more "efficient," that government hasput a pricetag on that aspect of democracy.  Such actionsare likely to have two results.  The first is that fewerpeople will participate in the scheme of access anddebate on a societal level will be incrementally moreuninformed.  The other result of fees in such statutes isto further exacerbate the chasm between economic havesand economic have-nots.  Those entities, primarilybusiness, which can easily absorb the fees and realizethat government information is still a bargain in thecommercial market will continue to access governmentinformation and reap the potential benefits.  Those whoare driven by grassroots activism or mere personalcuriosity will begin to drop out of the race or at leastthink twice before plunging ahead with a request.  Ifinformation is truly power, the fostering of divisionsalong economic, class or political lines ultimately hasconsequences that resonate throughout a democraticsociety.Back to Headline List CopyrightACCESS REPORTS/FREEDOM OF INFORMATION via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996          The D.C. Circuit has ruled that the Secret Service          The D.C. Circuit has ruled that the Secret Serviceproperly withheld records concerning the breakup of ameeting of computer hackers at the Pentagon City Mall bymall security under Exemption 7(C) (invasion of privacyconcerning law enforcement records) and Exemption 7(D)(confidential sources). However, it told the SecretService to show that the sources had been promisedconfidentiality.  Although the agency said it routinelytreated source information as confidential, the courtpointed out that "the manner in which an agency`routinely' handles information is not sufficient toestablish an implied assurance of confidentiality as toany particular source."  It then noted that "the Serviceoffered no evidence that a fear of retaliation by hackersis sufficiently widespread to justify an inference thatsources of information relating to computer crimes expecttheir identities and the information they provide to bekept confidential."  The agency was able to establishthat at least one source had explicitly requestedconfidentiality.  Ironically, it wasn't until the D.C.Circuit issued its opinion that the plaintiffs --Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility -- evenknew there was more than one source.   As to 7(C), thecourt took a hardline position that virtually any mentionof an individual in law enforcement records gave rise toa privacy expectation.  CPSR pointed out that "therecords also contain information relating to individualswho attended the meeting of the 2600 Club" and arguedthat "the exemption does not authorize the Service towithhold this information because, it its view, no stigmacould attach to persons who `were engaged in whollylawful activity and were peaceably assembled in a publicplace.'"  But the court disagreed, noting that "even ifwe were to assume that the Service's records contain suchinformation and even if those individuals were notsuspects, their public identification with a meeting thatreportedly attracted the attention of law enforcementofficials would subject them to a degree of interest thatwould impinge upon their privacy.  We conclude, then,that Exemption 7(C) permits the Service to withhold thenames and identifying information of persons appearing inits records so long as their privacy interest in notbeing connected in any way with a criminal investigationoutweighs the public interest in disclosure."  (ComputerProfessionals for Social Responsibility v. United StatesSecret Service, No. 94-5247, U.S. Court of Appeals forthe District of Columbia Circuit, Jan. 2)          A federal judge in Maine has rejected the rationaleof Dismukes v. Dept. of the Interior and has ruled thatdigitized data maintained by the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration for use in electronic chartingsystems was an agency record subject to disclosure.  NOAAhad argued that it was not obligated to provide thedigitized data because its paper-format charts werealready available and contained the same information.But Judge D. Brock Hornby, wondered why "if the materialsare subject to disclosure in some format (here, the papercharts), then why not in any other format in which theyalso exist?"  He provided the agency's answer: "Expenseand inconvenience to the agency are the obvious answers,"but noted that "Congress seems to have addressed theseconcerns by providing specific measures for costrecovery."  Noting that the Supreme Court in Dept. ofJustice v. Tax Analysts had held that agency records maybe withheld only if they are subject to an exemption,Hornby added that "the paper charts -- information thehuman eye can decode -- and the binary number strings --instructions a computer can decode to generate an imageof a chart on a monitor -- are both agency records.  Theyalso each add information to the underlying raw dataabout depths, shoals, buoy locations, etc., in order tomake the data more easily usable -- by eye, the mind, orthe computer.  Nothing in the FOIA excuses an agency fromdisclosing a particular record because it has disclosedthe content elsewhere in a different format."  (DelormePublishing Company v. National Oceanic and AtmosphericAdministration of the United States, Department ofCommerce, Civil Action No. 95-94-P-H, U.S. District Courtfor the District of Maine, Dec. 11, 1995)          The Eighth Circuit has ruled that a district courtjudge improperly dismissed Jack Urban's FOIA suit for acopy of a polygraph test he took administered by theKansas Bureau of Investigation and provided to the U.S.Attorney for Kansas.  The lower court dismissed the casebased on the government's claim that it could not findthe record.  The court of appeals noted that "when agovernment agency claims that it does not possess orcontrol a requested document, the agency must show itfully discharged its statutory obligations by `conductinga search reasonably calculated to uncover all relevantdocuments.'  Thus, when the question is whether arequested document exists, or is outside the government'spossession or control, an FOIA action is not moot, anddismissal prior to service will almost never beappropriate."  The court said that the response of theAssistant U.S Attorney for Kansas that he could notlocate the records in the files of the U.S. Attorney'soffice was not adequate.  The court noted that "Urban hasnow spent nearly eighteen months seeking a copy ofseemingly innocuous test results.  His early requests gotno response or a cryptic brush off.  He has never beentold why he is not entitled to the documents.  And hisattempt to invoke, FOIA, a statute intended to fostergreater access to government records, has insteadfostered more paper shuffling and lame excuses."Remanding the case to district court, the court ofappeals noted that "there may be a legitimate reason whyUrban is not entitled to the materials he requests, butnone appears in this record."  (Jack Urban v. UnitedStates of America; Kansas Bureau of Investigation, No.95-2386, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit,Dec. 27, 1995)          A federal judge in New York has given the FBI a yearto respond to Wayne Pray's request.  Noting that the FBIhad a backlog of 14,055 cases as of May, 1995, JudgeSidney Stein also indicated that there were at least1,616 requests ahead of Pray's and that the agency wasprocessing requests at the rate of 19 per month.  Notingthat this would mean Pray's request would be completed inseven years, Stein observed that "it seems inconceivablethat defendants would be requesting this Court to stayPray's request for seven years.  Therefore this Court isprepared to assume that defendants' declaration containsa typographical error, that the average of 19 cases permonth is actually 190 cases per month and that defendantsshould therefore be able to comply with Pray's request inapproximately 9 months.  Because of the difficulty inestimating time, this Court will grant defendants' motionfor a stay until December 31, 1996 or until Pray'srequest is responded to, whichever is sooner."  (WaynePray v. Federal Bureau of Investigation, Civil Action No.95-0380 (SHS), U.S District Court for the SouthernDistrict of New York, Dec. 27, 1995)          A federal court in New York has accepted amagistrate's recommendation and found that the FBIproperly withheld records concerning the murder of PedroBueno and the whereabouts of the plaintiff's wife and twodaughters.  The only record disclosed to Devernon LeGrand was a letter from the Director of the FBI to theNational Center for Analysis of Violent Crime fieldoffice in New York informing it that a Violent CrimeApprehension Program (VICAP) report had been submittedfor Bueno.  In withholding the report under Exemption7(C) (invasion of privacy concerning law enforcementrecords) and Exemption 7(D) (confidential sources), themagistrate noted that there was no public interest in theVICAP report, but that "the administration of VICAP,which seeks to assist state and local law enforcementagencies in their investigations of unsolved violenthomicides, clearly involves concerns of potentialharassment of personnel and interference with lawenforcement efforts."  As to 7(D), the magistrateobserved that "the VICAP Report for Pedro Bueno wassubmitted by the New York State Police to the FBI undercircumstances which support an inference ofconfidentiality.  It consists of information concerningthe investigation by the New York State Police of thePedro Bueno homicide.  It is reasonable to infer that astate law enforcement agency would not turn over to theFBI all of its investigative information on an unsolvedhomicide if the information were not to be treated asconfidential by the FBI."  (Devernon Le Grand v. FederalBureau of Investigation, Civil Action No. 94-0300, U.S.District Court for the Southern District of New York,Nov. 29, 1995)          Judge Louis Oberdorfer has ruled that the FBIproperly invoked a series of exemptions and conductedadequate searches in most instances in responding to arequest from Jeffrey Steinberg.  However, Oberdorferfound that some searches were inadequate, noting that theCharlotte and New York offices had not justified theirsearch for a Terrorist Photograph Album.  He pointed outthat the agency failed to address Steinberg's contentionthat the album should be searched.  He noted that"plaintiff has identified a particular document, the TPA,that is likely to contain any responsive information thatexists . . .In this case, defendant has failed to meetits burden of showing that its search was reasonable."As for the search of the Richmond office for recordsconcerning the Dan Bar Farm, Oberdorfer noted that theagency had alluded to a resident agent in Radford, VA,who had information about the farm; however, the agencytold the court there was no Radford agent.  But Steinbergproduced a document from an Alexandria agent stating thatan agent under Richmond's supervision had informationabout the farm.  Steinberg suggested the agency contactthe Alexandria agent and find out who the "missing" agentwas.  Although the agency claimed to do so would betantamount to conducting research, Oberdorfer noted that"it is not unreasonable to require defendant to obtain asingle redacted name and make a single phone call toclarify defendant's mistake and discover where responsiverecords, if any, are located."  (Jeffrey Steinberg v.U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Action No. 93-2409-LFO,U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, Oct.31, 1995)          Judge Louis Oberdorfer has ruled that the CustomsService search for records responsive to a request fromJeffrey Steinberg was inadequate.  Oberdorfer noted that"although defendant has stated in conclusory terms that[the Treasury Enforcement Communications System] is usedto locate investigative files and is, to its mind,comprehensive, defendant has failed to explain or even tostate, `that no other record system was likely to produceresponsive documents.'"  He pointed out that Steinberghad produced a list of 18 possible systems of recordsthat might have responsive records.  He noted that"plaintiff has shown that it is reasonable to concludethat additional systems exist and that TECS does notinclude these systems.  Plaintiff has shown that it wouldnot be `unduly burdensome' to search these systems, giventhat they are organized alphabetically."  To furtherclarify the search issue, Oberdorfer ordered the agencyto respond to Steinberg's interrogatories.  (JeffreySteinberg v. U.S. Department of the Treasury, CivilAction No. 93-2348-LFO, U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia, Sept. 13, 1995)          A federal court in Chicago has ruled that an FOIAsuit against the Veterans Administration is not moot.After William Johnson filed suit against the VA, theagency disclosed records responsive to his request.However, Johnson continued to contend that it had notprovided all the requested information.  Refusing todismiss the case, Judge Suzanne Conlon noted that "whilethe medical center denies the existence of theinformation in issue, Johnson asserts that hisconversations with the medical center's pharmacy indicateotherwise.  The Seventh Circuit views conflicting claimsas to the existence of documents or information as a formof improper withholding.  Accordingly, the case is notmoot."  (William J. Johnson, Sr. v. VeteransAdministration, Civil Action No. 95 C 4909, U.S. DistrictCourt for the Northern District of Illinois, EasternDivision, Dec. 6, 1995)          A federal judge in Michigan has ruled that the IRSproperly refused to honor a subpoena requiring testimonyof a special agent and production of documents pertinentto an ongoing law enforcement investigation.Acknowledging that he was not dealing with an FOIArequest, Judge Gerald Rosen nevertheless found that FOIAcase law was instructive in reaching a conclusion.Relying on the Sixth Circuit's decision in Dickerson v.Dept. of Justice, 992 F.2d 1426 (6th Cir. 1993), whichupheld the Justice Department's decision to withhold allits files on the Jimmy Hoffa investigation, Rosen notedthat "the level of justification demanded from an agencywhen it refuses to disclose information surely mustdepend on the nature of the materials sought and theirrelation to any ongoing criminal investigations.  Thematerials sought by Plaintiffs go to the very heart ofthe ongoing criminal investigation of the Plaintiffs."He concluded that "the subpoena issued in connection withPlaintiffs' state court action seeks testimony andmaterials that are central to an ongoing IRS criminalinvestigation.  The District Director reasonablydetermined that compliance with this subpoena wouldseriously impair federal tax administration."  (BranchInternational Services, Inc., etal. v. United States ofAmerica and Internal Revenue Service, Civil Action No.94-CV-75003-DT, U.S. District Court for the EasternDistrict of Michigan, Southern Division, Nov. 29, 1995)          A federal court in Minnesota has ruled that SteveNetzman cannot have access to IRS information concerningcharges or penalties filed against Philip French.  Thecourt found that the records were "tax information"covered by Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code.The judge noted that the Haskell Amendment -- which"precludes from exemption data in a form which cannot beassociated with, or otherwise identify, directly orindirectly, a particular taxpayer -- was the onlyexception to non-disclosure under 6103.  He pointed outthat the records Netzman was requesting consisted of"information which relates directly to a particularindividual and, therefore, is not subject to the HaskellAmendment."  (Steve Netzman v. Internal Revenue Service,Civil Action No. 3-95-248, U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Minnesota, Third Division, Nov. 21, 1995)          A federal judge in New Hampshire has ruled that theIRS properly withheld records from Terrence Bennett.Judge Paul Barbadoro pointed out that "the documentsrefer to information exchanged pursuant to a tax treaty.The Service reasonably concluded that the disclosure ofsuch documents would chill future cooperation withforeign government treaty partners.  Therefore, it isentitled to withhold the documents on the ground thattheir disclosure would seriously impair federal taxadministration."  (Terrence M. Bennett v. InternalRevenue Service, Civil Action No. 95-73-B, U.S. DistrictCourt for the District of New Hampshire, Nov. 8, 1995)          A federal court in California has ruled that data onwhich the Department of Health and Human Services reliedto show that the Loma Linda Community Hospital had over-represented the number of Medicare patients it servedshould not have been withheld based on the Privacy Act.The Department claimed that only 14.77 percent of LomaLinda's Medicare patients qualified as low-income.  Todefend itself against the charges, Loma Linda requestedaccess to the underlying data, claiming that itsdisclosure would be a routine use under the Privacy Act.The court found that Loma Linda was entitled to see thedata because it had already had access to theconfidential information contained in it in order to makeits own calculations under the state Medi-Cal program.The court noted that "the policy underlying the PrivacyAct of protecting confidential information fromdisclosure is not implicated in this particular factualsituation.  Even if release of the data relied upon bythe [Health Care Financing Administration] in making itscalculation had unexpectedly included information notalready known to Loma Linda, a confidentiality ordercould have been imposed to protect the privacy interestsin issue."  (Loma Linda Community Hospital v. DonnaShalala, Civil Action No. ED-CV-940055-RT and ED-CV-940068-RT, U.S. District Court for the Central Districtof California, Dec. 15, 1995)          The report on the state of access to public recordsprepared by former House Government InformationSubcommittee counsel Bob Gellman has been published inGovernment Information Quarterly.  The paper, entitled"Public Records -- Access, Privacy and Public Policy: ADiscussion Paper," is reprinted at 12 GovernmentInformation Quarterly, p. 391-426.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-21IA060-000326-B019-216http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt33.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020500 text/html 19532HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:03:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:57 GMTContent-length: 19343Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt33.html Sample Issue Copyright ANTITRUST FOIA LOG via NewsNet January 26, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (67 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (51 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (79 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (36 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (87 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (53 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (46 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (51 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (42 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (26 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (78 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (37 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (42 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (59 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (37 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (50 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (52 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Justice Department's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. (27 words) CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT95-369 DATE: 12/18/95REQUESTED BY: Ralph O. Barton Jamestown, ND 58402-1900MATERIAL REQUESTED: Correspondence from or to schools in North Dakota, theNorth Dakota School Board Association or the North Dakota AttorneyGeneral's Office discussing an alleged conspiracy "between 1966 and 1988 toallocate customers and rig bids for school buses and school bus bodies inNorth Dakota." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT95-370 DATE: 12/18/95REQUESTED BY: Frank Bass The Wall Street Journal 600 Travis Ave., Suite1965 Houston, TX 77002MATERIAL REQUESTED: Records pertaining to the closing and sale of theassets of The Houston Post to the Hearst Corporation in April, 1995. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT95-371 DATE: 12/18/95REQUESTED BY: Mark C. Rifkin Greenfield & Rifkin P.O. Box 259 Haverford, PA19041-0259MATERIAL REQUESTED: "[D]ocuments relating to the investigation of allegedviolations of the antitrust laws by Archer-Daniels-Midland Company ('ADM')underlying the litigation captioned United States of America v.Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., Civ. No. 83-51-D (S.D. Iowa, C.D.)." Also, anydocuments relating to the markets for high fructose corn syrup "or anyother corn derivative products." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT95-372 DATE: 12/18/95REQUESTED BY: Stacy A. Barnwell San Antonio, TX 78240MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any "investigations or complaints... against Rolex USAregarding price-fixing or other antitrust violations." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-001 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Patrick Sutton Preston Gates Ellis & Rouvelas Meeds Suite 5001735 New York Ave., NW Washington, DC 20006-4759MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any records pertaining to the U.S. Advanced BatteryConsortium (USABC). Also, any records pertaining to the efforts of the U.S.automobile and oil companies "or those industries acting jointly, withrespect to the development... of electric-powered vehicles or the batteriesfor use in electric-powered vehicles, whether or not implicating orinvolving the USABC." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-002 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Pete Yost The Associates Press 2021 K St., NW Washington, DC20006MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any memos or phone records referencing Mena, Arkansas,"the airport there and any investigations or government operations in thatarea from 1983 to the present." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-003 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Micheal [sic] T. Hurley Puyallup, WA 98373MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any information regarding "fraudulent claims of USGovernment involvement in the downing of Pan Am 103 on December 21, 1988over Lockerbie, Scotland." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-004 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Matthew Lee Inner City Press/Community on the Move P.O. Box416, HUB Station Bronx, NY 10455MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any records "assessing the competitive effects of theproposed merger of Chemical Banking Corporation... and The Chase ManhattanCorporation." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-005 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Kenneth A. Barnes Contact Lens Laboratories, Inc. 2465 DixieHwy. Fort Mitchell, KY 41017MATERIAL REQUESTED: Information regarding any DOJ investigation of Bausch &Lomb for tying arrangements. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-006 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Michael Ravnitzky St. Paul, MNMATERIAL REQUESTED: The 1995 FOIA Case Log. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-007 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: W. Todd Miller Baker & Miller Suite 615 700 Eleventh St., NWWashington, DC 20001-4507MATERIAL REQUESTED: "[D]ocuments relating to the 'Amendment No. 1 to JointOperating Agreement' dated April 30, 1992, purporting to amend the JointOperating Agreement between the Detroit Free Press, Incorporated and TheDetroit News, Inc. that had been approved by the Attorney General on orabout August 8, 1988." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-008 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Milton M. Bush The 'M Companies 3942 N. Upland St. Arlington,VA 22207MATERIAL REQUESTED: Documents relating to any investigation of UnderwritersLaboratories. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-009 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Gail Morgan M.L. Burke Company 33204 Western Ave. Union City,CA 94587MATERIAL REQUESTED: The complaint and competitive impact statement in U.S.v. Pilkington plc, Civ. CV 94-345-TUC-WDB. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-010 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Hugh K. Webster Webster, Chamberlain & Bean 1747 PennsylvaniaAve., NW Washington, DC 20006MATERIAL REQUESTED: Since 1980, any broad studies or reports "regarding theactual economic or competitive impact of information exchange activities bycompetitors in an industry, including through an industry tradeassociation." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-011 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Pamela Mones Harford Business Ledger P.O. Box 40 Aberdeen, MD21001-0040MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any information regarding "possible price-fixingactivities in the paper industry." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-012 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Katherine R. Matthews Elias, Matz, Tiernan & Herrick 12thFloor 734 15th St. NW Washington, DC 20005MATERIAL REQUESTED: The competitive factors report "with regard to theapplication by First Bank Systems to acquire First Interstate." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-013 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: William D. Anderson, Jr. Simpson Thacher & Bartlett 425Lexington Ave. New York, NY 10017-1954MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any DOJ comments regarding the "merger of Fleet Bankand Shawmut Bank and the merger of U.S. Bancorp and West One/Bancorp." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightANTITRUST FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 26, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. JusticeDepartment's Antitrust Division between December 18, 1995 and January 16, 1996. ANTITRUST DIVISION CONTROL NO.: AT96-014 DATE: 01/16/96REQUESTED BY: Nick Fitch San Rafael, CA 94903MATERIAL REQUESTED: A list of industries investigated by the DOJ.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-22IA060-000326-B019-258http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt02.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020525 text/html 18749HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:03:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:49 GMTContent-length: 18560Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt02.html Sample Issue Copyright CONGRESS DAILY via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *BUDGET* Dole Says `Enough Is Enough,' Urges 7 To 10-Day CR (510 words) *TELECOMMUNICATIONS* GOP Leaders To Meet Wed. On Proposed Telco Changes (237 words) *ENVIRONMENT* House Panels Seeking Superfund Financing Alternatives (301 words) *DEFENSE* Sources: Osprey Exhibits Problems During Shock Tests (337 words) *SCHEDULE* House, Senate Schedule For This Week (106 words) *BANKING* Talks On Banking Issues Pushed Back; State Fees Still Problematic (149 words) *GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS* Union Asks Congress To Contribute Pay To Furloughed Workers (157 words) *REPUBLICANS* Gingrich Admits Mistakes In First Year As Speaker (482 words) *THE FINAL WORD* Washington Pundits (158 words) CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Dole Says `Enough Is Enough,' Urges 7 To 10-Day CR      Contending that "enough is enough," Senate Majority LeaderDole today said Congress should pass a seven- to 10-daycontinuing resolution to reopen the entire federal government. "Ithink we've made our point," Dole told reporters, saying theHouse and Senate should pass a "clean" CR lasting up to a weekand a half, while budget negotiations continue. "There are nottoo many wealthy people working for the federal government," Dolesaid, referring to employees who are not being paid. He said healso is concerned that without immediate legislation, various"expiring provisions" of federal law will prohibit some statesfrom providing certain services. He said, for example, somestates may not be able to send out unemployment checks.      Dole said he would discuss the CR proposal with HouseSpeaker Gingrich later today. Meanwhile, Senate Minority LeaderDaschle said this afternoon Democrats would again attempt tooffer a clean CR in the Senate later today and that given Dole'ssupport, he hoped Gingrich would go along with the proposal. ButHouse members are likely to stick to their position that a CRshould only be passed as part of an overall budget deal, HouseAppropriations Chairman Livingston told CongressDaily. "Ihonestly don't believe that a straight CR would pass over here,"he said, adding that he sympathizes with Dole's position. "I wantto get the government going," he said. A House Republicanleadership aide said, "The last time we gave [President Clinton]a CR, he didn't even come to the table for a month, so it doesn'tgive us much incentive to do it again."      The aide said tonight's White House budget meeting isexpected to be the first time the negotiators try to resolve thelarger issues. "We'll see how serious they are," the aide said,adding that decisions on whether the House tries to overridepresidential vetoes of the Commerce-Justice-State, VA-HUD andInterior appropriations bills depends -- in part -- on whetherthe Clinton administration bargains in good faith. Livingstonagreed, saying, "The shape and content of the discussion willhave great bearing on what we do over the next few days." Clintonearly today met for two hours with his budget advisers to discussstrategy for today's negotiating sessions, which could go lateinto the evening, Press Secretary Michael McCurry said. Whenasked if the president would support a CR that sends all federalemployees back to work without pay, McCurry said, "It's betterthan nothing, but not much better than nothing."      On a related front, the administration has barely startedto piece together the FY97 budget the president is supposed topresent to Congress by Feb. 5 because the final form of the FY96budget is unknown. An administration official said the presidentnormally would be making final decisions on the FY97 budget thistime of the year if an FY96 budget were in place. Administrationbudget officials need to know final figures for FY96appropriations and any planned changes in entitlement spendingformulas before they can craft a new budget, the official said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996GOP Leaders To Meet Wed. On Proposed Telco Changes      At a joint House and Senate leadership meeting scheduledfor Wednesday morning, Senate Majority Leader Dole and HouseSpeaker Gingrich are expected to try to iron out a finalcompromise on four or five outstanding issues intelecommunications reform legislation, sources said today. Theissues include foreign ownership, price regulation, and broadcastownership. Spectrum sales, an issue Dole brought up again lastweek, may also be raised, sources said. Optimistically, if theleadership can settle these issues, the telecommunicationsconference agreement could go to the House floor Thursday. Itcould then be brought to a vote in the Senate on Friday or earlynext week, sources said, while cautioning, "But we've all heardthat before."      The most recent version of an agreement put together by thefour conference leaders dropped a provision that would haverelaxed foreign ownership restrictions for U.S. communicationsfirms. House Commerce Trade and Hazardous Materials SubcommitteeChairman Michael Oxley, R-Ohio, is working to reinstate theprovision, strongly opposed by Senate Commerce ranking memberErnest Hollings, D-S.C. The regional Bell operating companieshave sought "price regulation" of their services to replace thecurrent system of "rate of return" regulation, which caps theamount of profits the RBOCs can earn. Also, some conferees wantto loosen broadcast ownership restrictions for the number ofproperties held by one owner. And Dole has sought to chargebroadcasters for the purchase of spectrum as a revenue raiser.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996House Panels Seeking Superfund Financing Alternatives      With a rebate to private parties for Superfund cleanups atarget of fierce political attacks, the House Commerce andTransportation and Infrastructure panels are seeking alternativesfor financing the program, panel sources said. Among theproposals are further exemptions from liability for new classesof Superfund sites, a Transportation and Infrastructure sourceadded. Transportation and Infrastructure Water Resources andEnvironment Subcommittee Chairman Sherwood Boehlert, R-N.Y., lastmonth said the rebate -- called the retroactive liabilitydiscount -- will be dropped from the Superfund reform legislationhe is sponsoring with Commerce Trade and Hazardous MaterialsSubcommittee Chairman Michael Oxley, R-Ohio. "There is generalagreement that it won't survive," Boehlert said.      Democrats and environmental groups derided the RLD plan asa "pay-the-polluter" giveaway and a costly new entitlement.Boehlert said Democrats were able to target the RLD to portraythe Superfund legislation as an attack on the environment. Asapproved by Oxley's subcommittee in November, the RLD would cover50 percent of the cleanup cost at Superfund sites and would bepaid out of the Superfund trust fund. Bill sponsors proposed theRLD as an alternative to exempting from cleanup liabilityaltogether sites polluted before the Superfund law went intoeffect in 1980. Oxley said repealing retroactive liability wouldbe too expensive, and that the RLD would reduce liabilitylitigation and get more money into cleanups.      To replace the RLD, the committees are consideringexempting more multi-party sites from cleanup liability, theTransportation source said. Cleanup would be financed directlyfrom the Superfund trust fund. The source contended adding newexemptions for multi-party sites to the current plan would reducelitigation costs and increase money going to cleanup by one-thirdto one-half over the amount spent under current law. The billalready would exempt municipal landfills and private oilrecycling facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Sources: Osprey Exhibits Problems During Shock Tests      The Navy's troubled efforts to improve its historicallyweak ability to counter anti-ship mines suffered another setbackrecently, when the first of a new type of mine-hunting ships cameunglued during simulated combat tests. During explosive shocktrials in late October, some of the interior bulkheads andequipment platforms and decking of the coastal mine hunter Ospreybecame separated from the ship's hull, according to sourcesfamiliar with the tests. The problem appears to be a failure ofthe bonding that is supposed to hold together the interiorstructures and the hull, all of which are made of a specialplastic material, the sources said. One source said the problemsrevealed in the Osprey could require extensive modifications thatalso would have to be retrofitted, at additional cost, to the 11other ships in the class, all of which are completed or nearlyfinished.      The damage to the Osprey is just the latest problem with aproject that ran years behind schedule and well above expectedcost. And it continues a rash of difficulties plaguing the Navy'sentire program to eliminate a war-fighting weakness thathandicapped operations in the Persian Gulf. Capt. GordonPeterson, a Navy spokesman, confirmed that the Osprey experiencedsome damage during the trials but declined to specify howextensive it was, citing security concerns. Peterson noted somedamage is expected during shock trials and said that "the shipmaintained the ability to maneuver, navigate and perform its warfighting missions" at the completion of the tests. But one sourcesaid he was told "they suffered significantly more damage thanthey expected."      Another source said the test was stopped after fiveexplosions, instead of the planned six shots, and repairs had tobe made between the fourth and fifth explosions. Petersonconfirmed repairs were made and the test cut short, explainingthat Navy experts decided "sufficient data was obtained" in fiveshots. A government source said the Navy now is struggling overhow to correct the problems revealed in the shock trials.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996House, Senate Schedule For This Week      Both the House and Senate will adjourn momentarily at noonWednesday to fulfill the constitutional requirement of ending thefirst session of the 104th Congress Jan. 3. When the Housereturns Wednesday, it is expected to take up an override ofPresident Clinton's veto of the defense authorization bill.Depending on budget negotiations, the House also may try tooverride vetoes of the Interior, Commerce-Justice-State and VA-HUD appropriations bills later this week. A bill to permit statesto operate national parks at their own expense during theshutdown also may be brought to the floor. The Senate schedulealso will continue to reflect the negotiations.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Talks On Banking Issues Pushed Back; State Fees Still Problematic      Budget talks on banking issues have been pushed back andnot yet rescheduled, and the issue of state bank fees is still onthe table, sources said today. At a meeting last week of HouseBanking and Budget committee staff, Banking aides did not opposea revenue-raising provision that would require federal regulatorsto collect fees for their examinations of state-chartered banks,sources said. Staff took a more "objective" stance, saying thecommittee "has never approved of a position" to collect the fees,according to a source. In contrast, on the issue of whether toraise the ceiling on Federal Housing Administration loans, "staffdoes not recommend this as an option," one source said. Statebanks already pay examination fees to state regulators, andBanking Chairman Leach wrote to the Budget Committee last monthurging budget negotiators not to accept the fee provision,included in the administration's budget proposal.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Union Asks Congress To Contribute Pay To Furloughed Workers      The National Treasury Employees Union is asking members ofCongress to donate pay they receive during the partial governmentshutdown to furloughed federal workers through the FederalEmployee Education and Assistance Fund. In a letter to CongressFriday, the NTEU called it an "outrage" that Congress, "whocaused this shutdown crisis by not passing the necessaryappropriations bills on time, have been on vacation for theholiday and will receive no reduction in pay due to thefurlough." The union also said it will file a temporaryrestraining order with a federal court asking that the lawrequiring federal employees to work without pay be declaredunconstitutional. Meanwhile, Rep. Charles Taylor, R-N.C., offeredSaturday to make available about $10,000 a month from his own payfor emergency, no-interest loans to furloughed federal workers,the Associated Press reported. "I know I can't help everyone, butat least I can get some people through the crisis times," Taylorsaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Gingrich Admits Mistakes In First Year As Speaker      Looking back at his first year as speaker of the House andleader of the Republican revolution, House Speaker Gingrichacknowledged Saturday that he has made some mistakes and will tryto correct them by confining himself to doing only his job. Thejump from back bench bomb-thrower to key policy decision-makercaused some errors of inexperience, Gingrich said. "Nobody couldgo from being minority whip of the House to the speaker of theHouse in one jump and go from being in the opposition party toworking with [Senate Majority Leader] Dole and being really thedominant agenda-setting force in the country [...] and not makemistakes," Gingrich said on CNN's "Evans and Novak."      Among the errors Gingrich noted was linking his treatmenton Air Force One to taking a hard line with President Clinton onshutting down the government. "There's no question that there aretimes, as I've described it, where it's like throwing aninterception straight into the other team's defense. And onseveral occasions, and that's one, I did things that weren'tright," Gingrich said. The controversy surrounding his originalacceptance of a $4.5 million book advance also could have beenavoided, he added, by taking advice from people "who understoodbeing a national figure in the way I frankly didn't understand."      Gingrich said a major way of avoiding self-inflicted woundsthis year will be to keep to his job as speaker and stopfreelancing as social commentator. Several times in the last yearand a half Gingrich has linked breaking news stories -- likeSusan Smith's murder of her two children in South Carolina -- toa breakdown of civilization caused by liberal policies. "Youknow, I'm speaker of the House. I'm not an assistant professor ofhistory. I'm not an analyst. I'm not a commentator. And I thinkat times I've tried to play other roles, and it's almost alwaysbeen wrong," Gingrich said. "I've got to be the speaker of theHouse and leader of the House Republican Party and stay insidethat particular box to be effective." Gingrich, however, has saiddebate and teaching are the only ways to achieve the broadcultural goals of conservatives.      Gingrich also attributed his low poll ratings to how he iscovered by the media. "If I were the person who was seeing seven-second sound bites, I wouldn't like me either," he said. But headded that over time, "as people see more of what we're reallydoing [...] my ratings will go up." Gingrich also made somethingof a New Year's resolution to engage more with individualreporters and editors in an effort to improve the Republicanrevolution. "I'm going to work harder at interacting withindividual editors and reporters to see if we can't get our storythrough if by no other means than just embarrassing them intobeing professional," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996Washington Pundits   Some observations by Washington experts and pundits on theongoing budget battle, as quoted late last week by Reuters:    "Everyone thought Congress wouldn't leave town for Christmaswith the government shut down because it would look terrible. Wewere wrong."       -- Stanley Collender, a former Hill aide who is now thein-house budget expert at Price Waterhouse.       "You have a conflict of issues more fundamental than mostpeople think. This isn't just children squabbling. This is a realdifference between the way the Republicans in Congress andClinton want to take the country."       -- Stephen Moore, budget analyst at the Cato Institute,who said the standoff "will probably be ended in the next fewweeks [...] but it could last several months."       "Custer presumably thought he would win at Little BigHorn, too."       -- Political analyst Kevin Phillips -- suggesting that theRepublicans had trapped themselves rhetorically, but are yet torealize it.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-23IA060-000326-B019-289http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt03.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020636 text/html 31263HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:04:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:50 GMTContent-length: 31074Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt03.html Sample Issue Copyright CONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *BUDGET* Senate Approves CR; Budget Talks To Continue Today (946 words) *HOUSE ADMINISTRATION* Oxley Wants To Head House Commerce Telco Panel (363 words) *AGRICULTURE* Roberts Seems Reluctant To Extend Food Aid Programs (465 words) *HOUSE RACES* A Third Of Calif. Delegation In Play As Filing Closes (1335 words) *TAXES* 81 Republicans Oppose Deal That Trims $245B Tax Cut (223 words) *OUTLOOK* No Senate Votes Slated This Week (185 words) *TELECOMMUNICATIONS* Pressler Urges Quick Passage Of Th Telco Bill (171 words) *HEALTH* Senators Object To Proposed Regulations On Tobacco (184 words) *POLITICS* NRSC Files Complaint Against Wyden Senate Campaign (171 words) Majority In State Believes Thurmon Should Not Seek Re-election (143 words) Durbin Camp Seeks To get Primary Foe Off The Ballot (145 words) CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Senate Approves CR; Budget Talks To Continue Today      As late-night White House budget talks produced "progress"but no final deal, the Senate Tuesday hedged its bets and passeda continuing resolution to reopen the federal government as wellas a backup measure to bring federal employees back to workwithout pay if, as it appears, the House refuses to approve thenew CR immediately. President Clinton and Hill leaders met fromabout 6:15 p.m. (EST) to 9:15 p.m. (EST) Tuesday at the WhiteHouse, but did not announce any new agreements on the budget or aCR afterward. Instead, the participants, continuing their effortsto keep the budget negotiations behind closed doors, left withouttalking to reporters and issued a one-sentence joint statementsaid to have been authored by Vice President Gore. The statementdeclared, "Our talks continue to make constructive progress andwe will reconvene tomorrow at 1:30 p.m."      White House Press Secretary Michael McCurry said today'smeeting would be at the White House. Among the participants inthe meeting with Clinton Tuesday night were House SpeakerGingrich, Senate Majority Leader Dole, Senate Minority LeaderDaschle, House Majority Leader Armey, House Minority LeaderGephardt, Gore and White House Chief of Staff Panetta. Afterspending 90 minutes in the Oval Office, the negotiators moved tothe White House residence to continue talks over a dinner ofpasta and shrimp. Meawhile, the Senate earlier Tuesday eveningapproved a "clean" continuing resolution that simply extends thenow-expired CR until Jan. 12. Dole appeared on the Senate floor,shortly after meeting in the afternoon (EST) with House andSenate Republican leaders for more than two hours, to makeseveral unanimous consent requests, including one to pass the newCR. Most programs would be funded at the lowest of House, Senateor FY95 funding levels. Technically, the CR was added tolegislation that would provide most favored nation status toBulgaria.      In a floor statement, Dole declared, "People have been gonefrom their jobs long enough."      He said while some House Republicans want to refuse to passa new CR until a budget deal is set, "I don't quite understandthe logic in all that." And Dole said federal employees "want towork," adding: "They're caught in the middle. They're pawns [...]If there's any point to be made, it should have been made bynow."      While Gingrich refused to consider the possibility of a newCR until he saw how Tuesday night's budget talks progressed, Doledenied there was a split between himself and the speaker, butagreed "there are some differences" between House and SenateRepublicans on "how we should proceed."      Asked later if he was trying to pressure the House to passthe CR, Dole said: "Me? No."      Gingrich speaking with reporters on Capitol Hill declinedto discuss the Senate action Tuesday evening, saying, "I don'thave any comment." And Gingrich spokesman Tony Blankley termedthe Senate action as "a tactical judgment for the Senate."      Talking with reporters in the Oval Office later Tuesdaybefore the meeting with Clinton, Gingrich said, "Our members willbe back by noon (EST) tomorrow, and we hope to meet with all ofthem and brief them on tonight's meeting and whatever happenstomorrow morning, and maybe get something done during the daytomorrow." "I think if we can both get movement on the balancedbudget and get the government back to work, and paid for, thatreally would be a good step in the right direction," Gingrichadded.      House Budget Chairman Kasich said it is "very unlikely" theHouse would pass a CR until a budget deal is set, adding, "We seeall this as being connected to balancing the budget."      Anticipating that the House may refuse to consider the newcontinuing resolution, the Senate, by unanimous consent Tuesday,also amended and passed separate House legislation that wouldbring federal employees back to work without pay, but with theguarantee they would eventually be paid.      The legislation in effect declares all federal employees"essential."      In addition, the Senate amended the legislation to providetargeted funding to several programs, which Dole said could notcontinue without the funding.      Those programs include the federal Meals on Wheels programfor the elderly, child protection services, unemploymentcompensation for 11 states, passport offices, programs for nativeAmericans, certain veterans programs and national parks.      The Senate also deleted a House provision that wouldrequire the Senate to consider any budget deal on an expeditedbasis. However, Dole also requested, and received, unanimousconsent that if Daschle agrees at the time, any budget deal beconsidered as budget reconciliation legislation and be subject tothe same limits. Those limits would prohibit a filibuster andlimit debate to a maximum of 20 hours. "That would speed up theprocess considerably," Dole said. Because the Senate amended theHouse-passed "essential" employees proposal, it apparently wouldhave to be reconsidered by the House before it would be sent toClinton.      Sen. Byron Dorgan, D-N.D., Tuesday applauded Dole's effortsto reopen the federal government, saying, "This is a major stepforward."      In addition, Senate Budget Chairman Domenici, commenting onthe CR said: "I think it's time we do this [...] Most federalemployees are saying they'd like to work to be paid [...] I hopethe House gives serious consideration to this."      On another front, as public officials continue to feel theheat from their constituents over the government shutdown, Rep.Martin Hoke, R-Ohio, Tuesday announced he donated his $11,133congressional pay for the month of December to 28 northeast Ohiocharities. Hoke in a statement called his decision a "matter ofconscience."Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Oxley Wants To Head House Commerce Telco Panel      There seems to be some dissension in the GOP over who willchair the House Commerce Telecommunications and FinanceSubcommittee in the next Congress. Last week, newly convertedRepublican Rep. W.J. (Billy) Tauzin of Louisiana, in announcinghe will not run for the open Senate seat in his state this year,also reportedly said he is the anointed chairman-in-waiting forthe subcommittee after its current chairman, Rep. Jack Fields, R-Texas, retires later this year. But sources Tuesday said Tauzin'snews came as a surprise to the panel's current second-rankingRepublican, Rep. Michael Oxley of Ohio. "Mr. Oxley intends to bethe next chair of the telecommunications subcommittee," saidPeggy Peterson, his spokeswoman, adding, "He is currently thevice chairman, and he is pursuing the chairmanship."      Tauzin last week told reporters Speaker Gingrich promisedhim the Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee chairmanshipin the next Congress. When he switched parties, the Republicanleadership agreed to retain Tauzin's seniority in the House.Tauzin said he would not usurp a "sitting" chairman. In his ninthcongressional term, Tauzin has four years on Oxley and two yearson Commerce Chairman Bliley.      Asked if Oxley had discussed the matter with Gingrich,Peterson had no comment. However, she said: "Mr. Oxley does notthink that Republicans are the party of seniority. Seniority isonly one factor in picking a chair."      Ever since Tauzin made his remarks, sources on and offCapitol Hill have speculated about whether the reports wereaccurate and, if so, why the speaker would make such a deal.      Some close to the matter said Gingrich hoped Tauzin's plumspot would lure other senior Democrats over to the GOP, andstrengthen the Republican position in the House.      The speaker's office did not return several inquiries fromCongressDaily Tuesday.      Technically, under House Rule 19, the speaker does notappoint subcommittee chairmen, staff noted. The chairman of thefull committee proposes a leadership slate that must be ratifiedby the majority members of the committee, they said. The HouseCommerce Committee spokesman had no comment on the matter.      Oxley intends to file for re-election in his districtFriday, according to his staff.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Roberts Seems Reluctant To Extend Food Aid Programs   House Agriculture Chairman Roberts appears to be resistingwriting an extension of authority for the Food for Peace and Foodfor Progress programs, which provide food to poor countries,including war-torn Bosnia.      Authority for the two food programs expired Dec. 31, alongwith the rest of the 1990 farm bill. The vetoed GOP budgetreconciliation bill would have reauthorized agriculturalprograms, including the international food assistance programs,but the reauthorization has been tied up in the ongoing budgetnegotiations.      A Roberts spokeswoman Tuesday said the Clintonadministration has not "conveyed to us that there is a particularproblem" regarding the two food programs, adding, "Our effort isstrictly working on the balanced budget."      But a farm organization lobbyist speculated the underlyingreason probably is that Roberts does not want to break out anypieces of the farm bill reauthorization that are contained in thebudget reconciliation bill.      Agency for International Development Administrator BrianAtwood, Agriculture Secretary Glickman and House InternationalRelations Chairman Gilman have been pushing Roberts to extend theprogram since mid-December, when it became apparent no budgetagreement would be reached before the 1990 farm bill expired.      Atwood and Glickman both wrote Roberts and other Hillofficials Dec. 13 asking for an extension, and Gilman planned tointroduce it before Christmas. However, Roberts insisted onobtaining another letter from Glickman explaining the situationwas an emergency. The second Glickman letter was held up forclearance at the White House, but arrived at the HouseAgriculture Committee Tuesday morning.      The letter states that "any lapse in authority couldseriously undermine the ability of the United States to meet theneeds, particularly emergency needs of vulnerable populations,and to augment food supplies in food-deficit countries."      Nevertheless, Agriculture Committee staff director GaryMitchell Tuesday through a spokeswoman said the letter was notspecific enough to require action.      Commenting on the turn of events, a House InternationalRelations Committee staffer Tuesday said: "We felt that there wasso much agreement to go ahead and do this anyway that therewasn't a need to go through the specific contracts. We're talkingabout a program to feed starving people. If they need specifics,we'll get specifics."      In addition, Atwood told CongressDaily he does not thinkRoberts needs more specifics to act. "I think a request by DanGlickman and me citing that OMB has no objections is clarityenough. We really need the clear support of Congress and needtheir authorization to deliver food in emergency circumstances,"Atwood said. Atwood said he had a good relationship with Robertsand believes Roberts "is thinking about this not in partisan butlegislative, tactical terms. I think the approach he is taking isa risky one and I hope that he would reconsider."Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996A Third Of Calif. Delegation In Play As Filing Closes     Filing for the March 26 California primary closed lateFriday, and while there will be no megabucks Senate race in theGolden State this year, there will be competitive races in atleast a third of the state's 52-member House delegation.      The California congressional elections this year arecomplicated by several minor party candidates who are largelyconservative and could draw enough votes away from Republicans toaffect some close races.      This is the first year the Natural Law Party and RossPerot's Reform Party have qualified as official parties, whilethe Libertarian Party has fielded candidates in the past.      For example, Libertarian candidate Ross Crain took 4percent of the vote against Democratic Rep. Vic Fazio in 1994 and9 percent against Fazio in 1992; Fazio won only 50 percent of thevote in 1994, and 51 percent in 1992, while the GOP nominees andCrain divided the conservative vote in the Sacramento area seat.      As a chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, Fazio is oneof the GOP's top House targets this year. But Republicans couldencounter a bitter primary battle for the right to oppose Faziobetween 1994 nominee Tim LeFever, a conservative, and Espartoschool board member Charles Schaupp, a moderate.      The LeFever-Schaupp ideological battle has split GOPcentral committees in two of the district's counties, resultingin attempts to remove people from those panels.      While Fazio is the GOP's most prominent California target,his is but one of up to eight Democratic-held seats being eyed bythe Republicans.      In the San Fernando Valley north of Los Angeles, whereDemocratic Rep. Anthony Beilenson is retiring, Richard Sybert, aformer aide to Gov. Pete Wilson, is expected to emerge as thewinner of a three-way GOP primary.      Sybert, who owns a toy manufacturing company and can tapinto his family fortune, spent $1.6 million in 1994 to win 48percent against Beilenson.      Leading a field of five Democrats is Brad Sherman, who hastwice won elections to represent the Los Angeles area on thestate's four-member tax board. Sherman also has family wealth onwhich to rely.      On the southern side of the Los Angeles area, DemocraticRep. Jane Harman faces the prospect of a rematch against 1994 GOPnominee Susan Brooks, who lost to Harman by a mere 812 votes.After the election, Brooks pursued a legal challenge claimingelection irregularities, including that illegal aliens voted.      Torrance businessman and physician Irwin Savodnik has filedto challenge Brooks in the primary.      Another prime GOP target is Democratic Rep. George Brown,ranking member of the Science Committee, who edged GOP candidateRobert Guzman by just 51-49 in 1994. Guzman is again seeking theGOP nod, but so are four other candidates. Widely regarded as thefront-runner in the primary is Linda Wilde, a state SuperiorCourt judge who has taken a leave of absence to run.      Included in the next tier of GOP targets are twoconservative Democrats from the state's Central Valley, Reps.Gary Condit and Calvin Dooley, as well as two northern Californialiberals, Reps. Sam Farr and Anna Eshoo.      Three Republicans have signed up to challenge Farr, whoholds White House Chief of Staff Panetta's former House seat. Thewould-be nominees against Farr, who won just 52 percent in 1994,include Santa Cruz County Farm Bureau Director Jess Brown.      Eshoo appears more secure: She was re-elected with 61percent in a difficult year for Democrats. Her 1994 opponent, BenBrink, is one of two candidates seeking the GOP nod this year.      Challenging Condit, a leader of The Coalition, will beRepublican Bill Conrad, a general contractor who has never heldelective office. Condit won his 1994 race by a 2-1 margin,although GOP nominees for governor and senator won the district.      Three Republicans are contending for the right to opposeDooley, who won 57 percent in 1994. The GOP front-runner isAssemblyman Trice Harvey, who reportedly did not want to runagainst Dooley, but opted to do so because the state's termlimits law is forcing him out of the California Assembly.      At the southern end of the state, Republicans also thinkthey may have a shot against San Diego-based Rep. Robert Filner.While three Republicans have filed for the nomination, localobservers feel Filner is in greater jeopardy in the Democraticprimary.      San Diego Councilman Juan Vargas, a Democrat who lost toFilner in a crowded primary in 1992, is running again. Vargas'assets include a Harvard degree and a Hispanic background in adistrict that is 40 percent Hispanic.      For the Democrats, the targets include three GOP freshmen:Reps. Frank Riggs, Andrea Seastrand, and Brian Bilbray.      Riggs, who represents a district that stretches from northof San Francisco to the Oregon border, first won the seat in1990, lost it in 1992, and regained it in 1994. Former DemocraticRep. Dan Hamburg, who lost to Riggs last time out, opted not torun again this year.      There are a half-dozen contenders in the Democratic primaryfor Riggs' seat, with the three leading contenders including tworecent immigrants from San Francisco. They are Carol Ruth Silver,a former member of the San Francisco Board of Supervisors whomoved into the district last year, and Michela Alioto, a daughterof former San Francisco Mayor Joseph Alioto and, until recently,an aide to Vice President Gore.      The third major contender is attorney Monica Marvin. She isbacked by state Sen. Mike Thompson, who was the Democrats' firstchoice to take on Riggs.      In the Santa Barbara area, Seastrand will face a rematchagainst Democrat Walter Holden Capps, whom she defeated by just1,500 votes in 1994. And in San Diego, three Democrats are vyingto take on Bilbray. But Democratic prospects there received asetback just days before the filing deadline when former Rep.Lynn Schenk, who lost to Bilbray in 1994, announced she would notrun again.      The leading contender in the three-way Democratic primaryis University of California at Irvine professor Peter Navarro,who hosts a local talk show. But Navarro carries politicalbaggage from unsuccessful runs for supervisor and mayor. Alsorunning is small business owner Nancy Casady, who has ties tosome leading state Democrats.      The Democrats also are eyeing the open seat of retiring GOPRep. Carlos Moorhead in the Los Angeles area and the Long Beach-based district of GOP Rep. Stephen Horn.      Two Democrats have filed to take on Horn: 1994 primarycandidate and professor Peter Matthews, and attorney Rick Zbur.Horn won in 1994 with 58 percent, but won with only 49 percent in1992.      Assemblyman James Rogan is the leading GOP contender forMoorhead's seat, while the Democrats will have tough primarybattle between Douglas Kahn, a wealthy businessman who wasMoorhead's 1992 and 1994 opponent, and Barry Gordon, an actor andformer president of the Screen Actors Guild.      In the second tier of Democratic targets are GOP Reps.Richard Pombo and Sonny Bono. Pombo likely will face DemocratJason Silva, a public relations consultant, in the Stockton areaseat. Former radio personality and retired businesswoman AnitaRufus has filed for the Democratic nod against Bono in the PalmSprings-based district. Meawhile, 10 Democrats have entered thespecial election to succeed Democratic Rep. Walter Tucker, whoresigned last month following his conviction on federal briberyand tax evasion charges.      The special primary will coincide with the March 26primary. If no candidate for the open seat receives more than 50percent, a runoff will be held. The Los Angeles area district isthree-quarters black and Hispanic and is overwhelminglyDemocratic.      The leading Democrats in the race include Assembly membersWillard Murray and Juanita McDonald, Lynwood Mayor Paul Richards,Compton Mayor Omar Bradley and Compton City Clerk Charles Davis,as well as Tucker's wife, Robin, who has operated a youthtraining center.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 199681 Republicans Oppose Deal That Trims $245B Tax Cut      A group of 81 Republican senators and House members, aswell as one House Democrat, has sent a letter to PresidentClinton, House Speaker Gingrich and Senate Majority Leader Dolevowing to oppose any final budget deal that has less than the$245 billion in tax cuts contained in the budget reconciliationbill vetoed by Clinton. "We urge you to support a plan thatprovides real tax relief for families and economic growth forsmall businesses and that balances the budget in seven years; wealso urge you to reject any plan that does not," said the letter,which was initiated by Rep. David McIntosh, R-Ind., and Sen. RodGrams, R-Minn., and released Tuesday. "You can count on oursteadfast opposition to any budget plan that turns its back onour promises to American families," the members said. The letter,signed by 52 Republican House members, one House Democrat, Rep.Ralph Hall of Texas, and 29 GOP senators also said "thecongressionally approved tax relief package must not besacrificed at the altar of more spending and a biggergovernment." It further contends "tax relief for families iscritical."      Among those signing the letter were Senate Majority WhipLott, Senate Banking Chairman D'Amato and Sen. Phil Gramm ofTexas, who was the only GOP senator seeking the presidency tosign the letter.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996No Senate Votes Slated This Week      No roll call votes are planned in the Senate this week ornext week unless there is significant movement in budgetnegotiations which would require floor action, Senate MajorityLeader Dole announced Tuesday.      In a Senate floor statement, Dole added that senators willhave ample warning to return to Washington if votes are calledfor any reason.      Today at noon, both the House and Senate are slated toofficially begin the second session of the 104th Congress.      Votes are expected in the House today, Thursday and Friday,according to the House GOP cloakroom recorded message formembers.      The House this week may take up an override of PresidentClinton's vetoes of the FY96 Defense authorization legislationand FY96 Commerce-Justice-State, Interior and VA-HUDappropriations bills.      An override attempt also is possible in the House this weekon welfare reform legislation if it is vetoed by Clinton, as thepresident promised before Christmas.      In addition, a bill to permit states to operate nationalparks at their own expense during the federal government shutdownalso may be brought to the House floor.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Pressler Urges Quick Passage Of Th Telco Bill      In an effort to keep up the momentum for passage oftelecommunications reform legislation, Senate Commerce ChairmanPressler Tuesday issued a statement urging his colleagues to actquickly to approve a conference agreement. "Congress should puttelecommunications reform first on its list of New Year'slegislative resolutions," Pressler said. House Speaker Gingrichduring a Capitol Hill press conference last Thursday said he "wasgoing to ask [Senate Majority Leader] Dole probably to have ameeting on Wednesday with the leading members on the House andSenate Republican side to go over the [telecommunications] bill."Gingrich added, "Both of us had expressed some interest, someconcern, about some pieces of the bill." In addition, sourcesearlier Tuesday said Dole and Gingrich were expected to try toiron out a final compromise on four or five outstanding issues inthe telecommunications bill at a joint House-Senate leadershipmeeting this morning. However, Dole's office and House CommerceCommittee aides late Tuesday said no such meeting on thetelecommunications legislation had been scheduled for today.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Senators Object To Proposed Regulations On Tobacco      A group of 32 senators, led by Sens. Jesse Helms, R-N.C.,and Wendell Ford, D-Ky., Tuesday signed a comment to the FDAstrongly objecting to the agency's proposal to regulate the saleand advertising of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco. "Congresshas not given FDA either `clear direction' or any authority toregulation tobacco," the senators said. Tuesday was the deadlinefor public comment on the FDA proposal, which is designed toprevent teenagers from taking up cigarette smoking and tobaccochewing. The tobacco industry submitted several thousand pages ofdocuments opposing FDA regulation and denying that nicotine isaddictive. The senators in their comment declared, "While westand steadfastly against tobacco use by minors, we strenuouslyobject to FDA's effort to expand its jurisdiction and the federalbureaucracy in dealing with a problem that Congress has alreadydesignated to the states." The senators said Congress in 1992decided that states should address tobacco use by minors when itrequired each state to implement a program to keep minors fromobtaining tobacco products. Congress has denied FDA the authorityto regulate tobacco, the senators added.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996NRSC Files Complaint Against Wyden Senate Campaign      The National Republican Senatorial Committee has filed acomplaint with the FEC alleging irregularities in the Senatecampaign of Rep. Ron Wyden, D-Ore. The complaint, dated lastThursday, said the AFL-CIO and the National Abortion andReproductive Rights Action League "are about to violate federalelection law in the Oregon Special Election by making a series ofmassive illegal independent expenditures they have improperlycoordinated with the Wyden for Senate campaign and its agents."The complaint requested the FEC make an "immediate determination"that the AFL-CIO is illegally subsidizing the Wyden campaign with"an unusually large number of political operatives" and that theAFL-CIO and NARAL are prohibited from making independentexpenditures on behalf of Wyden because the groups are "notlegally independent" from the campaign. The Democratic SenatorialCampaign Committee termed the complaint is "superficial" and "anattempt to shift focus from [GOP candidate Gordon Smith's] dismalbusiness and political record." Wyden and Smith are seeking theseat of former GOP Sen. Bob Packwood in a Jan. 30 specialelection.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Majority In State Believes Thurmon Should Not Seek Re-election      In a new South Carolina poll, almost 60 percent of likelyGOP primary voters believe 93-year-old Senate Armed ServicesChairman Thurmond should not seek another term. The survey,conducted for The State newspaper by Mason-Dixon OpinionResearch, found 59 percent believe Thurmond should not seekanother term, while 33 percent feel he should. And while 44percent said they would vote for Thurmond in a primary, 56percent said they would consider someone else. In a matchupagainst former Gov. Carroll Campbell and Secretary of State JimMiles, Thurmond led Campbell by just 40-37 percent, within thesurvey's 4.7 point error margin. Miles was at 8 percent. In ahead-to-head with Thurmond, Miles trailed 53-26. Campbell toldThe State he will not run against Thurmond, while Milessidestepped questions about challenging Thurmond. The poll of 472likely primary voters was conducted Dec. 26-27.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESS DAILY A.M. via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996Durbin Camp Seeks To get Primary Foe Off The Ballot      Rep. Richard Durbin, D-Ill., who is seeking his party'sSenate nomination in the March primary, is hoping to get alittle-known, but well-heeled, foe off the primary ballot. Durbinlast week lodged objections to more than 90 percent of thepetition signatures filed by Chicago attorney Clinton Krislov,and asked state officials to bar Krislov from the ballot, theChicago Tribune reported. An attorney for the Durbin campaignsaid volunteers had cross-checked signatures on Krislov'spetitions with voter lists, and had found thousands that did notmatch. Krislov, who made a fortune by representing plaintiffs inclass action suits, termed the allegations "outrageous," whileadding, "I'm almost flattered that [Durbin] recognizes the impactI'm going to have on this race." Krislov has said he will dipinto personal funds to bankroll his campaign. There are fourother Democratic contenders, including former state TreasurerPatrick Quinn.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-24IA060-000326-B019-318http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt20.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020652 text/html 10821HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:05:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:55 GMTContent-length: 10632Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt20.html Sample Issue Copyright CONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES *ARTICLES AND NEWS NOTES* CORPORATE LEADERS ASKED TO SHARE IN NATIONAL SACRIFICE (265 words) CBO PROJECTS BUDGET PLAN WOULD PRODUCE INCREASING SURPLUS IN OUT YEARS (132 words) INFORMATION ON LOBBYING REGISTRATION UNDER NEW LAW PLACED IN RECORD (340 words) NUMEROUS NOMINATIONS INCLUDING NRC AND RECLAMATION COMMISSIONER APPROVED (158 words) SENATE ENERGY COMMITTEE REPORTS LABOR SUPPORT OF ANWR OIL SALE (247 words) CLIMATE COALITION ELECTS WILLIAM O'KEEFE AS CHAIRMAN FOR 1996 (134 words) CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CORPORATE LEADERS ASKED TO SHARE IN NATIONAL SACRIFICE     In  further  response  on Dec. 27 to the advertisement by  a  number  ofcorporate executives, forty six congressional Democrats led by Reps. Gephardt(D=Mo.),  Obey  (D=Wis.) and Miller (D=Calif.) called on the  executives   todetail the specific areas of personal and company sacrifice they are preparedto make to assist in efforts to balance the budget.  Rep. Obey said "we thinkit  is  important that bIg business understand that most Americans  have  notbenefited from the recent performance of the US economy.  We wanted to  pointout  that  there  were  a  number  of  areas  where  they  could  make  majorcontributions.  Given the timing of their ad we thought they should  rememberthat  there  are a lot of Bob Cratchits out there and that  big  corporationsmight  want  to see if they could pick up a little of the burden  instead  oflaying everything off on the Cratchit family."     Meanwhile,  on  Dec. 27, Sen. Gramm (R=Tex.) said "it is  critical  thatSenate  Republicans stand their ground as budget negotiations resume  in  thecoming  days.  While the Clinton Administration public relations machine  hadreduced  some Senate republicans to a defensive crouch in earlier  stages  ofthe  confrontation,  the House Republicans have called  President   Clinton'sbluff.   Whenever   the President finally begins negotiating  with  America'sfuture   in  mind  instead  of his own, our  House  colleagues  are  due  thecredit...  House Republicans have taken the moral high ground in this  fight;the  public is on our side, and President Clinton will have no choice but  tojoin us if we keep the courage of our convictions," Sen. Gramm said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CBO PROJECTS BUDGET PLAN WOULD PRODUCE INCREASING SURPLUS IN OUT YEARS     The Congressional Budget Office on Dec. 21 said the proposed Seven  YearBalanced Budget would produce increasing surpluses in 2003 of $10 billion, in2004 of $30 billion and in 2005 of $50 billion.  The figures were given in  amemorandum to the Senate Democratic Budget Committee staff that was requestedby Sen. Exon (D=Nebr.).     House  Budget  Committee Chairman Kasich (R=Ohio) in a  comment  on  thereport said the surpluses "will likely be even larger if we maintain the  capon discretionary spending.  Our balanced budget," he said, "is an honest  andfair  plan  that uses real numbers, conservative  economic  assumptions,  andmakes fundamental structural changes in the Federal government. Balancing theFederal  budget  now  is  the best Christmas present we  could  give  to  ourchildren and grandchildren," Rep. Kaisch concluded.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996INFORMATION ON LOBBYING REGISTRATION UNDER NEW LAW PLACED IN RECORD     The  Secretary  of the Senate and the Clerk of the House  filed  in  theCongressional  Record  information on the new Lobbying Disclosure  Act  (P.L.104=65)  that  takes  effect  on Jan. 1,  1996.   In  general,  the  LobbyingDisclosure  Act establishes broad requirements that individuals and  entitieswho  seek to influence the Federal government register with the Secretary  ofthe  Senate and Clerk of the House and disclose their clients, issues,  fees,and interests of foreign entities.  All registrations filed under the Act arepublic records.     Information,  forms and instructions will be available in early  Januaryfrom  the  House  Legislative Resource Center  1036  Longworth  House  OfficeBuilding  and  Senate  Office  of Public  Records,  232  Hart  Senate  OfficeBuilding.  The first reports under the new act will be due by Aug. 14,  1996.Lobbying  firms  must file separate reports for each  client.  (CongressionalRecord Dec. 22 p. S=19290=21).     After the law was signed, Sen. Cohen (R=Me.) said he was hopeful that itwould persuade the people "that Congress's business can be done in the  open.Lobbyists  now  have  to make full disclosure of who they  are,  who  they'relobbying on behalf of and how much they're spending to do what.  I think manypeople  are under the impression that lobbyists are dictating and  dominatingthe  legislative process in this country.  They're cynical about it and  theyfeel that people who have the money are the ones reaping the benefits."     Sen. Levin (D=Mich.) also praised the bill.  He said one of the  reasonshe  fought for the bill "is because if we want the public to have  confidencein  our  actions, the nation's business has got to be conducted more  in  thesunshine.  When public cynicism runs deep about a democratic government, thatgovernment must act to restore that public confidence."     Common  Cause  President  Ann McBride said the  bill  and  Congressionalearlier  action ending the lobbyist gift system provide hope to the  Americanpeople  by showing that political reform is possible and their voices can  beheard on Capitol Hill.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NUMEROUS NOMINATIONS INCLUDING NRC AND RECLAMATION COMMISSIONER APPROVED     The Senate before its conditional recess on Dec. 22 approved a long listof  pending  nominations  including  the nomination of  Greta  Joy  Dicus  ofArkansas  to  be a member of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for  the  termexpiring June 30, 1998.  The nomination of Eluid Levi Martinez of New  Mexicoto be Commissioner of Reclamation was also approved.     Other nominations approved were that of Kathleen McGinty of Pennsylvaniato  be a member of the Council on Environmental Quality, Ernest J.  Moniz  ofMassachusetts  to  be  an Associate Director of the  Office  of  Science  andTechnology  Policy,  Patricia  Beneke of Iowa to  be  an  Assistant  InteriorSecretary, and Gail Clements McDonald to be Administrator of the St. LawrenceSeaway Development Corp. for the term expiring Mar. 20, 1998.     The President also sent the nomination of Alvin Alm of Virginia to be anAssistant Secretary of Energy for Environmental Management to the Senate.  Hewould replace Thomas Grumbly.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SENATE ENERGY COMMITTEE REPORTS LABOR SUPPORT OF ANWR OIL SALE     The  Senate Energy Committee on Dec. 22 reported that  Robert  Georgine,President  of the AFL=CIO Building and Construction Trades Department sent  aletter to President asking him to include the provision to lease a small partof  the Alaska National Wildlife Refuge coastal plain  for  oil   explorationand development  in  any  compromise on the budget  reconciliation   package.The  Committee   said  that on Oct. 25, the presidents of  five   other   keyAFL=CIO unions issued similar endorsements.     "On  behalf  of  the  over 3 million  American  working  men  and  womenrepresented  by the 15 member unions of the Building and Construction  TradesDepartment, AFL=CIO, I again ask that you support the provision to allow  theresponsible  leasing  of  a small part of the ANWR  coastal  plain.  Americanworking families across the US depend on your support," Mr. Georgine wrote.     Senate  Energy  Committee  Chairman Murkowski  (R=Alaska)  said  he  waspleased  with  the decision to push for ANWR leasing.  "This is  a  big  stepforward  because it is further proof that the opening of a tiny part  of  thecoastal plain to oil exploration will pay huge benefits to the nation and theworking  people  of America.  It will produce hundreds of thousands  of  highpaying  jobs.  For the first time, we have moved ANWR through both the  Houseand the Senate with significant support.  The only thing standing in the  wayof ANWR becoming a reality is the Clinton Administration and Secretary of theInterior Bruce Babbitt," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL ACTIVITIES via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CLIMATE COALITION ELECTS WILLIAM O'KEEFE AS CHAIRMAN FOR 1996     The  Global  Climate  Coalition on Dec. 22  announced  the  election  ofWilliam O'Keefe as chairman.  Mr. O'Keefe is Executive Vice President of  theAmerican  Petroleum Institute.  John Shlaes will continue his  leadership  asExecutive Director of GCC.     Robert  McFadden, Manager Special Projects for the  American  AutomobileManufacturers  Association  will  be Vice  Chairman  for  Policy.   ConstanceHolmes,  Vice  President, National Mining Association and Robert  Beck,  VicePresident,  Edison Electric Institute will be Chairman and Vice  Chairman  ofthe Operating Committee.     Others elected were Edward Harper. Association of American Railroads  tobe  Vice  Chairman  for membership,  Thomas  Parker,  Chemical  ManufacturersAssociation to be Secretary and Ray Harry, Southern Company to be  Treasurer.Bruce  Steiner,  American Iron and Steel Institute and Gordon  Fry,  AluminumAssociation were elected to the Coalition's Executive Committee.  = OWS =Back to Headline List WT03-B40-25IA060-000326-B019-381http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt46.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020751 text/html 123355HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:05:22 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:50:01 GMTContent-length: 123165Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt46.html Sample Issue Copyright CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNet JUNE, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEDERAL CROP INSURANCE: CURRENT ISSUES AND OPTIONS FOR REFORM (154 words) MARKET PROMOTION PROGRAM ISSUES (92 words) CONTINUING APPROPRIATIONS ACTS: SUMMARY DATA FOR FISCAL YEARS 1977- 1992 (97 words) FEDERAL BUDGET ISSUES: SUMMARIES OF SELECTED CRS PRODUCTS (145 words) THE FEDERAL DEBT: WHO BEARS ITS BURDEN? ISSUE BRIEF (132 words) "PAY-AS-YOU-GO" BUDGET ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES IN 1992: ISSUE BRIEF (96 words) PROPOSED AND ACTUAL BUDGET TOTALS FOR THE FISCAL YEARS 1980 THROUGH 1991 (112 words) SPENDING ON HUMAN RESOURCES; A REPORT IN THE SERIES ECONOMIC POLICYMAKING IN CONGRESS: TRENDS AND PROSPECTS (80 words) EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION; SELECTED REFERENCES, 1990-1992 (87 words) INDUSTRIES AND WORLD MARKETS: A SAMPLING OF THE U.S. EXPERIENCE IN THE 1980S (109 words) RESIDENTIAL EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE AFFORDABILITY (91 words) RESIDENTIAL EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE AVAILABILITY (92 words) SECURITIES AND FUTURE MARKETS IN TRANSITION (104 words) SHAREHOLDER VOTING CONCERNING EXECUTIVE PAY (104 words) CONSTITUTIONALITY OF COMPELLING DISCLOSURES CONCERNING MOTION PICTURE ALTERATIONS (111 words) CABLE TELEVISION INDUSTRY: A BRIEF OVERVIEW (63 words) TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS AND SIGNALING SYSTEM 7 (95 words) CHOICE PROGRAMS AND STATE CONSTITUTIONS: THE INCLUSION OF SECTARIAN SCHOOLS (98 words) DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION FUNDING ISSUES: FY 1993; ISSUE BRIEF (134 words) DRUG-EXPOSED CHILDREN AND FEDERAL EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS (107 words) EDUCATION RESEARCH AMENDMENTS: A SUMMARY OF H.R. 4014 AND COMPARISON WITH CURRENT LAW (103 words) FEDERAL ASSISTANCE TO LIBRARIES: CURRENT PROGRAMS AND ISSUES (102 words) FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION: ISSUE BRIEF (110 words) TERM LIMITATIONS: BIBLIOGRAPHY-IN-BRIEF, 1977-1992 (104 words) TERM LIMITS FOR FEDERAL AND STATE LEGISLATORS: RECENT PROPOSALS IN THE STATES (1991-1992) (82 words) 1992 PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES (80 words) ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY PROVISIONS OF S. 2166 AND H.R. 776: A SIDE-BY-SIDE COMPARISON (111 words) GIANT OIL FIELDS AND DOMESTIC OIL PRODUCTION (163 words) MOTOR FUEL MARKETING COMPETITION AND H.R. 2966 (107 words) RESTRUCTURING THE URANIUM ENRICHMENT ENTERPRISE: A COMPARISON OF S. 2166 (TITLE X) AND H.R. 776 (TITLE VI) (96 words) CIVILIAN NUCLEAR WASTE DISPOSAL: ISSUE BRIEF (93 words) ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICYMAKING: TWO-STEPPING TO A WALTZ (108 words) OIL RECYCLING BILLS: A COMPARISON OF H.R. 872, H.R. 1411, H.R. 3956, AND INDUSTRY'S PROPOSAL (137 words) BANK MERGERS AND INTERSTATE BANKING: POLICY ISSUES (109 words) FEDERAL PREEMPTION OF STATE CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS AS APPLIED TO NATIONAL BANKS AND OTHER FEDERALLY CHARTERED BANKING INSTITUTIONS (69 words) AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, AND THE PACIFIC ISLANDS: ISSUES FOR U.S. POLICY IN THE 1990S; ISSUE BRIEF (78 words) CHINA-U.S. RELATIONS IN A POST-COLD WAR WORLD: INFO PACK (119 words) COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES AND OTHER FORMER SOVIET REPUBLICS: NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF HEADS OF STATE (93 words) CONGRESS AND THE CRISIS IN U.S.-CHINA POLICY, 1991 (157 words) EUROPEAN COMMUNITY ENLARGEMENT: BACKGROUND AND ISSUES FOR THE UNITED STATES (102 words) FOREIGN AID: ANSWERS TO BASIC QUESTIONS (89 words) IRAQ'S POST-WAR COMPLIANCE RECORD: A CHRONOLOGY (114 words) THE ISRAELI ECONOMY AND ITS EXTERNAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS: AN OVERVIEW (146 words) ISRAEL'S ELECTION, 1992: ISSUE BRIEF (97 words) JAPAN-U.S. RELATIONS IN A POST-COLD WAR ENVIRONMENT: EMERGING TRENDS AND ISSUES FOR U.S. POLICY (88 words) LITHUANIA: BASIC FACTS (117 words) A NUCLEAR-WEAPONS-FREE ZONE IN THE MIDDLE EAST: BACKGROUND AND ISSUES; ISSUE BRIEF (83 words) PALESTINIANS AND MIDDLE EAST PEACE: ISSUES FOR THE UNITED STATES; ISSUE BRIEF (119 words) POLAND, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, AND HUNGARY: REGIONAL TRENDS; ISSUE BRIEF (87 words) ROMANIA, BULGARIA, ALBANIA: RECENT DEVELOPMENTS; ISSUE BRIEF (85 words) SOUTH AFRICA: 1992 WHITE REFERENDUM (90 words) TREATIES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION: CURRENT STATUS FOLLOWING THE BREAKUP OF THE U.S.S.R. (83 words) THE U.S. ROLE IN THE POST-COLD WAR WORLD: ISSUES FOR A NEW GREAT DEBATE (101 words) VIETNAM-U.S. RELATIONS: THE DEBATE OVER NORMALIZATION; ISSUE BRIEF (73 words) YUGOSLAVIA: NATIONALISM AND ETHNIC RELATIONS: SELECTED REFERENCES, 1989-1992 (153 words) ADDITIONS TO THE MAJOR ISSUE FILE: ISSUE BRIEF (70 words) ARCHIVED ISSUE BRIEF LIST: ISSUE BRIEF (61 words) INTERNSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS: CONGRESSIONAL, FEDERAL, AND OTHER WORK EXPERIENCE OPPORTUNITIES (121 words) SELECT MAJOR ISSUES BEFORE THE 102ND CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION (102 words) SPEECH MATERIAL: MEMORIAL DAY; INFO PACK (107 words) THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY: CONSPIRACY THEORIES (79 words) CONGRESS' EXEMPTION FROM SELECTED MAJOR LEGISLATION: A LEGAL ANALYSIS (109 words) CONGRESSIONAL REFORM: A SYNOPSIS OF CONCERNS AND PROPOSALS (71 words) CONGRESSIONAL REFORM AND CHANGE: SELECTED PROPOSALS INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES (65 words) CONGRESSIONAL VOTES AND JUDICIAL ACTION ON OUTSIDE INCOME AND HONORARIA RESTRICTIONS, 1974-1992 (123 words) FORMER PRESIDENTS: FEDERAL PENSION AND RETIREMENT BENEFITS (125 words) THE GOVERNORS AND LIEUTENANT GOVERNORS OF THE STATES AND OTHER JURISDICTIONS (98 words) REORGANIZING THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY: LANDMARK COMMISSIONS (124 words) RETIREMENT FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS (78 words) AIDS AND OTHER DISEASES: FEDERAL SPENDING AND MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY STATISTICS (67 words) AIDS: INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES AND ISSUES: BIBLIOGRAPHY-IN-BRIEF (109 words) ANTITRUST LAW AND JOINT ACTIVITY BY HOSPITALS (167 words) BREAST CANCER (161 words) FEDERAL FUNDING FOR AIDS RESEARCH AND PREVENTION: FY81-FY93 (97 words) HEALTH CARE ISSUES FOR THE 102ND CONGRESS, 2ND SESSION (88 words) OVARIAN CANCER (130 words) THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE REFORM PROPOSAL (100 words) WOMEN WITH HIV INFECTION (125 words) CURRENT ISSUES IN HOUSING (115 words) DEMOGRAPHY AND HOUSING IN 1990S (121 words) BASIC QUESTIONS ON U.S. CITIZENSHIP AND NATURALIZATION (99 words) SOCIAL SECURITY: THE EFFECT OF ECONOMIC VARIATIONS ON BENEFITS (94 words) UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION: THE EMERGENCY UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION (EUC) PROGRAM (73 words) ANOTHER RAIL STRIKE? ISSUE BRIEF (129 words) ATTORNEY'S FEES: THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION PROPOSAL TO ADOPT THE ENGLISH RULE (156 words) DRUG ABUSE IN AMERICA: SELECTED REFERENCES, 1990-1992 (93 words) DRUG CONTROL: A CHECKLIST OF CRS PRODUCTS (72 words) PRISONS: POLICY OPTIONS FOR CONGRESS; ISSUE BRIEF (87 words) PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ABROGATING RESTRICTIONS ON POSSESSION OF FIREARMS BY CONVICTED FELONS (137 words) CHINESE MISSILE AND NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION ISSUES: ISSUES FOR CONGRESS; ISSUE BRIEF (101 words) DEFENSE BUDGET FOR FY 1993: DATA SUMMARY (108 words) THE EUROPEAN DEFENSE INDUSTRY: RESPONSES TO GLOBAL CHANGE AND EUROPEAN INTEGRATION (163 words) INTELLIGENCE REORGANIZATION PROPOSALS: ISSUE BRIEF (116 words) NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION FROM RUSSIA: OPTIONS FOR CONTROL (97 words) NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION FISCAL YEAR 1993 BUDGET REQUEST (116 words) RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FUNDING: FISCAL YEAR 1993; ISSUE BRIEF (74 words) SCIENCE AT THE CROSSROADS: INFO PACK (106 words) THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA): AN OVERVIEW OF MAJOR PROVISIONS (77 words) AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT: FINAL RULES AND INFORMATION SOURCES (99 words) ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND GASOLINE EXCISE TAX RATES ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION (128 words) THE ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS (115 words) FEDERAL INCOME TAX TREATMENT OF THE ELDERLY (92 words) FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE FEDERAL INCOME TAX (61 words) INCOME TAX PAYMENTS BY FOREIGN-CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS (111 words) THE QUESTION OF INDEXING CAPITAL GAINS BY REGULATION (101 words) TAX ALLOWANCE FOR INTEREST PAYMENTS ON EDUCATIONAL LOANS: DATA AND DISCUSSION OF ISSUES (106 words) TAX PROPOSALS: A BRIEF COMPARISON OF THE HOUSE, SENATE, AND ADMINISTRATION ALTERNATIVES (127 words) TAX PROVISIONS EXPIRING IN 1992 (162 words) TAX RATES AND THE MARRIAGE PENALTY (112 words) FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN U.S. DEFENSE COMPANIES (102 words) IMPORT PENETRATION OF SELECTED U.S. MARKETS FOR MANUFACTURED PRODUCTS, 1975-1989 (96 words) JAPANESE-U.S. TRADE RELATIONS: COOPERATION OR CONFRONTATION: ISSUE BRIEF (110 words) LABOR MARKET EFFECTS IN THE UNITED STATES OF CHANGING PATTERNS OF U.S. TRADE AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS: A MICROECONOMIC VIEW (111 words) RUSSIA AND THE COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES: THE TRADE AGREEMENT WITH THE UNITED STATES (129 words) STATUTORY RESTRICTIONS ON TRADE AND FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS WITH THE FORMER SOVIET UNION (99 words) TRADE: ISSUE BRIEF (137 words) AVIATION AND THE 102ND CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION: BILLS, HEARINGS AND A SUMMARY OF ACTION (64 words) MASS TRANSIT FARES: FEDERAL TAX EXCLUSION PROPOSALS (76 words) CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL CROP INSURANCE: CURRENT ISSUES AND OPTIONS FOR REFORMBy Ralph M. Chite, Environment and Natural Resources Policy Division.18 pages.  Farmer participation in the federally subsidized cropinsurance program has fallen short of goals anticipated in 1980 whenthe program was greatly expanded.  Low participation rates havecontributed to the enactment of ad hoc disaster assistance bills,which have authorized more than $6 billion in additional directpayments since 1988. Many policymakers are concerned that the federalbudget cannot continue to support both crop insurance and disasterpayments, and that Congress might be required to reconsider theproper role of the government in farm risk management.  This paperpro-vides background on the mechanics of the crop insurance programand explores policy options and dilemmas in reforming the program.Order No. 92-318 ENR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992MARKET PROMOTION PROGRAM ISSUESBy Susan Epstein, Environment and Natural Resources Policy Division.7 pages.  Recent reports criticized the Market Promotion Program,focusing attention on whether or not to repeal it.  Issues inquestion include large U.S. and foreign firms receiving governmentfunds, U.S. content in promoted products, and generic versus brandedpromotion.  This report provides a briefing on these issues.  OrderNo. 92-300 ENR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONTINUING APPROPRIATIONS ACTS:  SUMMARY DATA FOR FISCAL YEARS 1977-1992By Kathy Dolan, Government Division.  3 pages.  This report providessummary data on continuing appropriations acts for the fiscal years1977-1992.  A continuing appropriation act provides budget authorityfor federal agencies and programs until regular appropriations actsare enacted or, sometimes, for an entire year.  Acts of this kind arereferred to as continuing resolutions because they are typicallyenacted as joint resolutions.  Order No. 92-323 GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL BUDGET ISSUES:  SUMMARIES OF SELECTED CRS PRODUCTS1990-1992, by Robert S. Kirk, Library Services Division.  78 pages.This compilation brings together the full-length summaries from aselection of CRS reports and issue briefs written for the Congress ona broad range of policy issues relevant to the federal budget.  Thecompilation includes writings on:  federal budget policy; thePresident's fiscal year 1993 budget and the congressional response todate; the interaction between the budget and the economy; the federalbudget process; the federal debt; trust fund issues; revenue raisingmeasures and federal borrowing; spending for defense andinternational programs; and spending for nondefense programs.  Thisreport includes an introduction "Federal Budget Process, Concepts,and Sources of Information.  Order No. 92-334 L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE FEDERAL DEBT:  WHO BEARS ITS BURDEN?  ISSUE BRIEFBy William A. Cox, Office of Senior Specialists.  As the federalgovernment's debt has mushroomed since 1992 at a rate unparalleled inpeacetime, questions about its effects have taken on greaterimportance.  Despite steps to reduce the deficit, public debt willcontinue to rise rapidly in the next several years.  Who is beinghurt by this development, and who, if anyone, benefits?  Should we beconcerned about heavy reliance on foreign capital?  What are theimplications of rising federal interest payments?  Are we "mortgagingthe nation's future," imposing a swelling burden on posterity?  Thesequestions are the subject of this brief.  Order No. IB92049.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992"PAY-AS-YOU-GO" BUDGET ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES IN 1992:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Edward Davis, Government Division.  In 1992, economic recoverylegislation and other major domestic policy initiatives are prominenton the legislative agenda.  To the extent that such proposals arecovered by the PAYGO process, and to avoid a PAYGO sequester infiscal year 1993, Congress and the President must come to agreementon suitable deficit reduction offsets or exempt these proposals fromthe PAYGO process.  Order No. IB92055.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992PROPOSED AND ACTUAL BUDGET TOTALS FOR THE FISCAL YEARS 1980 THROUGH1991By Philip D. Winters, Economics Division.  6 pages.  The President'sand Congress' budget estimates and proposals have rarely matched theactual budget numbers for a fiscal year.  This report discusses someof the reasons for these persistent differences.  Also included is atable containing the proposed budget totals from the administrationand the congressional budget resolution, the reestimates of theadministration's proposals from the Congressional Budget Office, andthe actual budget totals for the fiscal years 1980 through 1991.Order No. 92-252 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SPENDING ON HUMAN RESOURCES; A REPORT IN THE SERIES ECONOMICPOLICYMAKING IN CONGRESS:  TRENDS AND PROSPECTSBy Jane G. Gravelle, Office of Senior Specialists.  21 pages.  Thisreport is an overview of the economic issues confronting Congress inspending on human resources--education, health, and income security--with attention to historical trends, current issues, and effects onwork, savings, productivity, and income distribution.  Order No.  92-291 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION; SELECTED REFERENCES, 1990-1992By Robert Howe, Library Services Division.  6 pages.  Controversywith President Bush's recent trip to Japan focused new publicattention on the issue of executive compensation.  This bibliographyprovides access to the journal literature, and to a few recentnewspaper commentaries, on salaries, bonuses, and long-termincentives of chief executive officers of corporations.  Order No.92-288 L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992INDUSTRIES AND WORLD MARKETS:  A SAMPLING OF THE U.S. EXPERIENCE INTHE 1980SBy Economics Division and Science Policy Research Division.Coordinated by Bernard Gelb.  72 pages.  While some U.S. industriesare having considerable difficulty competing against their foreigncounterparts, some are holding their own, and some are doing quitewell.  This report analyzes the experience of a number of U.S.industries during the past decade or so, and makes some observationsabout the diversity of their fortunes in the context of theirindividual natures and structures.  Order No. 92-302 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992RESIDENTIAL EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE AFFORDABILITYBy Jean K. Rosales, Economics Division.  6 pages.  "Affordability"can refer to a number of different problems faced by potentialresidential earthquake insurance policyholders.  Hence, there are anumber of potential solutions to earthquake insurance affordabilityproblems, including mandated prices, lower prices through lowercosts, premium subsidies for economically disadvantagedpolicyholders, and mandatory purchase or residential earthquakeinsurance.  Order No. 92-249 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992RESIDENTIAL EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE AVAILABILITYBy Jean K. Rosales, Economics Division.  6 pages.  Althoughresidential earthquake insurance is available in every state,concerns have been expressed about the overall availability of suchinsurance.  Problems with insurance availability can be divided intocategories based on the type of damages anticipated.  This, in turn,facilitates the development and implementation of government remediesto insurance availability problems.  Order No. 92-248 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SECURITIES AND FUTURE MARKETS IN TRANSITIONBy Kevin F. Winch, Economics Division.  23 pages.  After describingthe regulatory structure of the securities and futures markets, thisreport examines major trends in these markets acted on by Congressfrom 1975 to date.  In addition, issues in securities and futuresmarket regulation likely to come before Congress in the immediatefuture are briefly described.  This report is part of the CRS series:Economic Policymaking in Congress:  Trends and Prospects.  Order No.92-307 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SHAREHOLDER VOTING CONCERNING EXECUTIVE PAYBy Michael V. Seitzinger, American Law Division.  4 pages.  The issueof how much executives of a corporation should be paid is especiallycontroversial at this time.  A recent change by the Securities andExchange Commission in an interpretation of the proxy regulationswill require certain shareholder proposals concerning executivecompensation to be included in proxy materials.  Nevertheless, thereis still congressional interest in enacting legislation morestringent than this interpretation.  Order No. 92-254 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONSTITUTIONALITY OF COMPELLING DISCLOSURES CONCERNING MOTION PICTUREALTERATIONSBy Henry Cohen, American Law Division.  5 pages.  Although moviemarquees and posters, and video cassette casings and boxes, serve toidentify a film and the individuals associated with it, they alsoimplicitly propose a commercial transaction.  If the bill requiredthat a film itself disclose information, a better case could be madethat the bill regulated noncommercial speech.  As it is, however, itappears more likely that the bill would be viewed as regulatingsolely commercial speech.  Order No. 92-256 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CABLE TELEVISION INDUSTRY:  A BRIEF OVERVIEWBy Angele A Gilroy, Economics Division.  6 pages.  This reportprovides a brief overview of both the structure of the cabletelevision industry, and the cable system-programmer-subscriberrelationship.  Order No. 92-326 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS AND SIGNALING SYSTEM 7By Stephen J. Down and Stephen Gould, Science Policy ResearchDivision.  6 pages.  Telephone outages in 1990 and 1991 that werecaused by software malfunctions within advanced telephone networkswitching systems have generated concern about the durability of theU.S. communications infrastructure.  These concerns have resulted inthe introduction of legislation in the 102nd Congress intended topromote greater network reliability.  Order No. 92-266 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CHOICE PROGRAMS AND STATE CONSTITUTIONS:  THE INCLUSION OF SECTARIANSCHOOLSBy David M. Ackerman, American Law Division.  20 pages.  One issuethat has arisen in the continuing debate about school choice programsconcerns the extent to which state constitutions would permitsectarian schools to participate.  This report analyzes the pertinentprovisions of the constitutions of the fifty states with referenceboth to programs that would be federally funded and to programs thatwould not be.  Order No. 92-260 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION FUNDING ISSUES:  FY 1993; ISSUE BRIEFBy Angela Evans, Education and Public Welfare Division.  Each yearCongress decides funding levels for all programs within theDepartment of Education (ED).  Most ED programs are discretionary.This means that the annual appropriation determines the amount offunding that will be available to support program activities for agiven fiscal year.  During the process Congress deliberates whatmight be appropriate levels of funding for ED programs, how theselevels differ from previous year funding levels, how programs mightbe changed to effect savings, and how funding for ED programscomplies with the budget enforcement provisions to restrain spendingon domestic discretionary programs.  Order No. IB92048.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992DRUG-EXPOSED CHILDREN AND FEDERAL EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ANDDEVELOPMENT PROGRAMSBy Steven R. Aleman, Education and Public Welfare Division.  7 pages.This report identifies selected federal early childhood education anddevelopment programs that may support either services to or researchon infants and children who were exposed prenatally to drugs.  Thereport also briefly discusses the rising concern with meeting thespecial needs of these children, and identifies legislation pendingin the 102nd Congress relating to the developmental and educationalneeds of these children.  Order No. 92-287 EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992EDUCATION RESEARCH AMENDMENTS:  A SUMMARY OF H.R. 4014 AND COMPARISONWITH CURRENT LAWBy Paul M. Irwin, Education and Public Welfare Division.  16 pages.This report analyzes H.R. 4014, the Educational Research,Development, and Dissemination Excellence Act, a proposal toreauthorize education research activities through fiscal year 1966.The bill authorizes a $144.5 million appropriation for fiscal year1993, double the current fiscal year 1992 appropriation; 4 nationaleducation research institutes; a national education disseminationsystem; and a National Education Research Library.  Order No. 92-282EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL ASSISTANCE TO LIBRARIES:  CURRENT PROGRAMS AND ISSUESBy Wayne Clifton Riddle, Education and Public Welfare Division.  37pages.  The federal government assists libraries through a variety ofgrant programs, plus the activities of the Library of Congress, theNational Commission on Libraries and Information Science, and twoWhite House Conferences on Library and Information Services.  Thisreport provides information on library assistance programs, issuesrelated to the programs, and recommendations of the 1991 White HouseConference.  Order No. 92-317 EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION:  ISSUE BRIEFBy L. Paige Whitaker, American Law Division.  The Federal ElectionCommission is charged with administering certain statutes thatregulate the financial aspects of campaigns for election to federaloffices.  In general, its task is to promote the integrity of thepolitical process.  The actions and decisions of the Commissionaffect fundamental political values and have an immediate impact onpolitical campaigns.  Consequently, the Commission's actions areoften controversial and usually receive close scrutiny, both in andout of Congress.  Order No. IB92050.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TERM LIMITATIONS:  BIBLIOGRAPHY-IN-BRIEF, 1977-1992By George Walser, Library Services Division.  7 pages.  With theenactment by three states in the 1990 elections of limitations on thenumber of terms of legislator that may hold office, the issue hasbecome an ongoing controversy throughout the nation.  This shortbibliography lists articles and commentaries on both sides of thequestion of whether Members of Congress and state legislators shouldbe restricted in how long they may serve.  Order No. 92-253 L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TERM LIMITS FOR FEDERAL AND STATE LEGISLATORS:  RECENT PROPOSALS INTHE STATES (1991-1992)By Sula P. Richardson, Government Division.  17 pages.  This reporton recently proposed state measures to limit federal and statelegislators' tenure consists of two parts:  (1) an overview of theissue; and (2) a table which lists for each state the number, type,and status of relevant proposals.  Order No. 92-322 GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 19921992 PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATESBy Janet Hays, Jennifer Manning, and Judith B. Frazier, CongressionalReference Division.  4 pages.  This report provides a selective listof presidential candidates for the 1992 election, including thecriteria for their selection.  The information for each candidateincludes the announcement date, campaign headquarters, and briefbiography.  Order No. 92-66 C.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY PROVISIONS OF S. 2166 AND H.R.776:  A SIDE-BY-SIDE COMPARISONBy Fred Sissine and Daniel Morgan, Science Policy Research Division.21 pages.  This report compares efficiency and renewable energyprovisions of Senate bill 2166, the National Energy Security Act of1992, as passed by the Senate on February 19, 1992, with those of theComprehensive National Energy Policy Act, as reported by the HouseSubcommittee on Energy and Power, on October 31, 1991.  The titles onelectric vehicles, alternative fuel vehicles, and othertransportation issues are not included.  Order No. 92-272 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992GIANT OIL FIELDS AND DOMESTIC OIL PRODUCTIONBy Joseph P. Riva, Jr., Science Policy Research Division.  7 pages.Giant oil fields are among the most valuable concentrations ofnatural wealth on earth.  When developed anywhere, they contributesignificantly to economic and individual well-being.  With its highstandard of living based on high per capita energy consumption, thishas been particularly true for the United States.  New giant fieldsare needed to shore up declining domestic oil production, thushelping to keep energy affordable.  However, almost all undiscovereddomestic giant fields are likely to be site-specific to a relativelyfew areas in Alaska and on the outer continental shelves.  Greatcontroversy reflecting differing societal values surrounds thedevelopment of oil in these areas, but there is a price for notexploring.  it could be very high.  Order No. 92-265 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992MOTOR FUEL MARKETING COMPETITION AND H.R. 2966By Bernard A. Gelb, Economics Division.  9 pages.  This report firstdescribes the structure and patterns of motor fuel marketing, and theevents that have buffeted them.  Then, the key provisions of H.R.2966, the Petroleum Marketing Competition Enhancement Act, arepresented and analyzed with respect to their likely effects on motorfuel marketing.  The report does not attempt to resolve conflictingassertions by proponents and opponents of the bill regarding marketbehavior.  Order No. 92-238 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992RESTRUCTURING THE URANIUM ENRICHMENT ENTERPRISE:  A COMPARISON OF S.2166 (TITLE X) AND H.R. 776 (TITLE VI)By Marc Humphries, Environment and Natural Resources Policy Division.18 pages.  This report compares and comments on two major proposalsto restructure federal enrichment services.  There seems to beconsensus on the idea of restructuring the Uranium EnrichmentEnterprise into a wholly owned government corporation, but there arestill many unresolved issues.  The differences between the two billsare described in this report.  Order No. 92-271 ENR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CIVILIAN NUCLEAR WASTE DISPOSAL:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Mark Holt, Environment and Natural Resources Policy Division.Management of radioactive waste has posed difficult issues forCongress since the beginning of the nuclear power industry in the1950s.  As new disposal facilities for all types of radioactive wastehave moved into the development and demonstration stage in recentyears, public concern about safety, health, and the environment hasrisen substantially.  Order No. IB92059.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLICYMAKING:  TWO-STEPPING TO A WALTZBy John E. Blodgette, Environment and Natural Resources PolicyDivision.  19 pages.  The costs of environmental protection programshave been growing, and their impact on the nation's economy andindustrial competitiveness is controversial. This report highlightsways in which environmental and economic policies and programsinteract.  It also reviews different ways of exploring suchinteractions and identifies potential consequences of differingassumptions underlying alternative analyses.  References includematerials that readers may wish to pursue further.  Order No. 92-295ENR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992OIL RECYCLING BILLS:  A COMPARISON OF H.R. 872, H.R. 1411, H.R. 3956,AND INDUSTRY'S PROPOSALBy Mark Reisch, Environment and Natural Resources Policy Division.22 pages.  Used oil is a valuable resource that can be re-refinedback into lubricating oil, or used as a fuel.  But when disposedimproperly, it presents a threat to the environment and publichealth.  How to properly regulate used oil to protect theenvironment, while at the same time encouraging recycling and notdiscouraging collection, has been a difficult problem for theEnvironmental Protection Agency.  This report compares, section bysection, three bills of the 102nd Congress and a proposal of theAmerican Petroleum Institute that attempt to encourage recycling ofused oil.  Order No. 92-247 ENR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992BANK MERGERS AND INTERSTATE BANKING:  POLICY ISSUESBy William Jackson, Economics Division.  25 pages.  To someobservers, the very survival of the banking industry as we know itappears threatened.  Its falling market shares and profitability maysuggest that industry consolidation is necessary to eliminate excesscapacity; some believe through nationwide banking involvingacquisitions across state lines.  But would the result be consistentwith financial competition?  This report analyzes the economicrelationships involved, and presents policy options for Congress todeal with them.  Order No. 92-305 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL PREEMPTION OF STATE CONSUMER PROTECTION LAWS AS APPLIED TONATIONAL BANKS AND OTHER FEDERALLY CHARTERED BANKING INSTITUTIONSBy Charles V. Dale, American Law Division.  18 pages.  This reportexplores federal statutes, regulations, and judicial decisionsrelevant to preemption of state consumer protection laws as appliedto national banks and federally chartered thrift institutions.  OrderNo. 92-296 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992AUSTRALIA, NEW ZEALAND, AND THE PACIFIC ISLANDS:  ISSUES FOR U.S.POLICY IN THE 1990S; ISSUE BRIEFthis issue brief reviews changes in U.S. interests in Oceania sinceWorld War II; explains recent problems for U.S. policy regardingpolitical, security, economic, and environment issues; and reviewsthe role of Congress in assessing possible U.S. policy approachesover the next few years.  Order No. IB92044.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CHINA-U.S. RELATIONS IN A POST-COLD WAR WORLD:  INFO PACK The demise of Soviet communism and the disintegration of the SovietUnion leaves the People's Republic of China (PRC) as the last majorCommunist state.  As the Cold War rationale for closer relations withthe PRC disappears, new questions are raised concerning theimportance of China to U.S. strategic interests.  This Info Packgives basic background on the PRC and about U.S.-PRC relations,including the issues of human rights, trade, and nuclearproliferation and arms control issues.  Included is material oncommunism in the PRC.  Order No. IP460C.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES AND OTHER FORMER SOVIET REPUBLICS:NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF HEADS OF STATEBy Vanessa Cieslak, Congressional Reference Division.  3 pages.  Inresponse to requests for the names and addresses of heads of statefor the former Soviet republics, this compilation is offered.  Theformat for the addresses follows Eastern European usage, i.e.,country name, city name and finally, street name and number.  Thisinformation is current as of March 31, 1992.  Order No. 92-327 C.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONGRESS AND THE CRISIS IN U.S.-CHINA POLICY, 1991By Robert G. Sutter, Office of Senior Specialists.  24 pages.  Thedebate between the Bush Administration and its congressional backers,and a large bipartisan group of critics in Congress over U.S. policytoward China went through three general states in 1991.  The firststage saw congressional criticism of China, and Bush Administrationpolicy toward China, moderate in late 1990 and early 1991.  There wasan outpouring of congressional criticism of China on human rights,trade, and arms proliferation issues, and criticism of the BushAdministration's "failed" China policy.  The third state came aftercritical votes on conditional most favored nation legislation inJuly.  At year's end, all sides in the debate anticipated continuedstrong congressional criticism of Chinese practices and BushAdministration policy.  Order No. 92-324 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992EUROPEAN COMMUNITY ENLARGEMENT:  BACKGROUND AND ISSUES FOR THE UNITEDSTATESBy Karen E. Donfried, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.16 pages.  A record number of states are expressing interest injoining the European Community (EC).  The questions surrounding theenlargement issue--whether the EC will expand its membership, and ifso when and according to what organizing principle--remain open.This paper reviews the prospects for EC enlargement and considers theimplications of enlargement for the United States.  Order No. 92-264F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FOREIGN AID:  ANSWERS TO BASIC QUESTIONSBy Curt Tarnoff, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.  14pages.  The U.S. foreign assistance program is a fundamentalcomponent of the international affairs budget and is viewed by manyas an essential instrument of U.S. foreign policy.  This reportprovides brief answers to frequently asked questions about the U.S.foreign aid program.  Order No. 92-309 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992IRAQ'S POST-WAR COMPLIANCE RECORD:  A CHRONOLOGYBy Kenneth Katzman, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.47 pages.  This report provides a chronology of Iraq's record ofcompliance with post-war United Nations resolutions and cease-fireagreements with the United States and its coalition partners.  Amongother issues, the chronology describes Iraq's cooperation with U.N.inspectors tasked to dismantle Iraq's weapons of mass destruction;its treatment of the Kurdish minority and Shi'ite population; and itsrelationship with Kuwait.  The chronology covers March 1991 throughMarch 1992.  Order No. 92-320 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE ISRAELI ECONOMY AND ITS EXTERNAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS:  AN OVERVIEWBy Patricia Wertman, Economics Division.  34 pages.  This reportexamines the performance of the Israeli economy between 1985 and1990.  The results of Israel's 1985 stabilization program arediscussed.  Particular emphasis is placed upon Israel's externalsector, that is, its export performance and its level of externalindebtedness.  The report concludes that Israel's stabilizationpolicy has been largely successful, but that the economy requiressignificant resource transfers from abroad.  The recent surge ofimmigration into Israel is likely to place fundamental economicpatterns under stress, particularly the near-monopoly structure ofIsrael's labor market.  The future outlook of the Israeli economyand, particularly, its future debt-servicing capacity are tied tothese issues.  Order No. 92-276 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ISRAEL'S ELECTION, 1992:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Clyde R. Mark, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.Israel is scheduled to hold parliamentary elections on June 23, 1992.Issues in the campaign may include electoral reform, unemployment,economic reforms, housing, treatment of recently arrived immigrantsfrom the former Soviet Union, settlements in the occupiedterritories, and, in particular, the Arab-Israeli peace process begunin Madrid in October 1991 and continuing in Washington.  Order No.IB92060.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992JAPAN-U.S. RELATIONS IN A POST-COLD WAR ENVIRONMENT: EMERGING TRENDSAND ISSUES FOR U.S. POLICYBy Richard P. Cronin, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.14 pages.  The prospects for Japan-U.S. relations in a rapidlychanging international environment were explored in a September 27,1991, CRS seminar entitled "The Future of U.S.-Japan Relations:Global Partnership or Strategic Rivalry?"  This report summarizes theprincipal findings of that seminar.  Order No. 92-314 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992LITHUANIA:  BASIC FACTSBy Vita Bite, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.  6pages.  This short report provides basic information on Lithuania,the largest and southernmost of the three Baltic states.  Lithuaniadeclared full independence from the Soviet Union on March 11, 1990.The United States recognized the Lithuanian government on September2, 1991, and the Soviet Union did so on September 6, 1991.  Lithuanianow faces the task of rebuilding political institutions, reformingits economy, addressing environmental problems, establishing foreignrelations, and dealing with minority populations.  Order No. 92-313F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992A NUCLEAR-WEAPONS-FREE ZONE IN THE MIDDLE EAST:  BACKGROUND ANDISSUES; ISSUE BRIEFBy Zachery Davis, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.  Thebroad issue is how best to promote peace in the Middle East.  Thespecific issue discussed in this brief, which could become a part ofthe negotiations, is the status of nuclear weapons in the region andthe question of their proliferation.  Order No. IB92041.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992PALESTINIANS AND MIDDLE EAST PEACE:  ISSUES FOR THE UNITED STATES;ISSUE BRIEFBy Clyde Mark, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.  Thisissue brief summarizes the significance of the Palestinians in theMiddle East peace process.  Congress will decide if the United Stateswill contribute financial support for the peace process, and willauthorize and appropriate any U.S. foreign assistance that may beincluded in a resolution of the dispute and any funding for U.S.involvement in peacekeeping.  Congress may also be involved inconsultations leading to or oversight of any U.S. commitments toguarantee peace treaties.  Order No. IB92052.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992POLAND, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, AND HUNGARY:  REGIONAL TRENDS; ISSUE BRIEFBy Julie Kim and Francis Miko, Foreign Affairs and National DefenseDivision.  Eastern Europe is undergoing a process of change that hasfar-reaching consequences for Europe and East-West relations.Internally, the governments face economic and public pressures fordemocracy and economic reform.  Externally, Gorbachev's glasnost andperestroika are having major repercussions in Eastern Europe.  OrderNo. IB92051.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ROMANIA, BULGARIA, ALBANIA:  RECENT DEVELOPMENTS; ISSUE BRIEFBy Sergin Verona and Francis T. Miko, Foreign Affairs and NationalDefense Division.  Romania, Bulgaria, and Albania, countries ofSoutheastern Europe, are undergoing a process of change from theSoviet-dominated communist systems that existed for more than fourdecades, with far-reaching consequences for Europe and for theirrelations with the United States.  Order No. IB92064.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SOUTH AFRICA:  1992 WHITE REFERENDUMBy Brenda Branaman, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.  5pages.  A referendum for white voters on continuation of the reformprocess was announced in February 1992, just as working groups of theConvention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) were negotiating atransitional government that could lead to a new constitution andnon-racial, democratic government.  Order No. 92-257 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TREATIES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND THE SOVIET UNION:  CURRENTSTATUS FOLLOWING THE BREAKUP OF THE U.S.S.R.By Jonathan E. Sanford, Foreign Affairs and National DefenseDivision.  3 pages.  This report provides a brief response toinquiries about the current status of the treaties previously inforce between the United States and the Union of Soviet SocialistRepublics following the breakup of the U.S.S.R.  Order No. 92-268 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE U.S. ROLE IN THE POST-COLD WAR WORLD:  ISSUES FOR A NEW GREATDEBATEBy Stanley R. Sloan, Office of Senior Specialists.  36 pages.  Whenthe Soviet Union was dissolved at the end of 1991, the United Statesfound itself without its number one "enemy" in internationalrelations and also without a clear sense of purpose for futureforeign and defense policies.  This report analyzes the emerging newgreat debate on the U.S. role in the world after the Cold War.  OrderNo. 92-308 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992VIETNAM-U.S. RELATIONS:  THE DEBATE OVER NORMALIZATION; ISSUE BRIEFBy Robert G. Sutter, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.The Cambodian peace agreement of October 1991 has begun a 4-phaseBush Administration plan to normalize relations with Vietnam.  Theplan and other developments prompt sometimes heated debate inCongress and elsewhere.  Order No. IB92054.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992YUGOSLAVIA:  NATIONALISM AND ETHNIC RELATIONS:  SELECTED REFERENCES,1989-1992By Valentin Leskovsek, Library Services Division.  22 pages.  Eventsin Yugoslavia in the last few years have exposed the fragile unity ofa loosely knit, multinational federation.  After the Second WorldWar, Tito's communism kept an iron hand on the ethnic tensions.  Withhis death, the political polarization along ethnic, religious, andeconomic lines resurfaced, and national antagonisms rendered apeaceful solution impossible.  Seeing no way out of a constitutionalstalemate, Slovenia and Croatia each voted for a peaceful separationand independence.  This brought the armed intervention of theYugoslav army wishing to prevent federal disintegration, a step thatpushed the country into a civil war.  This short bibliography ofselected books and articles deals with the present Yugoslav crisis.Order No. 92-259 L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ADDITIONS TO THE MAJOR ISSUE FILE:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Issue Brief Section.  This report contains a list of new issuebriefs recently added to the Major Issues file.  These issue briefs,as well as the other issue briefs on file, are available in printedform on request.  Order No. IB92001.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ARCHIVED ISSUE BRIEF LIST:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Issue Brief Section.  This document contains a list of issuebriefs no longer of intense public or congressional interest butstill considered valuable for the historic information they contain.Order No. IB92000.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992INTERNSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS:  CONGRESSIONAL, FEDERAL, AND OTHER WORKEXPERIENCE OPPORTUNITIESBy Janet Kinger, Congressional Reference Division.  18 pages.  Toassist congressional offices in responding to requests forinformation about internships, fellowships, and other work experienceprograms, CRS has prepared this report on congressional internships,other federal government internships, and congressional, judicial,and Presidential fellowships.  Detailed information on additionalprograms is outside the report's scope.  However, an annotatedbibliography lists further sources of information on internships,fellowships, and summer jobs.  The publications listed can be used tolocate additional work experience opportunities, both inside andoutside the federal government.  Order No. 92-292 C.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SELECT MAJOR ISSUES BEFORE THE 102ND CONGRESS, SECOND SESSIONBy Congressional Research Service.  28 pages.  Issues in domesticpolicy, trade, economic conditions, defense, and foreign affairsdominate the legislative agenda of the second session of the 102ndCongress.  The Congressional Research Service had identified 23 suchissues considered likely to (1) be national in scope, (2) receivewidespread public attention, (3) involve significant impacts on thebudget, economy, or social fabric of the nation, and (4) promiselegislative action.  Order No. 92-1 PLN.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SPEECH MATERIAL:  MEMORIAL DAY; INFO PACK In the United States, war dead have been honored on Memorial Dat, orDecoration Day as it was known, since the Civil War.  Since 1971,most states have observed memorial Day on the last Monday in May.This Info Pack is intended to assist Members of Congress to preparespeeches for this occasion.  Information includes background on theorigin and history of the holiday, sample past speeches, relevantquotations, and statistics on U.S. war casualties.  Order No. IP376M.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY:  CONSPIRACY THEORIESBy Suzanne Cavanagh, Government Division.  11 pages.  This reportsummarizes various conspiracy theories advanced with respect to theassassination of President Kennedy.  It discusses the findings of theWarren Commission and the House Select Committee on Assassinationsand the disposition of the files of those panels.  Order No. 92-270GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONGRESS' EXEMPTION FROM SELECTED MAJOR LEGISLATION:  A LEGALANALYSISBy Jay R. Shampansky, Charles Dale, Jack Maskell, Kathleen S.Swendiman, Vincent E. Treacy, American Law Division, and Raymond J.Celada, Office of Senior Specialists.  33 pages.  Congress has beencriticized for being exempt from various laws which apply to theprivate sector and/or to the executive branch.  This report providesan overview of these laws, arguments concerning their application toCongress, and recent legislative actions that have extended some ofthese measures to Congress.  Order No. 92-294 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONGRESSIONAL REFORM:  A SYNOPSIS OF CONCERNS AND PROPOSALSBy Frederick H. Pauls, Office of Senior Specialists.  11 pages.Concerns and legislative proposals underlying efforts in the 102ndCongress to establish committees to study and recommend reform of theHouse and Senate are identified and briefly explained.  Order No. 92-289 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONGRESSIONAL REFORM AND CHANGE:  SELECTED PROPOSALS INTRODUCED INTHE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVESBy Sean Tucker Government Division.  40 pages.  This reportcategorizes and summarizes proposals introduced in the House ofRepresentatives from 1977 through 1991 to effect changes in Houseorganization, operations, or procedure.  Order No. 92-312 GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CONGRESSIONAL VOTES AND JUDICIAL ACTION ON OUTSIDE INCOME ANDHONORARIA RESTRICTIONS, 1974-1992By Mildred L. Amer, Government Division.  29 pages.  This reportidentifies all congressional votes affecting the outside income ofMembers of Congress and congressional staff, including honoraria.  Itbegins with 1974, the year in which the first votes on the issuesoccurred.  In addition, information is provided on a court suit filedin 1977 by five Senators challenging the then-existing Senate outsideincome limitation rules and on a 1990 court suit filed by severalfederal employees challenging the ban on honoraria contained in theEthics Reform Act of 1989.  Order No. 92-267 GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FORMER PRESIDENTS:  FEDERAL PENSION AND RETIREMENT BENEFITSBy Stephanie Smith, Government Division.  3 pages.  Since itsenactment in 1958, the Former President's Act has been amended toprovide increases in Presidential pensions and in the authorizationlimits for office staff (3 U.S.C. 102 note).  The General ServicesAdministration (GSA) is authorized by the Act to provide an officestaff and suitable office space appropriately furnished and equipped.Related legislation has provided former Presidents with travelexpenses, mailing privileges, and Secret Service protection.  Table 1provides a listing of GSA's allowances for former Presidents forfiscal year 1991.  Order No. 92-299 GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE GOVERNORS AND LIEUTENANT GOVERNORS OF THE STATES AND OTHERJURISDICTIONSBy Isabelle Malloy, Congressional Reference Division.  8 pages.  Thisreport lists the governors and lieutenant governors of the 50 states,plus American Samoa, Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and theVirgin Islands.  Included is the year when the next election forgovernor and lieutenant governor will be held, the political partyaffiliation of the respective officials, the length of term ofoffice, and the address.  Order No. 92-290 C.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992REORGANIZING THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY:  LANDMARKCOMMISSIONSBy Ronald C. Moe, Government Division.  54 pages.  In most recentCongresses, including the 102nd Congress, bills have been introduced,considered, and occasionally passed to establish a commission tocomprehensively study the organization and management of theexecutive branch.  Reference is often made during consideration ofproposals to earlier similar commissions (e.g. Hoover Commissions,Ash Council).  This report provides a summary and analysis of major("landmark") executive branch study commissions in this century.  Theobjective is to place these commissions, their recommendations andresults, into a philosophical and historical context.  Order No. 92-293 GOV.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992RETIREMENT FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESSBy Carolyn L. Merck, Education and Public Welfare Division.  11pages.  Members of Congress can be covered under one of fourdifferent retirement plan arrangements.  This paper describes each ofthese arrangements, including the retirement eligibility criteria andthe formulas used to determine benefit amounts.  Order No. 92-330EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992AIDS AND OTHER DISEASES:  FEDERAL SPENDING AND MORBIDITY ANDMORTALITY STATISTICSBy Judith A. Johnson, Science Policy Research Division.  2 pages.Compares federal research funding for AIDS with that of four otherdiseases.  Also compares incidence, prevalence, and annual deathstatistics for the five diseases.  Order No. 92-255 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992AIDS:  INTERNATIONAL PERSPECTIVES AND ISSUES:  BIBLIOGRAPHY-IN-BRIEFBy Bonnie F. Managan, Library Services Division.  The acquired immunedeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a worldwide health problem that willhave significant impact on developing countries.  By the end of thecentury, the World Health Organization estimates that 90 percent ofthe projected 25 million to 30 million cases of humanimmunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection will be in developingcountries.  This bibliography focuses on AIDS in Africa, America(outside of the United States), Asia, and Europe.  Order No. 92-283L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ANTITRUST LAW AND JOINT ACTIVITY BY HOSPITALSBy Janice E. Rubin, American Law Division.  9 pages.  Some concernhas been expressed that the federal antitrust laws may be undulyhindering some hospitals from undertaking joint activities--includingthe sharing of technology or expensive medical equipment--which theybelieve are necessary in order to maximize the efficiency of theiroperations.  Indeed, many hospital administrators are afraid that ifthey even talk to each other, much less undertake joint programs,they will automatically violate the antitrust laws, which prohibitthe anticompetitive consequences of certain actions.  This report,therefore, will first get out some of the more important concepts inantitrust law which are pertinent to the issue of joint activity byhospitals.  It will conclude, after establishing a context, with somepossible congressional or hospital actions to reduce the likelihoodof antitrust challenges.  Order No. 92-269 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992BREAST CANCERBy Judith A. Johnson, Science Policy Research Division.  2 pages.For women, breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer.  TheNational Cancer Institute (NCI) estimates that in 1992 46,000 womenwill die of breast cancer and 180,000 new cases will be diagnosed.Controversy continues over the use of mammography in screeningasymptomatic women for the early detection of breast cancer.  A 1990National Institutes of Health consensus development conferenceconcluded that lumpectomy is as effective as mastectomy in treatingearly breast cancer.  Despite this, only 20 percent of women eligiblefor lumpectomy have this new procedure.  Debate persists over whetherbreast cancer patients with negative lymph nodes should receiveadjuvant therapy with its attendant risks when only a smallpercentage of those treated will actually benefit.  Order No. 92-279SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL FUNDING FOR AIDS RESEARCH AND PREVENTION:  FY81-FY93By Judith A. Johnson, Science Policy Research Division.  23 pages.This report provides a synopsis of the budget activity relating toAIDS from the discovery of the disease in 1981 through FY 1993.Federal funding for AIDS research and prevention has increased from$200,000 in FY 1981 to $1,967,257,000 in FY 1992.  Governmentwidespending on AIDS is estimated at over $4,360,000,000 in FY 1992.Order No. 92-328 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992HEALTH CARE ISSUES FOR THE 102ND CONGRESS, 2ND SESSIONBy Education and Public Welfare Division.  5 pages.  The secondsession of the 102nd Congress will be considering a wide range ofissues related to access and financing of health care services.These include health insurance for the uninsured, spending under theMedicare and medicaid programs, and reauthorization of certain PublicHealth Service Act programs.  Order No. 92-95 EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992OVARIAN CANCERBy Judith A. Johnson, Science Policy Research Division.  2 pages.Ovarian cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer mortality,behind lung, breast, and colo-rectal.  The National Cancer Institute(NCI) estimates that in 1992 13,000 women will die of ovarian cancerand 21,000 new cases will be diagnosed.  Ovarian cancer is difficultto diagnose because it often imitates other diseases.  Recentresearch indicates that if it is detected early, a cure is possible.NCI is supporting research in a number of institutions to evaluatethe usefulness of early screening methods in the detection of ovariancancer.  Order No. 92-280 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE REFORM PROPOSALBy Education and Public Welfare Division.  82 pages.  On February 6,1992, President Bush issued his Comprehensive Health Care Reformprogram, a plan designed to make health care more accessible bymaking health insurance more affordable and the health care systemmore efficient.  The program uses market forces to implement reformsthat build on our current health care system.  This report describesand analyzes the President's plan.  Order No. 92-285 EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992WOMEN WITH HIV INFECTIONBy Judith A. Johnson, Science Policy Research Division.  6 pages.Although, at present, women account for only 10 percent of AIDS casesreported to CDC, women are the fastest growing group in the HIVepidemic.  The route of HIV exposure in women is shifting from IVdrug use to heterosexual contact.  Because the medical conditionsexperienced by many HIV-infected women are not included in the CDCAIDS definition, women often are diagnosed and treated later thanmen.  Also, women may not qualify for benefit payments because theirsymptoms differ from men's.  Order No. 92-281 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CURRENT ISSUES IN HOUSINGBy Morton J. Schusheim, Office of Senior Specialists.  9 pages.  Thisreport summarizes a number of housing issues before Congress.Current proposals to stimulate the housing construction industry areexamined.  In addition, the persistent housing difficulties of lowincome households are discussed, including the questions:  who needsassistance, how many can be helped, and by what means.  Currentprograms and some proposed measures are enumerated.  The role ofincome transfer programs is touched on, along with programtraditionally regarded as housing assistance.  Order No. 92-275 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992DEMOGRAPHY AND HOUSING IN 1990SBy Barbara L. Miles, Economics Division.  15 pages.  Demographictrends through the 1990s imply formation of fewer new households thanin the 1970s and 1980s and, thus, a declining need for new additionsto the housing stock.  The Census Bureau's "middle" projectionsindicate that, on net, perhaps 1.2 million households will formannually in the first half of the decade, slowing slightly to about1.1 million through the year 2000.  This compares with a little morethan 1.3 million in the 1980s and 1.7 million in the 1970s.  OrderNo. 92-332 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992BASIC QUESTIONS ON U.S. CITIZENSHIP AND NATURALIZATIONBy Larry M. Eig, American Law Division.  6 pages.  Answers thesequestions:  Who is a United States citizen at birth?  How does onebecome a naturalized citizen?  Must citizens take loyalty oaths?What is the required period of residency prior to being eligible forcitizenship?  Is a citizenship revocable?  If so, under whatcircumstances?  Finally, are there provisions for dual citizenship?If so, under what circumstances?  Order No. 92-246 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SOCIAL SECURITY:  THE EFFECT OF ECONOMIC VARIATIONS ON BENEFITSBy Geoffrey C. Kollmann, Education and Public Welfare Division.  19pages.  Social security is designed to produce uniform benefit levelsover time.  However, in fact these benefits vary depending on theeconomic conditions prevailing when a worker becomes eligible forbenefits.  This report shows the instability in benefit levels thatwould occur under the economic conditions that occurred in 1966-1990.Order No. 92-333 EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION:  THE EMERGENCY UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION(EUC) PROGRAMBy Gene Falk, Education and Public Welfare Division.  9 pages.  TheEmergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) program provides additionalweeks of assistance to those who run out of state unemploymentcompensation and any extended benefits.  This report describes theEUC program.  Order No. 92-80 EPW.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ANOTHER RAIL STRIKE?  ISSUE BRIEFBy Linda Levine, Economics Division.  On March 4, 1992, the NationalMediation Board announced the start of a 30-day "cooling-off" periodinvolving contract negotiations between several unions that representemployees at Conrail and Amtrak, and between the machinists Union andnumerous major freight carriers.  If the parties do not resolve theirdifferences by 12:01 a.m. (Eastern Standard Time) on April 4, theunions will be free to strike and the carriers will be free toimplement new contract terms.  Congress has intervened in the past toend rail strikes and resolve rail labor disputes.  Order No. IB92063.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ATTORNEY'S FEES:  THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION PROPOSAL TO ADOPT THEENGLISH RULEBy Harry Cohen, American Law Division.  In the United States, eachparty to a lawsuit ordinarily must pay its own attorneys' fees.Courts generally may order the losing party to pay the winningparty's fees only when authorized by statute.  This is known as the"American rule," in contrast with the English rule, under which thelosing party routinely pays the attorneys' fees of the prevailingparty.  The President's Council on Competitiveness has proposed thatCongress adopted the English rule in cases brought in federal courton the basis of diversity jurisdiction.  The proposal has beenintroduced by Representative Fish and by Senator Grassley as section3 of the Access to Justice Act of 1992, H.R. 4155 and S. 2180, 102ndCongress.  Order No. 92-237 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992DRUG ABUSE IN AMERICA:  SELECTED REFERENCES, 1990-1992By Jean Bowers, Library Services Division.  17 pages.  Thisbibliography includes references to recent articles, books, andselected congressional reports which discuss the use of abuse ofnarcotics and other dangerous drugs in America today, with somereferences to such drug use in history.  Materials listed alsodiscuss use by various populations, health issues, and trends in drugrelated crime.  Order No. 92-321 L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992DRUG CONTROL:  A CHECKLIST OF CRS PRODUCTSBy George Walser, Library Services Division.  5 pages.  Theproduction, distribution, and consumption of illegal narcotics areproblems that have drawn increasing attention in Congress.  Thischecklist serves as a guide to CRS products on the CRS Major Issue.Order No. 92-258 L.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992PRISONS:  POLICY OPTIONS FOR CONGRESS; ISSUE BRIEFBy Keith Bea, Government Division.  It is generally agreed thatresources are needed to relieve the overcrowding of prisons,particularly since resources for probation and parole are alsoovertaxed.  Possible responses include additional prison constructionand dedicating more funds to supervised release or alternatives toincarceration.  The federal role in effecting such improvements is atissue.  Order No. IB92061.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ABROGATING RESTRICTIONS ON POSSESSION OFFIREARMS BY CONVICTED FELONSBy P.L. Morgan, American Law Division.  Federal law prohibits afelon, convicted by state or federal authorities, from possessingfirearms.  Most states have similar laws.  Relief from thisdisability arising from a federal conviction for crimes against theUnited States can come from a Presidential pardon.  The diversestates have several methods of authorizing felons to possessfirearms, though not all do.  Eliminating the state prohibition alsohas the effect of authorizing the felon to legally possess firearmsunder federal law.  This report briefly describes the state lawsprohibiting possession of firearms by felons and the provisions, ifany, for voiding those restrictions.  Order No. 92-262 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992CHINESE MISSILE AND NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION ISSUES:  ISSUES FORCONGRESS; ISSUE BRIEFBy Shirley A. Kan, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.This Issue Brief (1) highlights particular problems with Chinese armssales; (2) presents the data and, especially, their specific opensources on Chinese missile and nuclear proliferation activities ofcurrent concern; (3) provides Chinese statements of assurance andsteps towards participation in nonproliferation regimes; and (4)discusses some policy constraints and issues for Congress relating tobilateral and multilateral approaches.  Order No. IB92056.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992DEFENSE BUDGET FOR FY 1993:  DATA SUMMARYBy Keith Berner and Stephen Daggett, Foreign Affairs and NationalDefense Division.  40 pages.  Many different statistics are used toillustrate trends in defense spending.  This data summary presentsdefense budget information in a number of forms designed to presentdifferent perspectives on U.S. military spending.  It is a quickreference guide for facts and figures on the defense budget requestfor fiscal year 1993 and on long-term trends in U.S. defensespending.  Order No. 92-162.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE EUROPEAN DEFENSE INDUSTRY:  RESPONSES TO GLOBAL CHANGE ANDEUROPEAN INTEGRATIONBy Theodor W. Galdi, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.20 pages.  There are four main sections to this report.  The firstbriefly discusses the current structure and near-term outlook forWest European defense producers in light of moves toward Europeanintegration and the declining worldwide demand for arms.  The secondsection examines the major arms exports by France, the UnitedKingdom, and the Federal Republic of Germany over the last decade.Potential future export possibilities are also discussed in thissection.  The third section sets out the activities and goals of theEuropean Commission, the Independent European Program Group, and theNorth Atlantic Treaty Organization intended to harmonize andrationalize the defense trade.  The final section sets out U.S.policy responses and issues for consideration by Congress.  Order No.92-284 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992INTELLIGENCE REORGANIZATION PROPOSALS:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Richard A. Best, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.With the end of the Cold War, many observers are urging that the U.S.intelligence community be reshaped to serve altered national securitypolicies and to accommodate likely budgetary reductions.  Somemembers of Congress believe that reorganization of the intelligencecommunity should be accomplished, at lease in part, by legislation.Bills have been introduced and it is likely that there will beconsiderable discussion of intelligence reorganization throughout theremainder of the 102nd Congress.  Order No. IB92053.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992NUCLEAR PROLIFERATION FROM RUSSIA:  OPTIONS FOR CONTROLBy Zachary Davis, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.  17pages.  People, information, equipment, materials, components, andcompleted warheads from Russia could contribute to nuclearproliferation.  This report summarizes the proliferation potential ofeach and describes methods to help limit their spread.  The UnitedStates and other nations seek to apply a range of controls andinducements to this end in cooperation with Russia.  Order No. 92-310F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION FISCAL YEAR 1993 BUDGETREQUESTBy David P. Radzanowski, Science Policy Research Division.  6 pages.This report summarizes the National Aeronautics and SpaceAdministration's fiscal year 1993 budget request.  NASA is requesting$141.993 billion, an increase of 4.46 percent of fiscal year 1992appropriations of $14.353 billion.  This report gives a briefdescription of the budget request for programs funded under NASA'sresearch and development and space flight, control, and datacommunications funding categories.  Also included is a discussion ofthe fiscal year 1993 funding outlook for NASA.  Order No. 92-278 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FUNDING:  FISCAL YEAR 1993; ISSUE BRIEFBy Science Policy Research Division.  Coordinated by John D. Moteff.This issue brief summarizes some of the issues associated with theresearch and development (R&D) budgets for 11 federal agencies.Together these agencies represent more than 95 percent of allfederally funded R&D.  Order No. IB92062.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992SCIENCE AT THE CROSSROADS:  INFO PACK During the second session of the 102nd Congress, the adequacy andtypes of federal support for R&D will be debated.  Many questionswhether the federal government can continue to increase support forscience and for a growing number of scientists.  This Info Packdiscusses the current status of scientific research in the UnitedStates.  Federal funding, priorities for research, and other issuescentral to the question of the direction of U.S. science are covered.Order No. IP461S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA):  AN OVERVIEW OF MAJORPROVISIONSBy Nancy Lee Jones, American Law Division.  8 pages.  The Americanswith Disabilities Act (ADA), enacted on July 26, 1990, would providebroad nondiscrimination protection for individuals with disabilitiesin employment, public services, public accommodations and servicesoperated by private entities, transportation, and telecommunications.Order No. 92-306 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT:  FINAL RULES AND INFORMATION SOURCESBy James W. Watson, American Law Division.  4 pages.  The Americanwith Disabilities Act (ADA), Public Law No. 101-336, prohibitsdiscrimination against individuals with disabilities in manysituations.  Numerous regulations have been promulgated under theADA.  This report contains citations to these regulations, telephonenumbers where copies of the regulations can be ordered, and telephonenumbers of organizations which may be of assistance to constituents.Order No. 92-311 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND GASOLINE EXCISE TAX RATES ADJUSTED FORINFLATIONBy Louis Alan Talley and Brian W. Cashell, Economics Division.  5pages.  This report provides inflation-adjusted excise tax rates foralcohol, tobacco, and gasoline products, a brief history of the taxrates since November 1951, and current revenues.  Each commodity hadrate increases as part of the Revenue Act of 1951.  This tax act wasborn from revenue needs dictated by military expenditures broughtabout by the Korean conflict.  Revenue needs for budget deficitreduction purposes caused rate increases in all of these excise taxesas part of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990.  Order No. 92-263E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX FOR INDIVIDUALSBy Gregg A. Esenwein, Economics Division.  5 pages.  Many individualsare able to take advantage of the preferences and incentives in theindividual tax code to reduce their income taxes and avoid payingtheir share of the tax burden.  To address this problem of fairnesswhile still preserving the social and economic incentives in the taxcode, Congress enacted the individual minimum tax.  Since itsinception, the value and effectiveness of the minimum tax hasroutinely been the focus of congressional debate.  Order No. 92-304E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FEDERAL INCOME TAX TREATMENT OF THE ELDERLYBy Louis Alan Talley, Economics division.  9 pages.  Under currentlaw there are a number of special provisions in the tax code whichhave the effect of reducing the tax liability of the elderly or areof special significance to older taxpayers.  This report summarizescurrent provisions of federal tax law that are of particular interestto senior citizens.  Order No. 92-277 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE FEDERAL INCOME TAXBy John R. Luckey, American Law Division.  27 pages.  This reportaddresses some of the frequently asked historical, constitutional,procedural, and legal questions concerning the federal income tax.Order No. 92-303 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992INCOME TAX PAYMENTS BY FOREIGN-CONTROLLED CORPORATIONSBy Harry G. Gourevitch, Office of Senior Specialists.  9 pages.  Inrecent years allegations have been made that domestic corporationscontrolled by foreign investors are less profitable and pay lessincome tax than domestic corporations controlled by U.S. investors,and that as a result the United States may be losing billions ofdollars in tax revenue annually.  This report examines the evidenceas to the low profitability of foreign-controlled corporationscompared to U.S.-controlled ones.  Order No. 92-261 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992THE QUESTION OF INDEXING CAPITAL GAINS BY REGULATIONBy Harry G. Gourevitch, Office of Senior Specialists.  7 pages.Proposals have recently been made to index capital gains forinflation by amending current Treasury regulations rather than theInternal Revenue Code.  Advocates of this approach point out that itis not unusual for the Treasury Department to revoke regulationsoutstanding and to issue new ones in their place.  This reportexamines the issues raised by these proposals.  Order No. 92-286 S.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TAX ALLOWANCE FOR INTEREST PAYMENTS ON EDUCATIONAL LOANS:  DATA ANDDISCUSSION OF ISSUESBy Louis Allan Talley, Economics Division, and Bob Lyke, Educationand Public Welfare Division.  13 pages.  The 102nd Congress isconsidering various proposals for a tax allowance for interestpayments on educational loans.  This report presents data on theamount of educational debt of some students and briefly discussesissues of tax equity and efficiency, of subsidizing education throughthe tax code, and of adopting a tax credit instead of a taxdeduction.  Order No. 92-316 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TAX PROPOSALS: A BRIEF COMPARISON OF THE HOUSE, SENATE, ANDADMINISTRATION ALTERNATIVESBy Jack Taylor and David L. Brumbaugh, Economics Division.  9 pages.As March 1991, enters its closing weeks, Congress is moving towardfinal consideration of three alternative tax plans:  one sponsored bythe President; one passed by the House; and one approved by theSenate.  The plans are similar in certain broad respects; all containsaving and investment incentives designed to improve economicperformance, and all contain a number of provisions whose stated goalin to assist families or to promote health, education, and homeownership.  The details of the plans, however, differed widely.Order No. 92-297 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TAX PROVISIONS EXPIRING IN 1992By David L. Brumbauch, Economics division.  6 pages.  As Congressdebates alternative tax plans in 1992, one question it is consideringis the fate of 12 temporary tax provisions that are scheduled toexpire at the end of June 1992.  In each case, the immediate issue iswhether to let the particular provision expire, or to extend it ormake it permanent.  And while each of the so-called "extenders" isunique, at a very general level they all pose a similar questions:each extender is a tax benefit for a particular activity, and eachresults in a loss of tax revenue.  In each case, is the activity theprovision promotes beneficial enough to warrant government supportand the resulting revenue loss and diversion of resources from otheruses?  Order No. 92-273 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TAX RATES AND THE MARRIAGE PENALTYBy Robert B. Burdette, American Law Division.  2 pages.  This reportexamines the rate schedules and tables applied for purposes ofcalculating liability under the federal income tax.  One frequentlyasked question concerning the rate schedules is why taxable incomereported by an unmarried individual is taxed at a higher rate than alike amount of taxable income reported by a married couple filingjointly.  This is an anomaly of having graduated rates applicable todifferent types of taxpayers.  Order No. 92-319 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN U.S. DEFENSE COMPANIESBy Gary J. Pagliano, Foreign Affairs and National Defense Division.8 pages.  The recent McDonell Douglas offer to sell 40 percent of itscommercial operations to the Taiwan Aerospace Corporation underscoresan ongoing debate about the limits of foreign investment in U.S.companies, particularly defense companies.  This paper explores thedifference aspects of foreign investment in U.S. defense companiesand their implications for the U.S. policymaker.  Order No. 92-331 F.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992IMPORT PENETRATION OF SELECTED U.S. MARKETS FOR MANUFACTUREDPRODUCTS, 1975-1989By David J. Cantor, Economics Division.  4 pages.  Foreigncompetition--as measured by the import penetration rate--increasedsignificantly in many U.S. markets over the past 20 years.  In 1975,the average import market share of 42 manufacturing sectors was about9.4 percent; in 1989, import penetration for these sectors averagedabout 22.2 percent, or more than twice the rate in 1975.  Order No.92-301 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992JAPANESE-U.S. TRADE RELATIONS:  COOPERATION OR CONFRONTATION:  ISSUEBRIEFBy William H. Cooper, Economics Division.  With Japan the UnitedStates has one of its most important and, at the same time, one ofits most difficult, trading relationships.  Japan is an importantmarket for U.S. exports and source of U.S. imports.  But large U.S.trade deficits with Japan and problems with access to Japanesemarkets for U.S. exports have been sources of friction that, attimes, approach confrontation, threatening the health of thealliance.  Order No. IB92057.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992LABOR MARKET EFFECTS IN THE UNITED STATES OF CHANGING PATTERNS OFU.S. TRADE AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS:  A MICROECONOMIC VIEWBy Charles V. Ciccone, Economics Division.  32 pages.  This reportshows that although the growing size of the free world market canenhance corporation operations and macroeconomic analysis showslittle, if any, net employment effects, a micro view shows thatconsequences for certain sectors of U.S. labor markets, includingthose with large concentrations of Black and other minority workers,can be substantial as trade flows shift and transfers of U.S.operating facilities to foreign lands increase.  Order No. 92-325 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992RUSSIA AND THE COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES:  THE TRADEAGREEMENT WITH THE UNITED STATESBy William H. Cooper, Economics division.  6 pages.  On December 9,1991, President bush signed into law H.J. Res. 346 (P.L. 102-197)enacting the bilateral trade agreement that he and Soviet PresidentGorbachev signed in June 1990.  The subsequent dissolution of theUSSR into twelve independent states loosely organized into theCommonwealth of Independent States (CIS) raises questions regardingthe agreement's applicability, the effects of having or not having anagreement on U.S. trading relations with Russia and other CIScountries, and possible courses of action by Congress and theexecutive branch.  Order No. 92-275 E.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992STATUTORY RESTRICTIONS ON TRADE AND FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS WITH THEFORMER SOVIET UNIONBy Jeanne J. Grimmett, American Law Division.  11 pages.  In light ofthe changing political situation that resulted in the formaldissolution of the Soviet Union, certain statutes have been enactedand administrative determinations made that have rendered some UnitedStates statutory restrictions inapplicable to or have resulted intheir temporary waiver with respect to the former U.S.S.R. andspecific newly independent states.  Order No. 92-329 A.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992TRADE:  ISSUE BRIEFBy Lenore Sek and William Cooper, Economics Division.  During itssecond session, the attention of the 102nd Congress is becoming moreclosely focused on trade and related issues.  Many members, mirroringthe concerns of their constituents over the effects of importpenetration in some key sectors and over foreign unfair tradepractices, are considering legislation to alter U.S. trade policy.Congress may be called on to evaluate multilateral and regionalarrangements that are currently under negotiation.  Trade may alsoplay a role in the Presidential campaign and congressional campaignsas part of the debate over U.S. economic policy during and after thecurrent recession.  Order No. IB92058.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992AVIATION AND THE 102ND CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION:  BILLS, HEARINGS ANDA SUMMARY OF ACTIONBy J. Glen Moore, Science Policy Research Division.  34 pages.Industry-driven competition, financial, and safety issues were highon the aviation agenda in the first session of the 102nd Congress.Order No. 92-315 SPR.The full report, as described above and authored by the CongressionalResearch Service, costs $47 from Penny Hill Press, 6440 WiscassetRoad, Bethesda, MD  20816, 301-229-8229.Back to Headline List CopyrightCONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH REPORT via NewsNetJUNE, 1992MASS TRANSIT FARES:  FEDERAL TAX EXCLUSION PROPOSALSBy Louis Alan Talley, Economics Division.  8 pages.  This reportexplores the issues surrounding employer-provided mass transitcommuting benefits.  The rationale for provision of this fringebenefit and a brief legislative history of the provision areincluded.  Additionally, a discussion of various legislativeproposals to increase and modify the existing exclusion is provided.The report concludes with a discussion of projected federal revenuelosses from proposed changes to current law.  Order No. 92-298 E.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-26IA060-000326-B020-37http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt05.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020859 text/html 83088HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:06:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:50 GMTContent-length: 82899Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt05.html Sample Issue Copyright DRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNet January, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LEGALIZATION MOVEMENT GETS BOOST (767 words) COPS PROGRAM FACES 25% CUT (509 words) LEGALIZATION MOVEMENT GETS BOOST (769 words) COPS PROGRAM FACES 25% CUT (508 words) TOUGH LAW ENFORCEMENT WORKS (1093 words) NEW DRUG CZAR NAMED (690 words) VIOLENT CRIME COMMISSION ISSUES REPORTS (358 words) HOW TO KILL MANUAL CRITICIZED (866 words) VIRGINIA REFORMS CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM (899 words) JUDGE SAYS ITS OK TO RUN FROM POLICE (801 words) CRIME DISCUSSED AT STATE OF UNION ADDRESS (725 words) RAP GROUPS TO RAISE MONEY FOR SLAIN OFFICER: (193 words) DETROIT'S POLICE AND SEARS TO HELP HOMELESS: (186 words) HUGE FORENSIC SCIENCE CENTER TO OPEN IN FLORIDA: (204 words) ATLANTA TARGETS VIOLENT CRIME FOR OLYMPICS: (213 words) COMMUNITY POLICING BRINGS HOPE TO BAKERSFIELD: (189 words) DEPARTING DRUG CZAR SLAMS ADIDAS SPORTS SHOE: (222 words) CLINTON APPOINTMENT TO JUVENILE JUSTICE COUNCIL: (197 words) FEDERAL JUDGE HALTED SALE OF DRUG DETECTION DEVICE: (220 words) POLICING DRUG HOT SPOTS IS HIGHLY EFFECTIVE: (141 words) DUF DATA FOR 1994 SHOWS COCAINE USE STILL HIGH: (165 words) SENATORS CALL FOR CRACKDOWN ON MEXICO: (261 words) FULLBRIGHT OFFERS FELLOWSHIP IN POLICE STUDIES: (138 words) MEXICO ARRESTS AND EXTRADITES DRUG TRAFFICKER: (185 words) CALI MONEY LAUNDERERS INDICTED IN NEW JERSEY: (215 words) CRIMINAL CHARGES TO BE BROUGHT AGAINST SAMPER: (171 words) JEWELRY TRADE SHOW AVOIDS PUBLICITY DUE TO CRIME: (234 words) DEMOCRATS ATTACK NEW YORK'S MAYOR FOR FOCUS ON CRIME: (246 words) VETERANS HOSPITALS NOW PROVIDING DRUG TREATMENT: (253 words) NOBEL WINNERS TAKE ANTI-VIOLENCE CAMPAIGN TO U.S.: (164 words) ALCOHOL AND DRUG COUNSELORS TO HOLD CONFERENCE: (112 words) CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996LEGALIZATION MOVEMENT GETS BOOST"It is our judgement that the war on drugs has failed," writes NationalReview Editor William Buckley in the latest edition of the conservativemagazine. The issue includes articles favoring drug legalization by manylong-time legalization advocates, including: Ethan Nadelmann, director ofthe Lindesmith Center; Steven B. Duke, a Yale University Law Professor;Joseph D. McNamara, a former police chief; Kurt Schmoke, Mayor ofBaltimore; Thomas Szasz a Psychiatrist at Syracuse University, and RobertW. Sweet, a federal judge in New York.Buckley writes in the lead article that the war on drugs "is divertingintelligent energy away from how to deal with the problem of addiction, thatit is wasting our resources, and that it is encouraging civil, judicial, andpenal procedures associated with police states." He said that the series ofarticles in National Review was designed to mobilize "fresh thought on thedrug problem." However, prominent law enforcement and political leadersfrom both major political parties sharply condemned the magazine.DEA Administrator Thomas Constantine said that legalization would be adisaster and that "As a citizen, I'm appalled at adding one more social ill to a country that already has AIDS and murders."Former Drug Czar and Education Secretary William Bennett said that"National Review's position on drug legalization is bankrupt morally,intellectually and, thank god, politically."In his National Review article Ethan Nadelmann said the "drugenforcement/treatment complex" is so "hooked on government dollars thatthe anti-drug crusade has become a vested interest." Nadelmann also hadharsh words for DEA's "ideologically driven bureaucrats who intimidateand persecute doctors for prescribing pain medication in medicallyappropriate doses, who hobble methadone programs with theiroverregulation, who acknowledge that law enforcement cannot alone solvethe drug problem but then proceed to undermine innovative public healthinitiatives."Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke recommended that the war on drugs befought as a "public-health war." Under this system, he explains, thegovernment would set up a regulatory regime to "pull addicts into thepublic-health system. The Government, not criminal traffickers, wouldcontrol the price, distribution, and purity of addictive substances-which italready does with prescription drugs. This would take most of the profit outof drug trafficking, and it is the profits which drive the crime," saysSchmoke.He also recommended an expansion of needle exchange programs andcalled the war on drugs "our domestic Vietnam."Joseph McNamara, Former police chief (in Kansas City, Mo., and San JoseCa.) said the "military industrial complex pales in comparison to the host ofindustries catering to our national puritanical hypocrisy-researchers willingto tell the government what it wants to hear, prison builders, correction andparole officers's associations, drug testing companies, dubious purveyorsof anti-drug education."Robert Sweet, a District Judge in New York City argues that the rights ofthe individual have been curtailed in the name of the War on Drugs. "Wehave seen the elimination of an accused's right to pretrial release for mostcharges under drug laws; heightened restrictions on post-conviction bail;and invasions into the attorney-client relationship through criminalforfeiture"He also states that the "fundamental flaw, which will ultimately destroy thisprohibition as it did the last one, is that criminal sanctions cannot, andshould not attempt to, prohibit personal conduct, which does no harm toothers." He does not address the tragedy of drug addicted babies.Thomas Szasz, of the Department of Psychiatry at Syracuse University,charges that the war on drugs is a mass movement characterized by thedemonizing of drugs, addicts, and traffickers as the incarnations of evil. "Itis foolish to dwell on the drug prohibitionist's failure to attain his avowedaims. Since he wages war on evil, his very effort is synonymous withsuccess. It is a fatal weakness of prudential critiques of drug policy that they ignore the Treligious' character of the war on drugs," says Szasz.He asks that the right analogy for America's war on drugs is not theVietnam war, but communism. Szasz further suggests that "self-medication" is a basic human right and drug criminalization is sinful.Steven Duke, Law of Science and Technology Professor at Yale LawSchool argues that under legalization, with drugs regulated by thegovernment, the "proportion of users who would consume drugs withoutsubstantial health or other problems would be greatly increased. He writesthat the only benefit to America in maintaining prohibition is the "psychiccomfort we derive from having a permanent scapegoat. We would be betteroff blaming our ills on celestial invaders flying about in flying saucers."Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996COPS PROGRAM FACES 25% CUTThe COPS police hiring program faces a 25% cut under a six weekcontinuing resolution enacted by Congress and signed by the President.Bipartisan negotiations between the White House and Congress producedanother stopgap spending bill to keep the entire federal government runningthrough March 15. Also facing a 25% cut were the Ounce of PreventionCouncil and the drug courts program.Republicans abandoned their strategy to use government shutdowns asleverage to advance their balanced-budget goals. Congress and theadministration produced a bill (HR 2880) that combined short-term fundingfor nine Cabinet departments whose annual budgets have yet to become lawwith full fiscal 1996 funding for foreign aid.The Congressional budget ax would continue to nick but not behead somecherished Clinton initiatives, including not only the COPS program, butalso the AmeriCorps National Service program, and subsidies forcommunity development financial institutions. Funding for these wouldcontinue at a pro-rated level of 75 percent of last year's funding, at leastthrough March 15. The bill also would end 10 programs, mostly educationgrants.The measure also served as a vehicle for carrying a host of lower-profileinitiatives into law, including a ban on federal funding of fetal embryoresearch, restrictions on excessive travel by Cabinet members and the saleof $100 million worth of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Preserve.The House passed the much-revised bill Jan. 25 on a 371-42 vote after afull day of negotiations in the office of Appropriations Committee ChairmanRobert L. Livingston, R-La., finally produced a compromise that all sidescould live with.  The Senate cleared the bill the next day, 82-8, afterdefeating Democratic amendments to raise the statutory debt limit andrestore spending on education to fiscal 1995 levels.President Clinton signed it into law by the midnight Jan. 26 deadline. Themeasure provided funding through March 15 at fiscal 1996 conferencelevels for the departments of Commerce, Justice, State, Veterans Affairs,and HUD and other agencies, such as the Environmental ProtectionAgency. Clinton earlier had vetoed both the Commerce, Justice and Statebill and the VA-HUD measure.Programs funded under the Labor, Health and Human Services andEducation bill (HR 2880) and the vetoed Interior spending measure (HR2880) would be financed at fiscal 1995 levels or the House- or Senate-passed levels, whichever is lowest. Meanwhile, House-Senate negotiatorson the District of Columbia spending bill (HR 2880) said that final action isimminent on the measure after they reached agreement on a controversialschool voucher plan.The final product reflected an unusual degree of bipartisanship, given therancor displayed during the two prior partial federal shutdowns. With theHouse, Senate and the administration all seeking to avoid anothershutdown, the frequently intense negotiations required give on all sides.Conspicuously absent was any effort to put more pressure on Clinton.  "Wewant to get a signable bill," said Dan Meyer, the top aide to House SpeakerNewt Gingrich, R-Ga., as the talks were in the late stages.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996LEGALIZATION MOVEMENT GETS BOOST"It is our judgement that the war on drugs has failed," writes NationalReview Editor William Buckley in the latest edition of the conservativemagazine. The issue includes articles favoring drug legalization by manylong-time legalization advocates, including: Ethan Nadelmann, director ofthe Lindesmith Center; Steven B. Duke, a Yale University Law Professor;Joseph D. McNamara, a former police chief; Kurt Schmoke, Mayor ofBaltimore; Thomas Szasz a Psychiatrist at Syracuse University, and RobertW. Sweet, a federal judge in New York.Buckley writes in the lead article that the war on drugs "is divertingintelligent energy away from how to deal with the problem of addiction, thatit is wasting our resources, and that it is encouraging civil, judicial, andpenal procedures associated with police states." He said that the series ofarticles in National Review was designed to mobilize "fresh thought on thedrug problem." However, prominent law enforcement and political leadersfrom both major political parties sharply condemned the magazine.DEA Administrator Thomas Constantine said that legalization would be adisaster and that "As a citizen, I'm appalled at adding one more social ill to a country that already has AIDS and murders."Former Drug Czar and Education Secretary William Bennett said that"National Review's position on drug legalization is bankrupt morally,intellectually and, thank god, politically."In his National Review article Ethan Nadelmann said the "drugenforcement/treatment complex" is so "hooked on government dollars thatthe anti-drug crusade has become a vested interest." Nadelmann also hadharsh words for DEA's "ideologically driven bureaucrats who intimidateand persecute doctors for prescribing pain medication in medicallyappropriate doses, who hobble methadone programs with theiroverregulation, who acknowledge that law enforcement cannot alone solvethe drug problem but then proceed to undermine innovative public healthinitiatives."Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke recommended that the war on drugs befought as a "public-health war." Under this system, he explains, thegovernment would set up a regulatory regime to "pull addicts into thepublic-health system. The Government, not criminal traffickers, wouldcontrol the price, distribution, and purity of addictive substances-which italready does with prescription drugs. This would take most of the profit outof drug trafficking, and it is the profits which drive the crime," saysSchmoke.He also recommended an expansion of needle exchange programs andcalled the war on drugs "our domestic Vietnam."Joseph McNamara, Former police chief (in Kansas City, Mo., and San JoseCa.) said the "military industrial complex pales in comparison to the host ofindustries catering to our national puritanical hypocrisy-researchers willingto tell the government what it wants to hear, prison builders, correction andparole officers's associations, drug testing companies, dubious purveyorsof anti-drug education."Robert Sweet, a District Judge in New York City argues that the rights ofthe individual have been curtailed in the name of the War on Drugs. "Wehave seen the elimination of an accused's right to pretrial release for mostcharges under drug laws; heightened restrictions on post-conviction bail;and invasions into the attorney-client relationship through criminalforfeiture"He also states that the "fundamental flaw, which will ultimately destroy thisprohibition as it did the last one, is that criminal sanctions cannot, andshould not attempt to, prohibit personal conduct, which does no harm toothers." He does not address the tragedy of drug addicted babies.Thomas Szasz, of the Department of Psychiatry at Syracuse University,charges that the war on drugs is a mass movement characterized by thedemonizing of drugs, addicts, and traffickers as the incarnations of evil. "Itis foolish to dwell on the drug prohibitionist's failure to attain his avowedaims. Since he wages war on evil, his very effort is synonymous withsuccess. It is a fatal weakness of prudential critiques of drug policy that they ignore the 'religious' character of the war on drugs," says Szasz.He asks that the right analogy for America's war on drugs is not theVietnam war, but communism. Szasz further suggests that "self-medication" is a basic human right and drug criminalization is sinful.Steven Duke, Law of Science and Technology Professor at Yale LawSchool argues that under legalization, with drugs regulated by thegovernment, the "proportion of users who would consume drugs withoutsubstantial health or other problems would be greatly increased. He writesthat the only benefit to America in maintaining prohibition is the "psychiccomfort we derive from having a permanent scapegoat. We would be betteroff blaming our ills on celestial invaders flying about in flying saucers."Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996COPS PROGRAM FACES 25% CUTThe COPS police hiring program faces a 25% cut under a six weekcontinuing resolution enacted by Congress and signed by the President.Bipartisan negotiations between the White House and Congress producedanother stopgap spending bill to keep the entire federal government runningthrough March 15. Also facing a 25% cut were the Ounce of PreventionCouncil and the drug courts program.Republicans abandoned their strategy to use government shutdowns asleverage to advance their balanced-budget goals. Congress and theadministration produced a bill (HR 2880) that combined short-term fundingfor nine Cabinet departments whose annual budgets have yet to become lawwith full fiscal 1996 funding for foreign aid.The Congressional budget ax would continue to nick but not behead somecherished Clinton initiatives, including not only the COPS program, butalso the AmeriCorps National Service program, and subsidies forcommunity development financial institutions. Funding for these wouldcontinue at a pro-rated level of 75 percent of last year's funding, at leastthrough March 15. The bill also would end 10 programs, mostly educationgrants.The measure also served as a vehicle for carrying a host of lower-profileinitiatives into law, including a ban on federal funding of fetal embryoresearch, restrictions on excessive travel by Cabinet members and the saleof $100 million worth of oil from the Strategic Petroleum Preserve.The House passed the much-revised bill Jan. 25 on a 371-42 vote after afull day of negotiations in the office of Appropriations Committee ChairmanRobert L. Livingston, R-La., finally produced a compromise that all sidescould live with.  The Senate cleared the bill the next day, 82-8, afterdefeating Democratic amendments to raise the statutory debt limit andrestore spending on education to fiscal 1995 levels.President Clinton signed it into law by the midnight Jan. 26 deadline. Themeasure provided funding through March 15 at fiscal 1996 conferencelevels for the departments of Commerce, Justice, State, Veterans Affairs,and HUD and other agencies, such as the Environmental ProtectionAgency. Clinton earlier had vetoed both the Commerce, Justice and Statebill and the VA-HUD measure.Programs funded under the Labor, Health and Human Services andEducation bill (HR 2880) and the vetoed Interior spending measure (HR2880) would be financed at fiscal 1995 levels or the House- or Senate-passed levels, whichever is lowest. Meanwhile, House-Senate negotiatorson the District of Columbia spending bill (HR 2880) said that final action isimminent on the measure after they reached agreement on a controversialschool voucher plan.The final product reflected an unusual degree of bipartisanship, given therancor displayed during the two prior partial federal shutdowns. With theHouse, Senate and the administration all seeking to avoid anothershutdown, the frequently intense negotiations required give on all sides.Conspicuously absent was any effort to put more pressure on Clinton.  "Wewant to get a signable bill," said Dan Meyer, the top aide to House SpeakerNewt Gingrich, R-Ga., as the talks were in the late stages.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996TOUGH LAW ENFORCEMENT WORKS"Drug law enforcement has proven to be an effective and integral part of thebattle against illicit drugs and crime in United States," writes formerMichigan State Drug Czar Robert E. Peterson in a fact-filled new reportentitled, The Success of Tough Drug Enforcement.Peterson uses scores of Justice Department studies to explain and describethe positive impact of drug enforcement.The report notes that from 1986-1992, a 13% rise in drug enforcementmanpower brought about a 39% increase in violent crime arrests and a110% increase in heroin/cocaine trafficking arrests. Since 1980 drugincarceration rates have increased over 400%. Peterson says that thisincreased incarceration had let to the plummeting of murder rates andnarcotics related homicides in most American cities."Contrary to popular belief, most drug convicts, and nearly all druginmates, are repeat or violent offenders." Thus, getting them off the streetssharply reduces crime.Although some advocates for decriminalization of drugs state that U.S.prisons are bursting with first time or minor offenders, Peterson finds"Over 93% of state inmates are repeat and/or violent offenders and first timenon-violent marijuana inmates constitute only 1/10 of 1% of the prisonpopulation. He also notes that the average amount of drugs in a marijuanatrafficking case is 3.5 tons, and for cocaine it is 180 pounds. Over 80% ofcrack cases involve trafficking of an average quantity of over 18,000 crackdoses.The report states that although the odds of imprisonment for drugs haveincreased over the last ten years, the nation is still far too lenient withdrug felons.  A person, Peterson says, is more likely to go to a federalprison for violating federal tax, regulatory, immigration, or liquor laws thanfor possessing heroin, crack or marijuana.Nonetheless, those drug criminals that are placed behind bars, result in asignificant cost savings to the public. This is due to the fact that most drugfelons are repeat offenders, many involved with drugs. One study foundthat heroin users committed more that 200 crimes per year to support theirdrug habit.The cost of incarcerating criminals averages $20,000 to $27,000 per year.The estimated cost to society for crimes committed by the average releasedcriminal, range from $172,000 to $2.36 million per year. Under thesefigures, based on several recent federal, state, and think tank studies, itcosts society at least seven times less money to keep someone in prison thanto let them go free.Peterson strongly supports drug treatment, both for those who are in prisonand for those who are not.  However, he warns that without a regular regimenof drug testing, treatment failure rates increase.  "Self-reports, counselorreports, and infrequent or random drug testing significantly under-reportsindividual drug use," says Peterson.  He cites a program in Lansing Michiganwhich has kept 75% of participants drug-free over a five year period.  As partof this program drug offenders are drug tested three times per week.  Iftested positive participants face a first sanction of three days in jail, asecond sanction of ten days in jail, a third sanction of 20 days jail and 30days for each positive drug test thereafter.  Only a small proportion ofprogram participants ever served jail time.  Although counseling and supportgroups (such as AA or NA) were provided, success rates did not vary amongthose who participated in these activities.Another area touched on in the report was the remarkable cost effectivenessof the Drug Enforcement Administration-through bringing in assetforfeiture funds. From 1990 to 1993 DEA's budget was $2.7 billion while$2.2 billion in drug assets were forfeited to the United States. In 1990 anaverage of over $250,000 was forfeited by drug dealers for each DEASpecial Agent.An entire chapter of The Success of Tough Drug Enforcement is dedicated toanalysis of drug enforcement and race.  Peterson find that racial disparitiesfor drug offenses were lower than that for other crimes, such as murder,robbery, and violent crime.  Generally, he explains, arrest and incarcerationrates are correlated with victimization rates, crime rates, and complaintrates.  For example, the robbery rate among blacks is over three times that ofwhites and the robbery convictions for blacks is two times that of whites instate courts.  The rape conviction rate was nearly two times higher for whitesthan blacks, and rape victims also were nearly twice as likely to be white.Overall, blacks were victims of  violence at a rate of 40% higher than that ofwhites and arrests of blacks were 39% higher than they were for whites.Time served by drug offenders also does not vary significantly by race. Fordrug trafficking offenses, blacks serve an average of 6% less time in prisonthan whites.Peterson makes a series of drug control policy recommendations in thereport. He suggests that drug enforcement efforts target youth withsentences that include "strict zero tolerance drug testing" with  treatmentimposed by courts and probation departments. More serious repeat andviolent youth offenders "must be incapacitated and kept from victimizingcommunities," he said.The report also recommends a radical overhaul of probation and parole."The current failure rate of those on community release and lack ofconsequences for violators indicate that this a weak link in the criminaljustice systems," Peterson says." The earlier that tough, but fair,community release sanctions and conditions are applied, the greater thelikelihood of deterring crime and drug use, he argues.Finally, Peterson recommends tougher marijuana enforcement, which hasbecome, he argues, "far too lax" while use of the drug by youth has rapidlyescalated. The proportion of violent juveniles on marijuana when arrestedhas climbed and high school use of the drug has doubled in the last severalyears. Peterson recommends that public benefits, student aid, and otherprivileges be suspended, reduced, or conditioned on cessation of drug useand criminal activity. Hefty finds and license revocations can be invokedand public service conditions applied to repeat marijuana offenders.The report's author, Robert Peterson served as Governor John Engler'sDrug Control Director from 1991-1995 where he Administered andevaluated education, health, and law enforcement grant programs. Beforethat he served as a prosecutor in Buffalo and a policy adviser toPennsylvania's Attorney General. He currently runs his own consultingfirm, PAE Services, Inc., which specializes in evaluating drug controlprograms. Peterson can be reached at (607) 786-1845. Individual copies ofthe report are available at $20 each from PAE.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996NEW DRUG CZAR NAMEDU.S. Army General Barry McCaffrey, named the new Director of the Officeof National Drug Control Policy during President Clinton's January 24State of the Union Address, is expected to promote closer cooperationbetween drug trafficking and producing countries to fight the narcotics tradein his new job as President Clinton's drug czar.Clinton said during his nationally televised speech, "General McCaffrey hasearned three purple hearts and two silver stars fighting for this country.Tonight I ask that he lead our nation's battle against drugs at home andabroad. To succeed, he needs a force far larger than he has ever commandedbefore. He needs all of us - every one of us has a role to play on this team.Thank you, General McCaffrey, for agreeing to serve your country onemore time." The general's stint as commander-in-chief of the United States SouthernCommand in Panama included collaboration among Latin Americancountries, especially Peru, Bolivia and Colombia, in the war on drugs."McCaffrey has praised the Andean range countries, where most of thecultivation of cocaine takes place, of working together. He has always saidwhen countries work together, they benefit economically and socially," amilitary spokesman said.McCaffrey is a veteran of the Vietnam and Gulf Wars known for his toughyet conciliatory style, McCaffrey, 53, was assigned in February 1994 ascommander-in-chief of Southcom, which is responsible for all U.S. militaryactivities in Latin America south of Mexico.Some Army officials wondered though whether he did the right thing inaccepting the anti-drug post because as the highest decorated officer, he wasin line to become the next Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff.Some Panamanian officials hope he will make a case to keep some U.S.troops in Panama after the canal treaties expire in the year 2000, especiallyHoward Air Force Base which serves as the South American headquartersof the  U.S. military's anti-drug trafficking efforts.American AWACs reconnaissance aircraft fly regular missions from thebase to seek out drug planes flying up from South America towards CentralAmerica and Mexico."They've given us information about flight plans of drug traffickers andhelped us detect shipments," said Panama's anti-drug chief Gabriel Castro.Previously, General McCaffrey served as Director for Strategic Plans andPolicy, Joint Staff, from 1993 to 1994, and as Assistant to the Chairman ofthe Joint Chiefs of Staff from 1992 to 1993.  From 1990 to 1992, GeneralMcCaffrey commanded the 24th Infantry Division, which he deployed toSaudi Arabia in 1990.  He led the Division on combat operations duringOperation Desert Storm, for which he was awarded the DistinguishedService Medal.From 1989 to 1990, General McCaffrey served as Director for Strategy,Plans, Policy and Joint Affairs for the Department of the Army.  He servedas the Deputy U.S. Military Representative to the NATO MilitaryCommittee from 1988 to 1989.  He has also taught American Government,National Security Studies and Comparative Politics at the United StatesMilitary Academy at West Point.General McCaffrey has been decorated for valor twice with theDistinguished Service Cross - our nation's second highest award for valorin combat - twice with the Silver Star, three times with the Bronze Star, andwas three times awarded with the Purple Heart for wounds received incombat.  He is the most highly decorated Army General on active duty.General McCaffrey received the NAACP Roy Wilkins Renown ServiceAward in 1991, and the U.S. Department of State's Superior Honor Awardin 1992. He is a 1964 graduate of the United States Military Academy atWest Point, and earned a Master of Arts degree in civil government fromAmerican University.The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) was established in1988 and is organized within the Executive Office of the President.ONDCP's mission is to develop and coordinate the policies, goals andobjectives of the nation's drug control program for reducing the use of illicitdrugs.  The ONDCP Director is the Administration's primary spokespersonfor drug issues, and develops and coordinates the National Drug ControlStrategy.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996VIOLENT CRIME COMMISSION ISSUES REPORTSThe first report of a bipartisan commission on violent crime finds thatdespite a welcome decline in crime rates in many U.S. cities, the chancesthat Americans will be victims of violent crime remains at an historic high.The report also deplored the "revolving door" American criminal justicesystem in which one of three criminals are supposedly under thesupervision of the justice system at the very time that they murder, rape andcommit other serious crime.The report, entitled The State of Violent Crime in America, was issued bythe Council on Crime in America, which is co-chaired by former U.S.Attorney General Griffin B. Bell and Former Drug Czar William J. Bennett.According to the report, the risk of becoming a victim of violent crime todayexceeds many significant life risks, including injury in a motor vehicleaccident and death from heart disease. Much violent crime, moreover, goesunreported. The actual number of violent crimes in 1993 (10.9 million) was5.6 times higher than the number of violent crimes reported to the police(1.9 million)."This study paints a realistic and sobering picture of violent crime inAmerica, but it is not without its ray of hope," said Bennett. "If the successthat cities such as New York and Houston have had in reducing crime ratesteaches us anything, it is that the common sense of the American people isright when it comes to crime: tough law enforcement is part of the solution,not part of the problem."The report attempts to refute some myths about incarceration rates in theU.S. It found, for example, that the American prison system imprisons justone criminal for every 100 violent crimes.John Walters, who served in the Drug Czar's office during the BushAdministration, is the Council's Executive Director. Other Council membersare former U.S. Attorney General William Barr, Florida Attorney GeneralRobert Butter-worth, Princeton University Professor John DiIulio,California Board of Prison Terms Commissioner John Gillis, IndianapolisMayor Stephen Goldsmith and Colorado Attorney General Gale Northon.For a copy of the report, contact Lara Stead by fax at (202) 822-8328.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996HOW TO KILL MANUAL CRITICIZEDThe instructions are precise and clinical, with gruesome detail to clearlyexplain the best way to kill."At least three shots should be fired to insure quick and sure death. Aim forthe head-preferably the eye sockets if you are a sharp shooter."That's just what James Edward Perry did when he walked into a suburbanMaryland home outside Washington in 1993 and pulled the trigger of hisrifle, killing two women before suffocating a severely disabled child in analleged  murder-for-hire scheme.His method, his weapon, his attempted coverup-all allegedly were straightout of the book, Hit Man: A Technical Manual for Independent Contractors.Perry was convicted and sentenced to death for the murders. But, accordingto a novel lawsuit filed last week in U.S. District Court in Maryland, thebook's publishers alsoshould have to pay."This book makes no bones about it. It is simply an instruction manual likethe one you operate your VCR with, but this one tells you how to killpeople," said John Marshall of Rockville, Md., one of the lawyers whofiled the suit.The lawsuit, which seeks an unspecified amount of money from PaladinEnterprises Inc. and its founder, Peder C. Lund, is believed to be the firstof its kind against a book publisher.Courts have held magazines like Soldier of Fortune liable for runningadvertisements offering hit-man services. But they've yet to hold publishersresponsible for the conduct of someone who learned how to commit crimesfrom a book.Already it's got some legal experts talking about dangerous precedents,because the case, they say, raises troubling 1st Amendment issues. Whencan a court punish publication of truthful information, even information thathas no redeeming value? And if you allow a lawsuit against the bookpublisher in this case, what's to stop lawsuits against, for example, makersof violent movies whose crimes are duplicated in real life?That's not to say those distinctions can't be drawn, legal experts say, but,as with most 1st Amendment issues, it would be tricky."It would require a change in 1st Amendment analysis to hold publishersresponsible for the crime that ultimately would occur," said Douglas Kmiec,a  professor at Notre Dame University Law School in South Bend, Ind.Perry was convicted last year of killing Mildred Horn, her quadriplegic sonand nurse Janice Saunders. He allegedly committed the crimes at thedirection of Horn's ex-husband, Lawrence Horn, who is accused ofordering the murders to get a $1 million award his son received in a medicalmalpractice lawsuit. Horn will stand trial in April.In Perry's trial, prosecutors cited more than two dozen instances in whichhe followed the book to the letter in carrying out the alleged murder-for-hirescheme. He used the same kind of rifle, rubbed out its serial numbers andshot the women three times each in the eyes. He also used a homemadesilencer and filed down parts of the rifle, just as the book said.Furthermore, he allegedly followed the book's suggestions to requestmoney up front, make the crime scene look like a burglary and discard thegun. But Dan Hale, a lawyer for the book's publisher, said those thingsshouldn't make the Boulder, Colo.-based company liable for Perry'sactions."The people who are responsible are the people who committed the crime,"Hale said. To hold otherwise, he said, would mean scaling back the 1stAmendment.The 1st Amendment, which guarantees freedom of speech and press, doesnot protect all speech. The Supreme Court has carved out certainexceptions, ruling, for example, that speech that is obscene or libelous orcreates a  clear and present danger of imminent lawless action is not alwaysentitled to  1st Amendment protection. As a result, the government canrestrict it or, in some cases, punish people for engaging in it.The victims' families in this case argue that the information in "Hit Man"should be considered unprotected speech, just like libel or defamation. "Ourargument is that there is currently no protection for speech that aids andabets an illegal transaction," said Rod Smolla, a professor at the College ofWilliam and Mary Law School in Williamsburg, Va., who is alsorepresenting the families. "Because it has absolutely no value of any kind,it is not protected under the 1st Amendment."But finding a judge sympathetic to that argument will be difficult, Kmiecsaid. Though a libel lawsuit limits speech, it is justified under the 1stAmendment because the material is false. Here, the material is true-and itstruth only makes it more awful, Kmiec said. "The plaintiff will have toprove not that the material is false but that it is worthless," Kmiec said."There's no directly applicable precedent."But, as Kmiec noted, deciding what's worthless would be as difficult asdetermining what's obscene. Courts have long struggled with trying tofigure  that one out. Hale argued that "culpability lies with Mr. Perry. And ifhe conspired with Mr. Horn, he'll  probably be convicted, as well."The courts will have to decide-meanwhile, the murder manual is still forsale.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996VIRGINIA REFORMS CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEMHundreds of violent juvenile offenders would be tried automatically asadults and face stiffer prison time under a compromise struck last monthbetween Gov. George Allen and state General Assembly leaders. Thecompromise proposal could clear the way for overhauling Virginia'sjuvenile justice system, which many say is ill-equipped to handle theincreasingly violent crimes committed by children as young as 14.Juvenile offenders currently can serve no more than seven years in prisonand must be released when they turn 21, no matter how dangerous they aredeemed to be. Allen, who made juvenile justice reform a top priority of hislegislative agenda this year, was quick to trumpet the bipartisan compromiseat a hastily arranged news conference held just hours after striking the deal."This will send a message to young people that we're not just going to giveyou a slap on the wrist," Allen said.The agreement, which resolves differences between two competing plans,calls for automatically trying as adults all juveniles 14 and older accused ofviolent crimes such as murder, rape and forcible sodomy. As part of thenew compromise, juveniles charged with some less-severe  violentcrimes - robbery, carjacking, kidnapping - would be tried as adults  at thediscretion of the local prosecutor.  In addition, judges would be given newsentencing options beyond  incarceration and probation.Allen's budget includes $8.5 million for new boot camps and "wildernesswork camps" that are aimed at giving young offenders a second chancethrough rehabilitation. Even a juvenile offender sentenced as an adult couldget his or her sentence suspended if a Circuit Court judge chooses to makeuse of such alternative programs. "The compromise we offer today reflectsa concern and commitment to be responsive to the vast majority of theyoung people who come before the court on minor charges and are in needof remediation to turn their lives around," said Del. Jerrauld C. Jones, D-Norfolk, who chaired a legislative task force and helped broker the newcompromise.The plan also opens long-secretive juvenile court proceedings to the publicwhen juveniles are charged with felony crimes. Juvenile criminal historyrecords would also be made public when youths are convicted of felonies.Attorney General James S. Gilmore III, who headed Allen's advisorycommission, said the compromise struck a careful balance between toughersentencing and increased prevention and rehabilitation programs. "We willprevent, rescue and redirect where and when we can," Gilmore said. "Butwe will also punish where we have to, with the paramount concern beingthe protection of the community."The compromise, reached in the opening weeks of the 60-day session, alsoreflects the conciliatory tone Allen has taken with the legislature this year,after watching Democrats kill most of his initiatives in last year's morepolarized session. "Obviously, you can't do things with just Republicansalone," Allen said. "I think this is a good sign for this session of theGeneral Assembly."The actual, practical effect of the plan, if approved, may be difficult tomeasure and could vary by locality.  Prosecutors say many of the mostviolent juveniles, such as those who commit murder, are already tried asadults. Judges increasingly transfer teen-agers into adult courts in responseto soaring juvenile crime rates,  they say.But administration officials say the proposed automatic transfer would targethundreds more violent teen-agers who now escape any serious punishmentin the juvenile system.  A state study found that of 1,400 juveniles aged 14and older charged with violent crimes in 1993, fewer than 20 percent weretried as adults.Under the juvenile system, the average prison time served for murder wasless than six years. Juveniles who commit rape serve less than five years onaverage. And those who commit armed robbery serve about a year,administration figures show. "I think that sends the wrong message," Allensaid. "Most people say this is just ridiculous."  But critics, who packed acommittee hearing Wednesday, said the plan offers nothing but a simplistic"harsher-is-better" philosophy."That may be the stuff of good politics," said Judith Bennett, of theVirginia Council of Churches. "It is not the stuff of which sound publicpolicy is made."  There is little evidence in other states to suggest thatsentencing children as adults will reduce crime, said Julie McConnell,associate director of the American  Civil Liberties Union's Virginia chapter."It is an abdication of our obligation as adults to protect and guide  childreninto responsible and socially productive lives," McConnell said.But few dispute the need to crack down on violent juvenile crime, whichhas increased by 36 percent since 1975, according to a study by the JointLegislative Audit and Review Commission, the General Assembly'sinvestigative  arm. To fund the plan, Allen has included $16.7 million in abond package that would pay for a renovation and expansion of theSouthampton Correctional  Center, which would house violent juvenileswho are sentenced as adults.Overall, Allen's budget includes nearly $200 million to meet the rising costsof a burgeoning juvenile justice system, although more than half that figurecomes from bonds to build new juvenile prisons.  Those bonds includeabout $41.6 million in debt already authorized by the legislature to renovatethe Beaumont Correctional Center west of Richmond and build a new 180-bed center in Chesterfield County.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996JUDGE SAYS ITS OK TO RUN FROM POLICEA federal judge who came under fire for tossing out evidence in aWashington Heights drug case said  that there was little chance he wouldreverse his ruling, and he called prosecutors' bid to get him to change hismind a "juvenile project."In a three-way conference call with lawyers from his chambers, JudgeHarold Baer, Jr. said he would listen to prosecutors' arguments that drugevidence and a videotaped confession should not be thrown out in a federalcase against Carol Bayless, 41.More than once, however, the judge made it clear that he probably wouldnot change his decision that the police did not have a reasonable suspicion topull over Ms. Bayless's car in the Washington Heights section ofManhattan."While I consider it a rather juvenile project to engage in at this juncture,"Baer said of prosecutors' bid to get him to reconsider his Jan. 24 ruling, "Idon't have a problem in letting them re-argue."Baer went on to say: "I doubt that the government has anything new anddifferent that they can show me in the papers or on the law. But so far as Iam concerned, they certainly should have that opportunity."In a ruling last week that has been criticized by many of the city's and thestate's top officials, Baer refused to allow as evidence 75 pounds of cocaineand more than 4 pounds of heroin that the police said they had seized fromMs. Bayless's rented car on Amsterdam Avenue at 5 a.m. on April 21. Thedrugs were estimated to have a street value of $4 million.The judge ruled that the drugs and Ms. Bayless's videotaped confessionwere not admissible as evidence because officers stopped her car withoutreasonable suspicion.An officer who saw Ms. Bayless said he suspected criminal activity in partbecause four men who had loaded two duffel bags into her trunk ran awayafter seeing him.But Baer, who served on the Mollen Commission, which investigatedpolice corruption, said that it was not necessarily suspicious behavior forpeople to flee the police in Washington Heights, a neighborhood where, hesaid, residents regarded police officers as "corrupt, abusive, and violent.""Had the men not run when the cops began to stare at  them, it would havebeen unusual," Baer wrote.The ruling immediately touched off a firestorm of criticism from politiciansand law enforcement officials, and quickly became fodder for newspapereditorials and radio talk shows. Critics accused Baer of being moreconcerned about protecting criminals than protecting the public, and saidthat his comments about the police unfairly maligned hard-working, honestofficers. Police Commissioner William J. Bratton went so far as to say thejudge was "living in a fantasy land."Baer, a 1994 Clinton administration appointee to the federal bench, hasrepeatedly declined to speak to the public or the press about his ruling andits potential impact on law enforcement efforts. During the 10-minutehearing no one mentioned the publicity or criticism that the ruling hasattracted for more than a week.But the judge's remarks are the first indication of how he would viewprosecutors' efforts to persuade him to change his mind. His remarks wereincluded in a 10-page transcript of the hearing released late on Friday.A spokesman for Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said the judge's latest remarkswere relayed  to the mayor, who had harshly criticized the judge's originaldecision."The mayor is hopeful that Judge Baer's decision will be reversed so aconfessed drug dealer will not go free," the spokesman, Colleen Roche,said on Friday night. Ms. Roche added that the mayor would notspecifically comment on what the judge said.A spokesman for Gov. George Pataki said the governor would have nocomment beyond his earlier criticism of the ruling.In a conference call prosecutors asked the judge for more time to preparepapers on the issue. But Jay Holtmeier, assistant U.S. attorney, saidprosecutors plan to ask Bear to reopen the hearing on the motion tosuppress evidence."Reopening the hearing had never been an item that I had focused on at all,"Baer told him. "So I am not clear how I come out."Ramon W. Pagan, Ms. Bayless's lawyer, argued that the prosecutorsshould not be permitted to ask Baer to reconsider his decision."I think they are trying to create something which is very new and unusual,"Pagan said. "If they lose a case, they want to redo it again and do an instantreplay, without the direction of the Court of Appeals, and that is not theway." Baer said prosecutors still had seveal more days to file their motionfor reconsideration.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996CRIME DISCUSSED AT STATE OF UNION ADDRESSPresident Clinton, preparing to embark on his re-election campaign,dedicated a significant chunk of his State of the Union Address to crimeissues.He said during the speech, "At last we have begun to find the way to reducecrime, forming community partnerships with local police forces to catchcriminals and to prevent crime. This strategy, called community policing isclearly working," Clinton said.He cited declining Violent crime rates. In New York City, murders aredown 25%, in St. Louis 18%, in Seattle 32%.  But, he said,  we still have along way to go before our streets are safe and our and our people are free offear.  He told the audience of Members of Congress that the Crime Bill of1994 "is critical to the success of community policing. It provides funds for100,000 new police in communities of all sizes. We are already a third ofthe way there and I challenge Congress to finish the job.  Let us stick withthe strategy that's working, and keep the crime rate coming down."Clinton also asked all Americans to respect and support our lawenforcement officers, and told police, "our children need you as role modelsand heroes. Don't let them down."In spite of its unpopularity with the current Congress, Clinton reported thatthe Brady Bill has already stopped 44,000 people with criminal recordsfrom buying guns. He also said that the assault weapons ban is keeping 19kinds of assault weapons out of the hands of violent gangs. "I challenge theCongress to keep those laws on the books," he said.The President also announced several new initiatives. "Our next step in thefight against crime is to take on gangs the way we once took on the Mob. Iam directing the FBI and other investigative agencies to target gangs thatinvolve juveniles in violent crime and to seek authority to prosecute - asadults - teenagers who maim and kill like adults," thePresident said.He also offered hope to public housing residents who have been frustratedwith the long legal process usually required for drug-related evictions."From now on, the rule for residents who commit crime and peddle drugsshould be: One strike and you're out," the President said.Clinton challenged every state to match federal policy, to assure thatserious, violent criminals serve at least 85% of their sentence.However, the President also emphasized the importance of drug and crimeprevention programs. He said more police and punishment are important,but they're not enough. "We have got to keep more of our young people outof trouble, with prevention strategies not dictated by Washington, butdeveloped in communities.  I challenge all of our communities, all of ouradults, to give these children futures to say yes to. And I challengeCongress not to abandon the Crime Bill's support of these grass-rootsprevention efforts."Clinton added that to reduce crime and violence, we have to reduce the drugproblem. "The challenge begins in our homes, with parents talking to theirchildren openly and firmly, and embraces our churches and synagogues,our youth groups and our schools. I challenge Congress not to cut oursupport for drug-free schools. People like D.A.R.E. officers are making areal impression on grade school children that will give them the strength tosay no when the time comes," he said.The day after the speech Clinton traveled to Louisville, Kentucky to test hisanti-crime themes on the road. Clinton does not plan to officially announcehis re-election bid until spring. But the State of the Union speech toCongress and the next day's trip to a state that will be an election-yearbattleground effectively launched his campaign.In a roundtable discussion with police and community leaders, he arguedthat Republican efforts to transform the current COPS program into a blockgrant program for states should be defeated.The split over community policing underscores the philosophical dividebetween Clinton and the Republican-led Congress over spending and taxpriorities that's led to the budget stalemate.But Wednesday House Speaker Newt Gingrich said Republicans are readyto take Clinton up on his budget compromise offer. He suggested that theWhite House and Congress agree to a budget "downpayment" of around$100 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996RAP GROUPS TO RAISE MONEY FOR SLAIN OFFICER:On Sunday, February 18, members of Philadelphia's hip hop communityand Philadelphia police officers will host a benefit for slain police officerLauretha Vaird's family. Organized by members of the rap group Da Fat CatClique, the benefit is being held to raise money for the slain officer's familyand to forge a relationship between hip hoppers and cops.  "Too oftenpeople think that rappers are just about violence and crime.  Well, many ofus have jobs and we don't condone nor endorse cop killing.  We think thatthis benefit will give us a chance to let the public know that we respectpolice officers and that all of us are not negative," said Criz, of Da Fat CatClique.  Several important Philadelphians have been invited to attend thebenefit including Mayor Ed Rendell and Police Commissioner RichardNeal. There will be performances by rap artists such as Jackal the Bear, DaYoungstas (Illy Funkstas), The Man They Call Lux, Ital Tha Ruffian andmany more.  The minimum donation to attend the event is only $5 and allproceeds will benefit the Lauretha Vaird Scholarship Fund.  For moreinformation, call (215) 206-9542.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996DETROIT'S POLICE AND SEARS TO HELP HOMELESS:The Detroit Police Department and Sears announced on February 2 theywould commemorate St. Valentine's Day by helping the homeless.Commander Ronald Haddad of the Detroit Police Department and RobertHaddad, Sears district human resource manager, joined forces to create the"Have a Heart For Detroit," program that involves 15 area Sears stores andlocal law enforcement agencies.  Each store will set up drop-off stations inthe package pick-up area to collect used clothing and non-perishable food.The program runs from Feb. 5 through Feb. 14. "Our offices are dedicatedto community policing and to improving the quality of life for all citizens,"said Commander Ronald Haddad.  More than 5,300 Sears associates in theDetroit area are contributing their time and energy to support this drive.  Inaddition to the Detroit Police Department, the 314th military intelligencebattalion, a U.S. Army Reserve unit, has volunteered their logisticalexpertise as well as offered their base as a collection center. Sydney Boggs,a Detroit-based candy maker, is providing "A Taste of Detroit" candy heartto volunteers. Organizations wishing to contribute to the Detroit PoliceDept. at (313)596-1110.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996HUGE FORENSIC SCIENCE CENTER TO OPEN IN FLORIDA:A new forensic science center is expected to bring thousands of crime labworkers to St. Petersburg, Florida for training. The National ForensicScience Technology Center has officially opened for business at St.Petersburg Junior College's Allstate Center.  It is likely to attract more than1,000 visitors this year and far more in future years, said Dr. Joan Wood,Pinellas-Pasco medical examiner and  president of the new center's board ofdirectors. She said job opportunities  in forensics have been expanding, buttraining programs have failed to keep  pace with the demand. "I think wehave a tremendous future ahead of us," she said. This week more than 100people, most of them from out of state, attended the center's inauguralthree-day workshop, which featured Bruce Weir, a DNA expert whotestified in the O.J. Simpson trial.  Eventually the center could be offering aworkshop every other week, Wood said. It also will be involved in jointeducational programs with the junior college, the University of SouthFlorida and the University of Central Florida. Other activities will includeresearch, creation of teaching videos and  computer discs, and developmentof industry standards. The center will have a  director and a small supportstaff, Wood said.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996ATLANTA TARGETS VIOLENT CRIME FOR OLYMPICS:Atlanta, ranked the most violent U.S. city for the second straight year in anew survey, is battling to cleanse its image ahead of playing host to theworld for the Olympic Games.  City officials said a private survey thatnamed Atlanta as the most dangerous U.S. city in violent crime such asmurder, rape, robbery and aggravated assault, was using outdated statisticsthat don't reflect improvements in 1995.  The Morgan Quitno survey, basedon 1994 FBI crime statistics, found Atlanta for the second year in a row tobe the least safe of the 100 largest U.S. cities, or those with more than100,000 people. The Atlanta Olympics, from July 19 to August 4 this year,will be the biggest ever, bringing together more than 10,000 athletes from197 countries. Atlanta officials boast that it will be the most compact Gamesin history, with most events and the Olympic Village concentrated in a smalldowntown area. But that area is in a high-crime part of the city center wherelocal residents fear to tread at night. Panhandlers and the homeless are afrequent sight in the area dubbed "the Olympic Ring." Local journalist DaveKindred commented that the Olympic Ring was already crowned withbarbed wire, even at Coca-Cola's world headquarters.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996COMMUNITY POLICING BRINGS HOPE TO BAKERSFIELD:Tony Martinez, a community services specialist with the Bakersfield PoliceDepartment, who has been coordinating city support for projects thatincrease neighborhood pride and decrease neighborhood crime. Since April,Martinez has roamed the neighborhood west of Lakeview Avenue in a vanthat touts his Community Oriented and Problem Solving program (COPS).He has helped set up Neighborhood Watch, clean up vacant lots andhouses, install and replace street lights, remove abandoned vehicles andincrease street police patrols. In addition, the city closed off Gorrill andRalston streets at Lakeview  Avenue three years ago to reduce pedestrianaccidents and street-corner drug  dealing. One effect has been that sinceJune, the neighborhood around Gorrill Street has had only four burglaries,Martinez said. That's remarkable because it would not have been unusualfor the neighborhood to have four burglaries a  week, he said. "It is thepeople in the neighborhood who are taking care of each other," Martinezsaid.  Citizens credit Martinez with helping to make changes in theneighborhood. "Now there is someone to talk to, to listen to our problemsand explain what can be done" one resident said.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996DEPARTING DRUG CZAR SLAMS ADIDAS SPORTS SHOE:As one of his last actions as the nation's National Drug Control PolicyDirector, White House Drug Czar Lee Brown is calling on athletic shoecompany giant Adidas to recall or stop selling its "The Hemp" shoe. Theshoe had ben scheduled for distribution to its vast network of retailers overthe next few months. "Hemp" is a street slang for marijuana. In a statementamplifying a letter to Adidas America President Steve Wynne, Brown said."The people at this shoe company apparently think this is cute, but it isreally quite deadly--especially at a time in which more and more of ouryoung people do not fear illegal drugs and as a result are using them.Moreover, it has been widely reported that the shoe" had previously beencalled the Chronic--another street name for marijuana. Wynne's response toBrown stated that "Hemp is not marijuana." But Brown, in a second letterreplied, "You fail to get the point. It doesn't matter what the your shoe ismade of -- the question is what you call it." Brown also charged that Adidasshows a blatant disregard of the fact that we now have a crisis among kidswho think using marijuana is the thing to do. To receive more informationon this topic, contact the Drug Czar's office at (202) 395-6618.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996CLINTON APPOINTMENT TO JUVENILE JUSTICE COUNCIL: Nancy G. Guerra of Illinois, an associate professor of psychology at theUniversity of Chicago, has been named to the Coordinating Council onJuvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.  The Council  was establishedto coordinate Federal juvenile delinquency programs and other Federalprograms relating to missing and exploiting children. The Council examineshow the separate programs can be coordinated among Federal, state andlocal governments to better serve at-risk children and juveniles and makesrecommendations to the President and Congress. Her primary fields ofresearch are child development, juvenile delinquency, cognitive-behavioralinterventions with high-risk/aggressive youth and the application of childdevelopment research in Hispanic and African-American populations.  Dr.Guerra has chaired the Santa Barbara Delinquency Prevention Commission.Additionally, she served as a program coordinator and research director forthe Santa Barbara County School District and has been a summer scholarfor the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences in Stanford,California.  She also served on the editorial board for the Journal ofDevelopmental Psychology.  Dr. Guerra holds both a Bachelor's degree inPsychology and a Master's degree in Educational Psychology from theUniversity of California.  She received her Doctorate in HumanDevelopment from Harvard University.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996FEDERAL JUDGE HALTED SALE OF DRUG DETECTION DEVICE:A federal judge last month temporarily halted manufacture and sale of adevice sold to schools, prisons, airports and law enforcement as a drug andexplosives detector. Government tests indicated it's a fake. FBI agentNorman Townsend told a federal judge that 1,000 Quadro Trackers, alsoknown as Quadro Positive Molecular Locators, have been sold or orderedfor $395 to $8,000 apiece. But he said analysis by FBI Laboratorytechnicians and by the Energy Department's Sandia National Laboratoriesshow the device is nothing more than a hollow plastic box attached to aretractable transistor radio antenna. A "chip" inside was found to be twopieces of plastic surrounding "a small piece of polymer coated white paper,similar to a candy bar wrapper," Townsend wrote in an affidavit. At therequest of the Justice Department, which is conducting a fraudinvestigation, U.S. District Judge Thad Heartfield in Beaumont, Texas,signed the restraining order against Quadro Corp. of Harleyville, S.C., itsTexas subsidiary and four company officers. The judge found "probablecause to believe that defendants are engaged in mail and wire fraud." Aschools use package was priced at $995 and law enforcement packagesranged from $1,145 to $5,000. Locator cards to be inserted in the devicewere priced at $250 for heroin and $25 for golf balls, Townsend said.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996POLICING DRUG HOT SPOTS IS HIGHLY EFFECTIVE:In a two page Research Preview National Institute of Justice (NIJ) Director,Jeremy Travis, describes and summarizes the results of recent research onpolice efforts to target drug hot spots. In 1990 the  NIJ initiated the DrugMarket Analysis Program (DMA) in order to develop strategies foraddressing street level drug problems and encourage innovations ingeographic analysis of crime. In Jersey City, New Jersey, one of five DMAdemonstration sides, an evaluation was conducted in 1993 of an innovativedrug enforcement strategy that focused on hot spots of drug activity. Thisstudy found consistent and strong effects of the experimental policingstrategy on disorder related emergency calls for service. The data suggestedthat surrounding areas of the hot spots also benefited. To receive a copy ofthis Research Preview, entitled "Policing Drug Hot Spots" contact NIJ at(800) 851-3420.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996DUF DATA FOR 1994 SHOWS COCAINE USE STILL HIGH:Recently released findings from the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) programfor 1994 show that despite slight decreases, cocaine remains one of themost commonly used drugs among adult male arrestees. The percentage ofmales testing positive for cocaine in 1994 ranged from 19% (in San Jose) to68% (in Manhattan). Cocaine positive rates for females ranges from 19%(in San Diego) to 80% (in Manhattan). While use of cocaine has declined inthe surveyed household and student populations, similar declines have notbeen found among arrestees.  Other cities with more than fifty percent ofmale arrestees testing positive for cocaine include Atlanta, Birmingham,Chicago, Miami, Philadelphia, and St. Louis. This information wassupplied from the Center for Substance Abuse Research at the University ofMaryland at College Park. To get on their fax list call (301) 403-8329. Toreceive a copy of "Drug Use Forecasting: 1994 Annual Report on Adult andJuvenile Arrestees," contact the National Criminal Justice Reference Service(NCJRS) at (800) 851-3420.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996SENATORS CALL FOR CRACKDOWN ON MEXICO:Saying it is high time for Mexico to crack down on drug trafficking into theUnited States, Sens. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., and Alfonse M. D'Amato,R-N.Y., last month announced plans for legislation aimed at pressuringMexico for increased cooperation. The action comes as the Clintonadministration is poised to extend for  six months Mexico's $20 billion inU.S. loan guarantees. President Clinton provided the guarantees on his ownauthority last Jan. 31, after lawmakers balked at his request that Congressauthorize a $40 billion bailout. "The measures my colleague and I areintroducing are meant as a shot across the bow to the government ofMexico," Feinstein said. "These measures... should send the signal that thisCongress is prepared to back up the president's effort in the strongestpossible terms if Mexico's actions do not match their words in the war ondrugs." The senators measures would tie the six-month extension of theloan guarantee to Mexico to that country's efforts to curb drug trafficking.Specifically, Feinstein said Mexican officials would have to comply with alist of 10 requirements such as meeting extradition requests, prosecutinglocal government officials for accepting graft, strengthening the prohibitionon money laundering and regulating chemicals used to producemethamphetamine and other narcotics. Another measure would suspendtrucking applications from Mexico under border crossing provisions in theNorth American Free Trade Agreement until Mexico improves its safetyrecord. D'Amato, chairman of the Senate Banking, Housing and UrbanAffairs Committee, said his panel would begin holding hearings andmarking up the draft bill in early March.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996FULLBRIGHT OFFERS FELLOWSHIP IN POLICE STUDIES:A Fullbright Fellowship in Police studies is offered for the United Kingdomfor 1997-1998. The Fellowship is designed for emerging, mid-career, orsenior domestic police professionals (with the rank of sworn Sergeant andabove) and is geared to the practitioner rather than the academic. Two policeofficers are chosen for the award each year, and the 1997-1998 competitionwill be the eighth year the award has existed. Applicants must hold U.S.citizenship and have a minimum of five years professional experience.Candidates should hold a bachelor's degree in criminal justice, policestudies, or a related discipline in the social sciences and must be currentlyemployed by a police agency and be recommended by supervisory staffwithin their department. The fellowship is for a minimum period of threemonths. For more information contact Karen Adams at (202) 686-6245.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996MEXICO ARRESTS AND EXTRADITES DRUG TRAFFICKER:On January 15 the Government of Mexico arrested Juan Garcia Abrego andthe next day expelled him from the country. Garcia Abrego was flown toHouston and taken into federal custody to face an indictment filed inSeptember, 1993 in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District ofTexas. The indictment charges that Garcia Abrego is the leader of one of themost powerful drug trafficking organizations in Mexico, which, whileoperating on both sides of the border, is responsible for transporting tons ofcocaine into the United States for the Cali Cartel. The indictment furtheralleges that Garcia Abrego authorized acts of violence, including murder, topromote drug activities. Garcia Abrego, who faces a life sentence if he isconvicted, was placed on the FBI's list of "Ten Most Wanted Fugitives" inMarch of 1995. Attorney General Janet Reno in a statement congratulatedMexican Secretary of Foreign Relations Jose Angel Gurria and AttorneyGeneral Antonio Lozano Garcia for the capture of Garcia Abrego and the"expeditious manner in which the government of Mexico achieved hisremoval from Mexico to the United States."Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996CALI MONEY LAUNDERERS INDICTED IN NEW JERSEY:U.S. authorities indicted 14 people accused of laundering $60 million forthe Cali drug cartel and seized large amounts of cash when they arrestedsome of the suspects on February 6. In what prosecutors called the biggestmoney laundering case brought in New Jersey, special agents of the U.S.Customs Service and the Internal Revenue Service arrested suspects in threestates beginning the night of February 5, officials said.  Special Agent DanHolmes of the U.S. Customs Service said the arrests were made in NewJersey, New York and Florida and at least $300,000 in cash had beenconfiscated. U.S. Attorney Faith Hochberg said in a statement that thegovernment would ask to have the suspects held without bail because theypose a high risk of flight. All face a 20-year prison term and a heavy fine ifconvicted.  The indictment said the 14 suspects operated through three frontcompanies, using money transfer agents and banks over more than twoyears to launder cash obtained from illegal narcotic sales in the United Statesback to Cali, Colombia. One of the companies named was Latelco, withoffices in West New York, New Jersey, Miami and Cali, Colombia. Itostensibly sold telephone debit cards. A second was a travel and moneytransfer agency in Jersey City.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996CRIMINAL CHARGES TO BE BROUGHT AGAINST SAMPER:Colombia's chief prosecutor was quoted on February 6 as saying that hewould file criminal charges against President Ernesto Samper because of hisalleged links to drug lords. The RCN and Caracol radio networks saidProsecutor-General Alfonso Valdivieso announced his plan to file chargesduring closed-door talks with members of the Committee of Accusations ofthe House of Representatives. Valdivieso could not be reached to confirmthe reports. The committee, the only body formally authorized to investigatea sitting president, is preparing to reopen a probe into charges that Samperaccepted up to $6 million in Cali cartel drug money to finance his 1994election campaign. The congressional panel cleared Samper of anywrongdoing last December after a four-month probe into the campaignfinance scandal his government has been embroiled in since last summer.But Samper himself asked it to reopen its investigation last week afterFernando Botero-his former defence minister and campaign boss -charged that the President personally approved the use of drug money tobankroll his campaign.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996JEWELRY TRADE SHOW AVOIDS PUBLICITY DUE TO CRIME:After a jewelry trade show participant from Hong Kong was shot androbbed of nearly $1 million in diamonds outside a midtown Manhattanhotel, his fellow jewelers hustled their expensive wares into the Jacob K.Javits Convention Center for a trade show so exclusive it has been almost asecret.  According to a report from the New York Times, the JAInternational Jewelry Show displays no signs outside, disseminates nogeneral publicity, posts no show dates in lists of upcoming events andsends out literature in plain brown envelopes. The  reason for the secrecy isthe concern that public notice would weaken security, though none of thepress officers from the parent company, Blenheim Group U.S.A., wouldacknowledge this. Many participants covered the badges identifying them aspart of the show, which is intended only for those in the industry. Policesaid that they had not yet made any arrests in the shooting. At the JavitsCenter a steady stream of armored cars, vans and taxis dropped offexhibitors bearing bulky crates, bulging briefcases and duffel bags like theone stolen earlier. Security was heavy. But one show participant said, fearof theft, combined with other local inconveniences, was causing the showto lose ground to the June show in Las Vegas. "People hate the cold, thesnow, the theft, the huge cost of hotel rooms. New York has a pretty lousyreputation."Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996DEMOCRATS ATTACK NEW YORK'S MAYOR FOR FOCUS ONCRIME:Democrats have begun to turn the mayor's success in lowering the crimerate against him, ridiculing him for concentrating on little else. City CouncilSpeaker Peter Vallone delivered an unusual reproach to Giuliani in hisannual address to the Council last month, charging that on issues likeeducation, housing, and health, Giuliani had been "a very good mayor - oncrime." The crime rate may once have been the voters' top priority, butsome New Yorkers are asking "What have you done for me lately?"Giuliani seemed conscious of the need to broaden his portfolio when, afterthe beating death of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo, he announced that he wouldreorganize the Child Welfare Administration with the same energy andcommitment he had earlier applied to the Police Department. Then he wentfurther, proclaiming in his budget message last week that his top prioritywas protecting the rights of society's most vulnerable, a category he saidincluded troubled children, the elderly, the sick and the handicapped. Tohelp pay for some of his new priorities, he agreed to trim the police force by1,500 officers. Caught off guard, social-welfare advocates praised thepolice cut but remained skeptical of the mayor's real intentions, particularlyif budget cuts continue to grow over all, as now seems likely. The budgetplan for next year, for example, includes a $160 million cut to the Board ofEducation, and projects the removal of more than 275,000 people from thewelfare rolls.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996VETERANS HOSPITALS NOW PROVIDING DRUG TREATMENT:The Department of Veterans Affairs is best known for its network ofhospitals, which continues to expand despite a decline in the population ofveterans and despite health care trends that are forcing many other hospitalsto close. But now the department's insulation from the fiscal and politicalpressures confronting the rest of the government has helped give it animportant new role as an agency that cares for the poor.  And a poor veteranoften gets assistance that a welfare recipient accustomed to nothing morethan cash or food stamps might find lavish.  "If you're a vet," said MarthaBurt, director of social service research at the Urban Institute, aWashington-based research organization, "you have a resource that a lot ofother people don't have." With the plunge in the number of war-maimedveterans treated at the agency's 173 hospitals, the VA has been turning moreof its attention to veterans who are among the nation's drug-addicted orindigent, mentally ill or physically disabled. To qualify, most need onlyhave put in some time in the service, in combat or not, in wartime orpeacetime. "If you serve 180 days on active duty," said one Republicancongressional aide who specializes in veterans issues, "and if for whateverreason you do not succeed in life, you get this complete safety net." As aresult, a department that is the nation's largest employer of doctors andnurses has also become the largest employer of social workers, with 4,241on the payroll last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996NOBEL WINNERS TAKE ANTI-VIOLENCE CAMPAIGN TO U.S.:In a bid to combat teen violence three Nobel peace laureates will take theirmessage of non-violence to young people, Nobel laureate Betty Williamsannounced last month. ``We're going to change things for the young peopleof America,'' said Williams, who was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in1977 along with Mairead Corrigan Maguire for their work in NorthernIreland.  Williams next month will kick off in Denver what is expected to bea five-year educational program known as PeaceJam. Williams later saidgang members will be recruited to attend the weekend conference in lateMarch. ``We're going to bring them in. We're going to go out and look forthem,'' she said after a press conference to announce the program.Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who was awarded the peace prize in 1984 forhis fight against apartheid in South Africa, and the Dalai Lama of Tibet whoreceived the prize in 1989, will attend similar conferences in Denver laterthis year, organizers said.Back to Headline List CopyrightDRUG POLICY REPORT via NewsNetJanuary, 1996ALCOHOL AND DRUG COUNSELORS TO HOLD CONFERENCE:The National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors(NAADAC), the National Association of Drug Court Professionals(NADCP) and the Betty Ford Center and nine other organizations will hosta public policy conference on alcohol and drugs from March 3 to 5 inWashington, D.C.  The conference will begin with a presentation on thecurrent political environment and the 1996 election by political analystCharlie Cook and will include the participation of Donna Shalala, Secretaryof Health and Human Services, as well as Representative Bill Zeliff (R-NH), Co-Chair of the Congressional Bipartisan Drug Policy WorkingGroup. For more information about the conference, contact Jim Ginther orElizabeth Powell at (703) 741-7686.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-27IA060-000326-B020-69http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt37.html 205.156.212.5 19970115020927 text/html 30880HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:07:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:57 GMTContent-length: 30691Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt37.html Sample Issue Copyright FEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GRANTS ALERT ADVANCED TECHNOLOGICAL EDUCATION (NSF) (214 words) ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH (NSF) (318 words) HUMAN BRAIN PROJECT: FEASIBILITY STUDIES (NIH/NSF/DOE/ONR) (544 words) ENVIRONMENTAL HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS (EPA) (370 words) SMALL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: NEW YORK STATE (HUD) (261 words) NATIONAL BOATING SAFETY (DOT) (269 words) RANGELAND RESEARCH GRANTS (USDA) (193 words) STATE COURTS GRANTS (SJI) (516 words) COMBAT CARE RESEARCH (ONR) (172 words) GRANTS CALENDAR (172 words) NEWS BRIEFING TOOLS OF THE TRADE: THE FEDERAL REGISTER (667 words) CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ADVANCED TECHNOLOGICAL EDUCATION (NSF)Scope:  The National Science Foundation is invitingproposals under its fiscal 1997 Advanced TechnologicalEducation program to improve science and technologyeducation at secondary school and undergraduate levels toprepare students for careers in a changing economy.Deadline:  June 25 for preliminary proposals; Dec. 10 forformal proposals.Funds:  NSF expects to support multiple projects and fivecenters of excellence in fiscal 1997, depending on funding.Curriculum projects range from $50,000 to $500,000 a yearfor one to four years; teacher preparation projects rangefrom $25,000 to $500,000 a year for one to three years; andcenter awards range up to $1 million a year for three tofive years.Eligibility:  Two-year colleges, other associate degree-granting institutions, two-year college systems andconsortia of two-year colleges and other organizations andinstitutions, such as universities and secondary schools.Areas:  Projects focus on math and science curriculumdevelopment, faculty or teacher enhancement or preparation,instructional materials development, design of technicalexperiences for students and laboratory development in thecontext of more comprehensive programs.Regional and national centers seek comprehensive andsystemic improvement in educating technicians for the highperformance workplace of advanced technologies.Contact:  Advanced Technological Education, National ScienceFoundation, Room 885, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA22230, (703)306-1668.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH (NSF)Scope:  The National Science Foundation is invitingproposals to plan and initiate collaborative projects tointegrate enabling electronic and information technologiesinto neuroscience research as part of the federal "Decade ofthe Brain" initiative.Deadline:  March 15.Funds:  Up to $100,000 per project for one or two years.NSF expects to make eight to 12 awards.Eligibility:  Domestic academic institutions and nonprofitorganizations with academically-oriented engineering andresearch programs.Proposals must include teams of two or more investigators,including at least one neuroscientist and one investigatorfrom a relevant discipline, such as applied mathematics,computer science, intelligent control/neuroengineering,interfaces, mathematical and statistical modeling, networkengineering, physics, scientific visualization, sensordesign, signal processing, simulation and systemsintegration/interoperability.Areas:  The initiative aims to bring together new teams ofinvestigators able to use common languages and scientificconcepts to attack problems with impact on more than onediscipline.Projects include collaborations to address problems indesigning, developing and implementing electronic andinformation resources for functional studies of the nervoussystem; and collaborations that apply paradigms fromengineering, computer science or artificial neural networktheory to assess the functionality of neuroscience modelsand circuits.Projects may include new computational and statisticalapproaches to functional visualization; explorations oflearning capabilities of biological neurons and neuralnetworks; development of novel database structures andsearch strategies; and design of software tools that provideneuroscientists access to multimodal information.NSF expects these cross-disciplinary research programsultimately will lead to novel solutions for problems ofneuroscience information storage, visualization, integrationand communication or empirically based reverse engineeringof the brain with emphasis on generic learning capabilities.NSF encourages research on any organism that provides a goodmodel system for neuroscience.Contact:  Carol Colby, Division of Integrative Biology andNeuroscience, Biological Sciences Directorate, NationalScience Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd., Arlington, VA 22230,(703)306-1416.  Refer to NSF announcement 96-20.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HUMAN BRAIN PROJECT:  FEASIBILITY STUDIES (NIH/NSF/DOE/ONR)Scope:  A dozen National Institutes of Health components andseveral other science agencies will fund investigator-initiated pilot studies in neuroinformatics that may lead tonew digital tools for all areas of brain and behaviorresearch under the federal Human Brain Project.Deadline:  Jan. 16 and Oct. 15.  Letters of intent are dueJuly 1 for the Oct. 15 deadline.Funds:  The NIH program will support research project (R01)grants up to about $230,000 a year; interactive researchproject grants (IRPG), which may involve R01 and FirstIndependent Research Support and Transition (FIRST) awardsof $350,000 over five years; and exploratory center (P20)grants of up to $1.1 million a year.  The project period isup to five years.Eligibility:  Foreign and domestic public and private for-profit and nonprofit institutions, including colleges anduniversities, hospitals, laboratories and state and localgovernments.Foreign institutions are not eligible for FIRST or P20grants, and R01 grants to foreign organizations are limitedto three years.Areas:  The initiative is to develop advanced informationtechnologies that can integrate and track wide-ranging anddivergent data across species, at different levels ofbiological interest and involving constructs as diverse asattention, memory, emotion and language that are generatedby brain and behavior research under the Human BrainProject.Funders are looking for collaborative research andapproaches that integrate brain and/or behavior research andinformatics, which draws from computer science, informationscience, applied mathematics, statistics, engineering andrelated areas.Areas in informatics include creation of novel databases,querying and information retrieval approaches that willallow varied databases to be accessed with a single queryand retrieval of different types of data into a commoninformation space; research on visualization andmanipulation of data about the brain and behavior; researchon integration and synthesis of data that increasingly ishighly specialized and narrowly focused; development oftools for electronic collaboration that would enable teamsat different sites to assemble quickly and address specificscientific questions; and research that builds bridgesacross existing information tools and resources.Areas of interest in brain and/or behavioral researchinclude development of tools for dealing with data fromdifferent biological levels of organization, such asmolecules, genes, cells and systems of cells, and frombehavioral constructs such as attention and perception; andresearch that taps structure-function relationships at alllevels of organization.  Research should be generalizable;sophisticated and performed on sophisticated platforms;extensible and salable; and designed to assess progress.Contact:  Michael Huerta (for the National Institutes ofHealth), National Institute of Mental Health, 5600 FishersLane, Room 11-103, Rockville, MD 20857, (301)443-5625; fax,(301)443-1731; e-mail, mhuerta@helix.nih.gov.  Terry Allard,Office of Naval Research, 800 N. Quincy St., Room 823, Code342-CS, Arlington, VA 22217-5660, (703)696-4502; fax,(703)696-1212;e-mail, terry@tomcat.onr.navy.mil.  Dean Cole, Office ofHealth and Environmental Research, Energy Department, ER-73,G137, 19901 Germantown Rd., Germantown, MD 20874, (301)903-3268; fax, (301)903-5051; e-mail,dean.cole%er@mailgw.er.doe.gov.Contacts also are Christopher Comer or Karen Sigvardt,National Science Foundation, 4201 Wilson Blvd. Arlington, VA22230, (703)306-1416; fax, (703)306-0349; e-mail,ccomer@nsf.gov or ksigvard@nsf.gov.  Marc Shepanek, NationalAeronautics and Space Administration,250 E. St. SW, NASA Headquarters, Code UL, Washington, DC20546, (202)358-2201; fax, (202)358-4168; e-mail,shepanek#m#_marc@smtpgmgw.ossa.hq.nasa.gov.  Refer to PA 96-002.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENVIRONMENTAL HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING AND COMMUNICATIONS(EPA)Scope:  The Environmental Protection Agency is invitingproposals to accelerate the evolution of high performancetechnologies and their applications to environmentalmanagement.Deadline:  Feb. 29.Funds:  $3 million for projects ranging from $100,000 to$200,000 a year for up to three years.Eligibility:  Generally, colleges and universities andnonprofit research organizations and consortia.Areas:  EPA is looking for projects that target research onproblem-solving environments, parallel algorithms and dataaccess and analysis techniques.  Grantees should demonstratein a results-oriented testbed that specifically addressescross-media ecosystem management capabilities to supportcommunity-based environmental assessments.Proposals on problem-solving environments should exploreconceptual data models that encompass all data typesrequired for cross-media environment assessment anddecision-making; explore and evaluate alternative techniquesfor fully integrating geospatial analysis, environmentalmodeling and object-oriented databases involving very largethree dimensional, time and space varying data; developscalable parallel input/output (I/O) techniques for objectoriented data bases, I/O mechanisms to support datareordering, fast queries over distributed databases andarchives and I/O for binary large objects; and developreusable object-model-based class libraries for parallelnumerical solvers and science processes related to cross-media modeling, uncertainty and risk assessment.Parallel algorithms projects should evaluate performancecharacteristics of alternative domain decompositionapproaches and scalable parallel algorithms for multi-media(air, water, soil, etc.); develop scalable parallelalgorithms for adaptive grid approaches and evaluate thepreservation of accuracy with the interaction of regular andirregular grid systems in the context of cross-mediaenvironmental assessments; or devise methods foroptimization problems involving non-linear processes,develop scalable parallel algorithms for efficientimplementation and explore the accuracy of samplingstrategies for non-linear response space.EPA also is interested in proposals that develop techniquesfor exploring multiple-scales and cross-media environmentaldata, including high performance data assimilationtechniques supported by scalable parallel I/O systems toenable integration of remote sensing data into predictivemodels; multivariate analysis and visualization techniquesover three dimensional space and time; and techniques fordesktop virtual environments for analysis of time sequencesof three-dimensional environmental data.Contact:  Chris Saint, National Center for EnvironmentalResearch and Quality Assurance (8703), EnvironmentalProtection Agency, 401 M St. SW, Washington, DC 20460,(202)260-1093; e-mail, saint.chris@epamail.epa.gov.  Referto 96-NCERQA-8.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SMALL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  NEW YORK STATE (HUD)Scope:  The Housing and Urban Development Department isinviting proposals for small community development projectsthat focus on creating or expanding jobs, meeting housingneeds or addressing local public facilities needs.  (Dec. 28Federal Register)Deadline:  March 13.Funds:  $50 million for comprehensive multiyear projects forup to $5 million and three years; and $600,000 for single-purpose grants.Previous recipients of two- or three-year commitments atlower levels may submit new multi-year applications and"trade-up" to the higher three-year amount.Eligibility:  Units of general local government in New Yorkstate, excluding metropolitan cities, urban counties, unitsof government participating in urban counties ormetropolitan cities and certain American Indian tribes.Areas:  Funded activities must meet a national objective,for example, to benefit low- and moderate-incomeindividuals, eliminate slums and blighting conditions ormeet imminent threats to community health and safety.Comprehensive grants should fund projects that address asubstantial portion of the identified community developmentneeds within a defined area or areas; involve two or morerelated and coordinated activities; and have a beneficialimpact within a reasonable time period.  Single-purposegrants are designed to address and resolve a specificcommunity development need.  Grants may consist of more thanone project, and projects may involve more than oneactivity.  Each project must address community developmentneeds in housing, public facilities or economic development.Contact:  Stephen Rhodeside, State and Small Cities Div.,Office of Community Planning and Development, Housing andUrban Development Department, Room 7184, 451 Seventh St. SW,Washington, DC 20410, (202)708-1322.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NATIONAL BOATING SAFETY (DOT)Scope:  The Coast Guard is seeking applications to promoteboating safety at the national level.  (Dec. 28 FederalRegister)Deadline:  March 18.Funds:  $1.5 million for multiple awards.  Fiscal 1995awards ranged from $15,000 to $304,000.Eligibility:  National nongovernment nonprofit publicservice organizations devoted to promoting national boatingsafety.Areas:  Areas of particular interest include development andimplementation of a national annual safe boating campaignthat targets boater market segments and specificrecreational boating safety topics; development andimplementation of a national recreational boating safetyoutreach and awareness conference for volunteers, state andlocal boating safety program organization leaders andindustry specialists to be held in the spring of 1997concurrent with a major recreational boating safety aquaticsymposium; dissemination of a market multi-use waterwayguide to aid development of comprehensive boating managementplans; implementation of a second phase of a recreationalboating safety measures of effectiveness project; design anddevelopment of a recreational boating accident healthcarecost model; planning of public workshops addressingdevelopment of boat construction and safety standards andreporting of defects by manufacturers and others.Other areas are development of instructional materials andtraining courses for boating accident investigators;analysis and compilation of research on operatingefficiency, maneuverability characteristics and protectionfactors of propellers, propeller guards and pump jets;implementation of a program to encourage public involvementin developing voluntary boating standards; and initiation ofstate/federal/boating organization cooperative partnershipefforts to foster boating safety.Contact:  Betty Alley, Office of Navigation Safety andWaterway Services, U.S. Coast Guard (G-NAB-5/Room 1202),2100 Second St. SW, Washington, DC 20593-0001, (202)267-0954.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RANGELAND RESEARCH GRANTS (USDA)Scope:  The Agriculture Department is inviting applicationsfor matching grants for basic research on rangelandresearch.  (Jan. 2 Federal Register)Deadline:  Feb. 29.Funds:  $451,535 for awards of up to $80,000.  Thenonfederal match is 50 percent.Eligibility:  Land-grant colleges and universities, stateagricultural experiment stations and colleges, universitiesand federal laboratories with a demonstrable capacity inrangeland research.Areas:  Areas include management of rangelands andagricultural land as integrated systems for more efficientutilization of crops and waste products in the production offood and fiber; methods of managing rangeland watersheds tomaximize efficient use of water and improve water yield,water quality and water conservation, to protect againstonsite and offsite damage to rangeland resources fromfloods, erosion and other detrimental influences and toremedy unsatisfactory and unstable rangeland conditions; andrevegetation and rehabilitation of rangelands, including thecontrol of undesirable plant species.Contact:  For applications, Proposal Services, GrantsManagement Br., Office of Extramural Programs, CooperativeState Research, Education and Extension Service, AgricultureDepartment, Room 303, Aerospace Center, Ag Box 2245,Washington, DC 20250-2245, (202)401-5048.  For information,Paul McCawley, same address, Ag Box 2210, (202)401-5351.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STATE COURTS GRANTS (SJI)Scope:  The State Justice Institute is inviting proposalsfor state court-related improvement projects under finalfiscal 1996 grant program guidelines.  (Dec. 14 FederalRegister)Deadline:  Feb. 14 for full proposals.  SJI is not seekingconcept papers this year.  For scholarships, deadlines areFeb. 1, for programs from April 13 and July 12; April 15 forprograms from July 13 and September 30; and July 15 forprograms from Oct. 1 and Dec. 31.Funds:  SJI estimates it will have $6 million to $9 million,but its fiscal 1996 appropriation still is pending inCongress.  SJI awards several types of grants, includingproject grants up to $200,000 for education, research,evaluation, demonstrations and technical assistance.  SJIestimates it will have $400,000 in fiscal 1996 for technicalassistance grants of $30,000 each for state or local courtsto engage outside experts; $175,000 for curriculumadaptation grants of up to $20,000 each for state and localcourts to replicate or modify model training programs fundedby SJI; and $175,000 for scholarships to enable judges andcourt managers to attend out-of-state education and trainingprograms.Eligibility:  State and local courts, nonprofitorganizations, higher education institutions and otherorganizations with expertise in judicial administration.Areas:  SJI is looking for projects that formulate newprocedures and techniques, or creatively enhance existingarrangements to improve courts; address aspects of statejudicial systems that especially need attention; havenational significance in terms of their impact or may bereplicated in other states; and create and disseminateproducts that effectively transfer information and ideasdeveloped to relevant audiences in state and local judicialsystems or provide relevant technical assistance.Special interest categories for this year include researchand other projects to improve public confidence in courtsand education and training for judges and other key courtpersonnel.  Proposals related to public confidence includeresearch, demonstrations and evaluations and educationactivities designed to improve the responsiveness of courtsto public concerns, including projects to improve service toindividual litigants and trial participants; test methodsfor clearly and effectively communicating decisions; addresscourt-community problems resulting from the influx of legaland illegal immigrants, design and assess procedures forcustody visitation and other domestic relations cases whenfamily members or property are outside the United States,improve communications with federal authorities when illegalaliens are involved in state court proceedings and developprotocols for dealing with non-U.S. citizens and entities incriminal and juvenile cases; and increase publicunderstanding of jury decisions, juror selection and serviceprocesses.Education and training projects for judges and other keycourt personnel include development of innovative educationprograms and curriculum adaptation projects.  Innovativeeducation projects could include self-directed learningpackages, such as interactive computer programs, projects tofamiliarize faculty with technology and projects thatincorporate findings from SJI-funded research.  Curriculumadaptation projects usually help state and local courtsprepare and test a model curriculum or effort developed withSJI funds by another state or organization.Contact:  David Tevelin, or Richard Van Duizend, StateJustice Institute, 1650 King St., Suite 600, Alexandria, VA22314, (703)684-6100.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMBAT CARE RESEARCH (ONR)Scope:  The Office of Naval Research is inviting proposalsfor basic and applied biomedical research focusing on Navy-relevant aspects of combat casualty care, especiallyhemorrhagic shock and blood products.  (Dec. 29 CommerceBusiness Daily)Deadline:  Feb. 1 for preproposals.Funds:  There is no specific setaside.  ONR may awardgrants, contracts and/or cooperative agreements.Eligibility:  Colleges, universities, medical schools,research institutes and other research entities.Areas:  Areas of interest include mechanisms and treatmentof hypoxic injury at the cellular and molecular level;neural induction or neuro/endocrine regulation of cytokinesand other soluble mediators involved in hemorrhagic shock;novel therapeutic interventions for severe hemorrhage andshock; design, testing and evaluation of supportive andtherapeutic resuscitation fluids; methods for extendingliquid storage of red cells and platelets; cryopreservationof blood products not requiring post-thaw cryoprotectantwashout; and impact of blood substitutes at the molecular,cellular and organ system levels in treating hemorrhagicshock.Contact:  J. Majde, Office of Naval Research, 800 N. QuincySt., Arlington, VA 22217-5660, (703)696-4055.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GRANTS CALENDARMONTH/GRANT PROGRAM/AGENCY           IN FGCWCONTACTFEBRUARY 1Academic Infrastructure/Equipment (NSF)          11/20/95(703)306-1040Angiogenesis and Vascular Remodeling in the Microvasculature(NHLBI) (letters of intent)          11/27/95     (301)435-0565Behavioral Therapies Development (NIDA)          08/14/95(301)443-0107Cancer Prevention and Control Research Small Grants (NCI)09/25/95     (301)496-8520Central Auditory System Plasticity in Adults (NIDCD)12/04/95     (301)402-3458Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Lymphangio-leiomyomatosis (NHLBI)          12/11/95     (301)435-0233Clinical Bioethical Dilemmas (NINR)          08/28/95(301)496-0207Clinical Neuroscience of Drug Abuse and Addiction (NIDA)09/25/95     (301)443-4877Deafness and Communications Independent Scientist Award(NIDCD)          09/11/95     (301)496-1804Deafness Mentored Clinical Scientist Development Award(NIDCD)          09/11/95     (301)496-1804Drug Abuse Independent Scientist Award (NIDA)09/11/95     (301)443-6072Drug Abuse Mentored Research Scientist Development Award(NIDA)          09/11/95     (301)443-6072Environmental Health Sciences Core Center Grants (NIEHS)10/23/95     (919)541-4943Epidemiology of Lung Cancer (NCI/NIEHS)          12/04/95(301)496-9600Etiology and Prevention of Gallstones (NIDDK)09/04/95     (301)594-8878High-Energy Astrophysics and Technology (NASA)11/20/95     (202)358-0370Independent Scientist Award (NICHD)          12/04/95(301)496-6515Initiative for Minority Student Development (NIGMS)11/06/95     (301)594-3900Innovative Discovery Research in AIDS OpportunisticInfections (NIAID) (for fiscal 1997)          09/18/95(301)496-0545Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS WEEKLY via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TOOLS OF THE TRADE: THE FEDERAL REGISTERThe Federal Register -- the federal government's 60-year-oldregulatory affairs reporter -- remains a key grantseekingtool, even in the electronic age.The Register last month announced free access to its ownsearchable electronic version.And despite increased use of the Internet by agencies toadvertise funding opportunities directly, the Register isthe forum of choice for certain health-related funders.In addition to running grant notices, the Register alsoupdates readers daily on critical rules, regulations andactions that shape grant competitions.By following official developments, grantseekers can stay ontop of changes that could affect their eligibility under agrant program or effect new procedures and requirements.In its electronic form, readers can have a custom-tailoredRegister.  Instead of sloggingthrough pages of extraneous text dealing with agencies inwhich readers may have no interest, readers can key intoonly the information they need."It's what they've always asked for," says RichardClaypoole, director of the Federal Register.And the electronic version has caught on, he says.  Evenbefore the Register went public,  subscribers logged 558,369document retrievals from November to December.In whatever form, grantseekers can use the Federal Registerto:*  Mine grant nuggets:  The Health Resources and ServicesAdministration, Centers for Disease Control and EnergyDepartment regularly use the Federal Register to announcegrant competitions.Browsers will find health-related Education Departmentnotices and health and life science notices from theAgriculture Department and the Environmental ProtectionAgency.*  Check on winners:  A few agencies, such as theHousing and Urban Development Department, use the FederalRegister to announce recent awards.  Announcements areoccasional, but they can provide insights about programconstituents and reveal subgrant and subcontractingpossibilities.*  Respond to proposed program rules and funding priorities:Laws creating grant programs often require agencies topublish regulations before getting down to grantmaking.Grantseekers can influence program direction by commentingon the proposals appearing in the Federal Register.*  Keepup with grant-related policies:  The Register provides thefull text on government-wide policies affecting grants andcontracts, such as Office of Management and Budget circularsrelated to university research costs.*In fact, revisions toOMB Circular A-21, which deals with university costs, couldhit the Register late this month. *  Learn about meetings:Agencies publish announcements for meetings, ranging frompreapplication workshops and advisory group sessions topolicy-setting forums, including meetings on grantseekers'home turf.  Notices specify when and where meetings will beheld and which parts will be open to the public.But the Federal Register also has its drawbacks -- for hardcopy and electronic users.  Agencies used to solicitinggrant applications via the Register sometimes bypass thepublication these days, finding it faster and easier to gowith electronic announcements.For example, EPA's 1996 grant competition, announced on theInternet last month, has yet to make it into the Register.Unless their announcements have regulatory impact, saysClaypoole, agencies are not required to publish applicationnotices in the Register.And whether users are hard copy or on-screen readers, theyroutinely must trudge through pages of often confusinglegalese.  To make things easier, the Federal Registeroffice regularly holds workshops on how to use the FederalRegister system.  The 1996 schedule includes workshops inand out of Washington.Other efforts to make life easier include a new column onregulations taking effect that day and a daily reminder ofimpending closing dates for comments on proposed rules.--Pam MooreContact:  The paper Federal Register is $375 a year from theSuperintendent of Documents, U.S. Government PrintingOffice, Washington, DC, (202)783-3238.Logging Into The Federal RegisterGPO Access, an online service of the Government PrintingOffice, provides searchable versions of the Federal Registerthrough the Internet.  Tap into this resource for free via:*  Telnet to swais.access.gpo.gov., login as guest;*  The World Wide Web athttp://www.access.gpo.gov/su_dics/aces/aaces001; or*  The World Wide Web athttp://thorplus.lib.purdue.edu/gpo/.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-28IA060-000326-B020-133http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt44.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021009 text/html 115990HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:07:56 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:59 GMTContent-length: 115800Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt44.html Sample Issue Copyright FEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNet MAY, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FOOD SAFETY AND QUALITY: WHO DOES WHAT IN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (244 words) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE: STRATEGIC MARKETING NEEDED TO LEAD AGRIBUSINESS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE (158 words) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE: FARM AGENCIES' FIELD STRUCTURE NEEDS MAJOR OVERHAUL (184 words) THE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 1991: SCORING OF GSA LEASE- PURCHASES (135 words) BUDGET ISSUES: EFFECTS OF THE FISCAL YEAR 1990 SEQUESTER (214 words) COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: OVERSIGHT OF BLOCK GRANT MONITORING NEEDS IMPROVEMENT (177 words) STAFFORD STUDENT LOANS: MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN LOANS AWARDED TO INELIGIBLE BORROWERS (288 words) EMPLOYEE BENEFITS: IMPROVEMENTS NEEDED IN ENFORCING HEALTH INSURANCE CONTINUATION REQUIREMENTS (246 words) JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT: REVIEW OF AUDIT FINDINGS RELATED TO THE DOWNRIVER COMMUNITY CONFERENCE PROGRAM (198 words) NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD: ACTION NEEDED TO IMPROVE CASE-PROCESSING TIME AT HEADQUARTERS (126 words) LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS: STRIKES AND THE USE OF STRIKE REPLACEMENTS IN THE 1970S AND 1980S (169 words) OIL RESERVE: SOME CONCERNS REMAIN ABOUT SPR DRAWDOWN AND DISTRIBUTION (191 words) ENERGY MANAGEMENT: DOE NEEDS TO BETTER IMPLEMENT CONFLICT- OF-INTEREST CONTROLS (219 words) OBLIGATIONS LIMITATION: RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION'S COMPLIANCE AS OF JUNE 30,1990 (230 words) RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION: UNNECESSARY LOAN SERVICING COSTS DUE TO INADEQUATE CONTRACT OVERSIGHT (141 words) FINANCIAL AUDIT: FINANCIAL REPORTING AND INTERNAL CONTROLS AT THE AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMAND (92 words) FINANCIAL AUDIT: AIR FORCE'S BASE-LEVEL FINANCIAL SYSTEMS DO NOT PROVIDE RELIABLE INFORMATION (182 words) FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT: INS LACKS ACCOUNTABILITY AND CONTROLS OVER ITS RESOURCES (144 words) INSPECTORS GENERAL: WORK PERFORMED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR INSPECTOR GENERAL IN 1988 AND 1989 (157 words) IMMIGRATION MANAGEMENT: STRONG LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT REFORMS NEEDED TO ADDRESS SERIOUS PROBLEMS (269 words) POSTAL SERVICE: CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE--EXPRESS AND PRIORITY MAIL TRANSPORTATION (155 words) DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA: INFORMATION ON COURT ORDERED TENANT EVICTIONS (113 words) REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ACT: INHERENT WEAKNESSES MAY LIMIT ITS USEFULNESS FOR SMALL GOVERNMENTS (271 words) MAJOR ISSUES FACING THE 102ND CONGRESS (403 words) MEDICAID: LEGISLATION NEEDED TO IMPROVE COLLECTIONS FROM PRIVATE INSURERS (238 words) MEDICAL MALPRACTICE: FEW CLAIMS RESOLVED THROUGH MICHIGAN'S VOLUNTARY ARBITRATION PROGRAM (150 words) MEDICARE: MILLIONS IN POTENTIAL RECOVERIES NOT BEING SOUGHT BY MARYLAND CONTRACTOR (148 words) SOCIAL SECURITY: ANALYSIS OF A PROPOSAL TO PRIVATIZE TRUST FUND RESERVES (154 words) SOCIAL SECURITY: PRODUCTION INITIATIVES IN OHA'S REGION V COMPLY WITH LAW AND GUIDELINES (226 words) TAX SYSTEM MODERNIZATION: STATUS OF IRS' INPUT PROCESSING INITIATIVE (122 words) ADP BUDGET: POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE'S BUDGET REQUEST (110 words) COMMAND AND CONTROL: DEFENSE'S USE OF ENGINEERING CONTRACTORS FOR ACQUIRING AUTOMATED SYSTEMS (137 words) MAINFRAME PROCUREMENTS: STATISTICS SHOWING HOW AND WHAT THE GOVERNMENT IS ACQUIRING (222 words) INTERNATIONAL BANKING: IMPLEMENTATION OF RISK-BASED CAPITAL ADEQUACY STANDARDS (156 words) FOREIGN ASSISTANCE: RESETTLEMENT OF PANAMA'S DISPLACED EL CHORILLO RESIDENTS (116 words) U.S. FOOD EXPORTS: FIVE COUNTRIES' STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR TESTING PESTICIDE RESIDUES (175 words) CAMBODIA: MULTILATERAL RELIEF EFFORTS IN BORDER CAMPS (107 words) U.S. EMBASSY, MOSCOW ALTERNATIVES FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND THEIR COSTS (200 words) DRUG INTERDICTION: FUNDING CONTINUES TO INCREASE BUT PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS IS UNKNOWN (131 words) ACQUISITION REFORM: DEFENSE MANAGEMENT REPORT SAVINGS INITIATIVES (267 words) DEFENSE MANAGEMENT: EFFORTS TO STREAMLINE ACQUISITION MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE (186 words) ARMY ACQUISITION: AIR DEFENSE ANTITANK SYSTEM DID NOT MEET OPERATIONAL TEST OBJECTIVES (176 words) MILITARY EXPORTS: IMPLEMENTATION OF RECENT OFFSET LEGISLATION (143 words) WEAPONS PRODUCTION: IMPACTS OF PRODUCTION RATE CHANGES ON AIRCRAFT UNIT COSTS (228 words) TEST AND EVALUATION: THE DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST AND EVALUATION'S CONTROLS OVER CONTRACTORS (212 words) DOD PROCUREMENT: CHANGES TO MILITARY SPECIFICATIONS FOR TESTING INDUSTRIAL FASTENERS (115 words) BIOLOGICAL WARFARE: BETTER CONTROLS IN DOD'S RESEARCH COULD PREVENT UNNEEDED EXPENDITURES (133 words) MILITARY BASES: RELOCATING THE NAVAL AIR STATION AGANA'S OPERATIONS (208 words) MILITARY BASES: PROCESS USED BY SERVICES FOR JANUARY 1990 BASE CLOSURE AND REALIGNMENT PURPOSES (250 words) ANTISUBMARINE WARFARE: TACTICAL SURVEILLANCE SONOBUOY AND RELATED SOFTWARE NEED TO BE TESTED TOGETHER (190 words) OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR: BETTER JUSTIFICATION NEEDED FOR DOD SYSTEMS' EXPANSION (197 words) NAVY BUDGET: POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS IN AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENT BUDGET (128 words) NAVY BUDGET: POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS IN WEAPONS PROCUREMENT (138 words) NAVY BUDGET: STATUS OF FLYING HOUR AND STEAMING DAY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (222 words) DEFENSE INVENTORY: DOD'S HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (187 words) ENLISTED FORCE MANAGEMENT: PAST PRACTICES AND FUTURE CHALLENGES (143 words) BATTLESHIPS: ISSUES ARISING FROM THE EXPLOSION ABOARD THE U.S.S. IOWA (252 words) DEFENSE PROCUREMENT: NOT PROVIDING TECHNICAL DATA MAY LIMIT DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY COMPETITION (183 words) COST AND FINANCING OF OPERATION DESERT SHIELD (302 words) RANGELAND MANAGEMENT: BLM EFFORTS TO PREVENT UNAUTHORIZED LIVESTOCK GRAZING NEED STRENGTHENING (197 words) MINERAL REVENUES: FUNDING FOR THE IDAHO INITIATIVE PROJECT (75 words) OREGON DUNES RECREATION AREA: PATENTING OF MINING CLAIMS COMPLIES WITH LAW (207 words) PARKS AND RECREATION: RESOURCE LIMITATIONS AFFECT CONDITION OF FOREST SERVICE RECREATION SITES (254 words) REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT: FEDERAL SUPPORT TO THE STATES HAS DECLINED (193 words) LOW-INCOME HOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE: STATES CUSHIONED FUNDING CUTS BUT ALSO SCALED BACK PROGRAM BENEFITS (223 words) TAX ADMINISTRATION: EFFECTIVENESS OF IRS' RETURN PREPARER PENALTY PROGRAM IS QUESTIONABLE (251 words) INTERNATIONAL AVIATION: IMPLICATIONS OF RATIFYING MONTREAL AVIATION PROTOCOL NO. 3 (275 words) TRUCK SAFETY: IMPROVEMENTS NEEDED IN FHWA'S MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY PROGRAM (261 words) AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL: EFFORTS TO MODERNIZE OCEANIC SYSTEM DELAYED (163 words) CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991FOOD SAFETY AND QUALITY:  WHO DOES WHAT IN THE FEDERALGOVERNMENTOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-19A and GAO/RCED-91-19BPages:  32 and 119Today's federal food safety and quality regulatory system isfragmented and complex, consisting of as many as 35different laws and involving 12 federal agencies. The firstvolume of this report provides an overall perspective onfederal efforts to ensure food safety and quality. GAOdiscusses (1) the statutory responsibilities, programs,activities, staffing, and budget of the federal agenciesinvolved with food safety and quality; (2) the inter-agencyagreements used by the agencies to cooperate in meetingtheir statutory duties; (3) the ways in which funding andstaffing levels have changed during the 1980s relative tothe agencies' work loads; and (4) the issues that federalofficials believe will be critical for food safety andquality in the 1990s. The second volume contains a moredetailed description of the food safety and qualityactivities of the 12 agencies that were the focus of thefirst volume. These 12 agencies include the following: Foodand Drug Administration and Centers for Disease Control(HHS); Agricultural Marketing Service, Federal GrainInspection Service, Food Safety and Inspection Service,Agricultural Research Service, and Animal and Plant HealthInspection Service (USDA); the Environmental ProtectionAgency; the National Marine Fisheries Service (Department ofCommerce); Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms(Department of the Treasury); U.S. Customs Service; andFederal Trade Commission.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE:  STRATEGIC MARKETING NEEDEDTO LEAD AGRIBUSINESS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADEOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-22Pages:  46GAO found that U.S. Department of Agriculture agenciesrarely use strategic marketing--a range of practices thatidentify consumer needs and develop products and deliverysystems to satisfy those needs--to help U.S. agribusinessbetter compete in both export and domestic markets. AlthoughUSDA agencies are reacting positively to some of thechallenges of strategic marketing, GAO concludes thatoverall the Department is not prepared to guide agribusinessin a market-driven economy. Important marketing policies,practices, and skills are lacking within individualagencies, impairing USDA'S ability to fulfill a leadershiprole. For example, three of the four agencies GAO examineddo not coordinate their program planning or systematicallyexchange information.  These factors have contributed toUSDA's inability to develop a plan for marketing as acoordinated, Department-wide issue under the new management-by-objective system.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE:  FARM AGENCIES' FIELDSTRUCTURE NEEDS MAJOR OVERHAULOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-9Pages:  60The U.S. Department of Agriculture runs its farm programsand services through one of the federal government's largestand most decentralized field structures. This structure alsodates to the 1930s and reflects the more limitedtransportation and communication systems in use at thattime. Given changing patterns in American agriculture andmounting constraints on federal spending, GAO looked forways to improve the overall management of USDA's fieldstructure. GAO found that USDA can save millions of dollarswhile maintaining or improving operational effectiveness by(1) more aggressively pursuing incremental improvementsthrough field office collocations and consolidations and (2)restructuring to provide a more flexible, integrated fieldorganization GAO notes the likelihood of many sources ofopposition to the restructuring of USDA field operations. Asa result, USDA Will need to engage its grass roots staff,top management, farm clients, and Congress in updating itscurrent structure to one that can effectively deliverservices into the next century.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991THE BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 1991:  SCORING OF GSA LEASE-PURCHASESOrder No.:  GAO/AFMD-91-44Pages:  7This report discusses differences in how the Office ofManagement and Budget and the Congressional Budget Officedid budgetary scoring for lease-purchase contracts at theGeneral Services Administration. OMB'S treatment producedhigher outlay estimates for fiscal year 1991 than did CBO'S.GAO believes that the key to resolving the issue would befor the administration and Congress to reconsider the matterin light of a common set of assumptions about the contracts'financing and the required scoring rule. GAO understandsthat the administration will be initiating discussions withCongress to develop a mutually acceptableway of resolving the issue.  GAO believes that this is anappropriate course of action.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991BUDGET ISSUES:  EFFECTS OF THE FISCAL YEAR 1990 SEQUESTEROrder No.:  GAO/AFMD-91-21Pages:  20This report examines the effects of the fiscal year 1990sequester on five federal agencies  the Department of Healthand Human Services, IRS, the Department of Education, theEnvironmental Protection Agency, and the Department ofHousing and Urban Development. GAO found that the 1990sequester had only a minimal effect on the five agencies.The five agencies actually lost less than 1.4 percent oftheir final budget authority because (1) growth in agencyappropriations offset sequester reductions and (2)appropriations enacted after the sequestration werepartially exempt from that process. As a result, agenciesabsorbed the sequester reductions by postponing programexpansions and improvements rather than by cutting coreservices. Final 1990 figures peg the deficit at $220.4billion, or $120.4 billion over the target level. Had OMBpredicted the need for a $120 billion sequester in itsearlier sequestration reports, GAO believes that meaningfulnonsequester deficit reduction might have been achieved inthe face of massive, across-the-board cuts. GAO continues tobelieve that sequestration alone will not eliminate thedeficit. Instead, a combination of good faith negotiations,political leadership, and compromise on difficult policymatters is needed.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:  OVERSIGHT OF BLOCK GRANT MONITORINGNEEDS IMPROVEMENTOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-23Pages:  14Local governments rely on the Community Development BlockGrant program to help meet locally defined communitydevelopment needs, including the creation of decent housingand the expansion of economic opportunities. However, theOffice of Inspector General found that many problems plaguedthe administration of grantees' programs. GAO reviewed threeDepartment of Housing and Urban Development field offices(Baltimore, Maryland; Columbus, Ohio; and Detroit, Michigan)to determine how they monitored entitlement grantees ofCommunity Development Block Grants. GAO found thatweaknesses in HUD'S guidance for monitoring entitlementgrantees may have contributed to inadequate supervisory andevidentiary control practices.  Without adequate supervisoryand evidentiary controls over its monitoring program, HUDcannot ensure that management problems are detected or t hatstaff do not duplicate previous work. In addition, withoutusing information found in Office of Inspector Generalreports when planning their monitoring, field offices maynot be using their limited resources most effectively.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991STAFFORD STUDENT LOANS:  MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN LOANSAWARDED TO INELIGIBLE BORROWERSOrder No.:  GAO/IMTEC-91-7Pages:  32Due to internal control weaknesses, GAO has cited theStafford Student Loan Program, the largest governmentprogram for student loans, as one of 14 areas at high-riskfor mismanagement, fraud, and abuse. A main problem at theStafford Student Loan Program is the lack of an informationsystem to protect the government's interests; in fiscal year1990, more than half the program's funds--$2.4 billion--wereused to repay defaulted loans. Today the Department isrunning a multi-million-dollar, commercial-type loanoperations with a data system containing incomplete,inaccurate, and unreliable information. Consequently, theDepartment has no way of knowing whether (1) student loandefaulters are trying to obtain new loans or (2) borrowershave exceeded legal loan limits. GAO found that loandefaulters may have obtained about million in new loans, andthat students have received million of dollar in loans overthe legal limits. While the total impact of such abuses isunclear because the data are so poor, GAO believes that asignificant problem exists--one that is costing the federalgovernment millions of dollars in interest subsidies andadditional defaulted loans. The Department of Educationplans to install a new data base in 1993. Until then GAObelieves that the Department needs to do much more to (1)improve the accuracy and completeness of the current database and (2) make this information available to guarantyagencies. GAO concludes that much is at stake. If the abusesgo unchecked, they will continue to corrode the financialaid system and ultimately deprive eligible students of themoney they need to finance their education.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:  IMPROVEMENTS NEEDED IN ENFORCING HEALTHINSURANCE CONTINUATION REQUIREMENTSOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-37Pages:  12GAO reviewed the Department of Labor's and the InternalRevenue Service's enforcement of the health insurancecontinuation requirements of the Consolidated Omnibus BudgetReconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA). This legislationrequires firms employing 20 or more employees and offering agroup health insurance plan to provide employees and theirfamilies the option of continued coverage in cases of jobloss, death, or divorce. This report discusses (1) Labor andIRS efforts to help private individuals who bring cases ofalleged noncompliance by employers to their attention, (2)procedures for investigating these allegations, and (3)enforcement history. Both IRS and Labor provide informationabout COBRA to those who inquire, and Labor will contactemployers to help employees obtain benefits. However, ifemployers refuse to provide benefits, IRS cannot and Laborgenerally does not try to force employers to providebenefits. Further, the extent of COBRA violations isunknown. IRS' method of dealing with potential COBRAbeneficiaries, in GAO'S view, discourages the reporting ofviolations. GAO believes that Labor and IRS should do moreto ensure that IRS is made aware of potential COBRAviolations. The knowledge that excise taxes may be assessedfor these violations could deter such violations. Also,people referred by IRS to Labor could get help quicker ifthey were given Labor's phone number along with its address.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT:  REVIEW OF AUDIT FINDINGSRELATED TO THE DOWNRIVER COMMUNITY CONFERENCE PROGRAMOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-90-105Pages:  22GAO initially looked at four expenditures made by theDownriver Community Conference--an organization thatprovides employment training to residents in the Detroitarea--under the Job Training Partnership Act  (1) $151,824for contractual services to create a data base to be used toidentify potential program participants, (2) $47,740 for asole source contract with a computer consultant, (3)$100,226 for the purchase of an air-conditioning system, and(4) a $4,725 payment to a terminated employee. While GAOconcluded that these expenditures represented an allowableuse of funds, concerns were raised that GAO had not fullydeveloped and considered the evidence of wrongdoing ormisuse of funds in connection with these expenditures.  In asupplement addressing these concerns, GAO notes that it didfind evidence that some local Downriver rules were violatedand that available evidence provides a basis to question thewisdom and prudence of some of Downriver's actions. However,GAO did not find sufficient evidence of fraud or otherimproprieties to warrant further inquiry or referral  to theDepartment of Justice.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD:  ACTION NEEDED TO IMPROVECASE-PROCESSING TIME AT HEADQUARTERSOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-29Pages:  72The National Labor Relations Board generally considers casesinvolving either allegations of unfair labor practices ordisagreements about elections on union representation. Inresponse to concerns about the length of time it has takento decide some cases appealed to the headquarters Board fromthe regional offices, GAO looked at the Board's system fordeciding cases. This report (1) describes how long the Boardhad taken to decide cases, particularly since 1984, anddetermines whether  there were any excessive delays; (2)identifies factors that contributed to such delays; and (3)determines if additional administrative or legislativeaction might be warranted.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS:  STRIKES AND THE USE OF STRIKEREPLACEMENTS IN THE 1970S AND 1980SOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-2Pages:  24, Jan. 18 (24 pages).The 1980s experienced about half as many strikes as did the1970s.  Among strikes reported to the Federal Mediation andConciliation Service in 1985 and 1989, GAO estimates thatemployers announced an intention of hiring permanentreplacements about one-third of the time and actually hiredthem in 17 percent of the strikes. GAO found  littledifference in the use of permanent strike replacements byemployers  in larger versus small strikes. Many employersand union  representatives involved in strikes in 1985 and1989 believe that permanent strike replacements were morecommon in the late 1980s than in the late 1970s. However,GAO estimates that--had it surveyed all employers and unionrepresentatives--about one-third of employers and 13 percentof union representatives would have said that they had nobasis for providing an opinion on trends in the hiring ofpermanent replacements.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991OIL RESERVE:  SOME CONCERNS REMAIN ABOUT SPR DRAWDOWN ANDDISTRIBUTIONOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-16Pages:  40The crisis in the Persian Gulf has renewed interest in theability of the Department of Energy's Strategic PetroleumReserve to counter disruptions in the supply of oil to theUnited States. To provide this protection, DOE must be ableto offset the supplies lost by quickly drawing down reserveoil from its storage sites and distributing it topurchasers.  This report (1) reviews DOE'S current andplanned capability for removing oil from reserve sites andgetting it to users via oil distribution networks,(2)examines the Strategic Petroleum Reserve's compliance withpipeline safety requirements, and (3) discusses DOE'Sefforts to correct problems that GAO previously reported.GAO concludes that a major distribution could be hamperedbecause buyers of Strategic Petroleum Reserve oil arerequired to use U.S.-flag tankers to ship the oil betweenU.S. ports.  DOE and industry officials doubt whether enoughU.S.-flag vessels are available to do the job, and questionsremain about the efficiency of procedures to authorize theuse of foreign vessels.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991ENERGY MANAGEMENT:  DOE NEEDS TO BETTER IMPLEMENT CONFLICT-OF-INTEREST CONTROLSOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-15Pages:  34DOE has 22 federally funded research and development centersthat are managed and run by private corporations anduniversities under contracts with DOE. In fiscal year 1989,DOE paid these contractors almost $8 billion thesecontractors, in turn, awarded about $3.2 billion tosubcontractors. In response to concerns about subcontractorconflicts of interest, GAO looked into the situation andfound that while DOE'S written policies and proceduresprovide guidance on how to spot and avoid conflicts ofinterest among subcontractors, DOE field offices have notbeen implementing these internal management controls.Contrary to DOE regulations the DOE Albuquerque field officeabdicated responsibility and allowed the research centers tomake conflict-of-interest determinations themselves.Although GAO was unable to determine whether DOE'S policiesand procedures were, in practice, effective, GAO noted twomanagement control problems. First, Albuquerque has reliedextensively on subcontractor self-certification in makingconflict-of-interest decisions even though certificationsmay not always be accurate. Second, Albuquerque'sdocumentation of conflict-of-interest decisions is limited.GAO also found that neither Albuquerque nor DOE headquartersexercised effective oversight to ensure that conflicts ofinterest were avoided in the subcontracts awarded by the LosAlamos and Sandia National Laboratories.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991OBLIGATIONS LIMITATION:  RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION'SCOMPLIANCE AS OF JUNE 30,1990Order No.:  GAO/AFMD-91-41Pages:  20This quarterly report examines the Resolution TrustCorporation's compliance with the maximum obligation limitset forth in the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery,and Enforcement Act of 1989. The act provides a formula forcalculating the limit and sets aside $50 billion infinancing to resolve troubled savings and loans placed intoconservatorship or receivership. On the basis of its reviewof RTC'S September 28,1990, report and schedule and itsfinancial records, GAO concludes that none of the categoriesfor the formula were omitted from RTC'S calculation and thatthere is little risk that RTC exceeded the limitation.However, RTC is facing a funding crisis. Without enoughmoney to absorb the losses and to buy the assets of failedinstitutions, RTC will have to slowdown its resolutionefforts. As a result, failing institutions will continue toincur operating losses, thereby increasing resolution costs.GAO believes that only quick action to identify a long-termsolution to RTC's funding needs will ensure theCorporation's continued ability to respond to the thriftcrisis. GAO also followed up on recommendations it made toRTC in its first quarter report and found that RTC is, inall instances, making progress on the recommendations,although none have been fully implemented yet.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991RESOLUTION TRUST CORPORATION:  UNNECESSARY LOAN SERVICINGCOSTS DUE TO INADEQUATE CONTRACT OVERSIGHTOrder No.:  GAO/GGD-91-19Pages:  8GAO found that from January to July 1990, the ResolutionTrust Corporation might have avoided as much as $1 millionin loan processing costs resulting from continued operationsat a large loan processing center in Orlando, Florida. Theseunnecessary costs arose from inadequate RTC oversight,insufficient RTC and North Carolina National Bank of Floridainitiatives to plan for a large reduction in the number ofloans processed at the center, insufficient cost informationon center operations, and RTC's failure to take early actionto market the center.  Given the thousands of assets inRTC's current real estate inventory, GAO believes that theFlorida situation highlights the urgent need for timely andadequate contractor monitoring efforts.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991FINANCIAL AUDIT:  FINANCIAL REPORTING AND INTERNAL CONTROLSAT THE AIR FORCE SYSTEMS COMMANDOrder No.:  GAO/AFMD-91-22Pages:  59This report presents the results of GAO'S review of the AirForce Systems Command's financial management operations.Systems Command managers are responsible for billions ofdollars in appropriations and accountable assets. However,GAO found that the Command's internal controls and financialreporting are not providing adequate and reliable financialinformation for effective management and reporting of theseresources. GAO discusses these problems and recommendscorrective actions.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991FINANCIAL AUDIT:  AIR FORCE'S BASE-LEVEL FINANCIAL SYSTEMSDO NOT PROVIDE RELIABLE INFORMATIONOrder No.:  GAO/AFMD-91-26Pages:  24This report presents of the results of GAO's review of theAir Force's base-level financial management operations forfiscal years 1988 and 1989. Base-level managers areresponsible for million of dollars in appropriations andaccountable assets. However, accounting errors andinaccurate financial reports pervaded the base-levelaccounting systems at the 17 bases where GAO conducted itstests. For fiscal years 1988 and 1989 combined, GAOidentified over $2.7 billion in adjustments needed tocorrect errors in year-end, base-level trial balances. Thisinaccurate information had already found its way intofinancial reports delivered to the Department of Defense,the Office of Management and Budget, the Department of theTreasury, and Congress. Real property account balances weremisstated because transactions were recorded in aninaccurate and timely manner. Unauthorized and excessiveissues of inventory and equipment diminished accountabilityfor those items, and the failure to match personnel andinventory payroll records created an opportunity forunauthorized payroll transactions.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT:  INS LACKS ACCOUNTABILITY AND CONTROLSOVER ITS RESOURCESOrder No.:  GA0/AFMD-91-20Pages:  34Over 40 years ago, Congress required each federal agency toestablish and maintain adequate systems of accounting andinternal control. However, GAO found that because of anoutmoded accounting system, poor internal controls, and lackof management emphasis on financial management--weaknessesthat have gone uncorrected for years--the Immigration andNaturalization Service continues to lack fiscalaccountability over its resources. INS could lose millionsof dollars in revenue because accurate and reliablefinancial information is unavailable to effectively bill,collect, or litigate amounts owed the government. Further,INS' primary accounting system contains incomplete andinaccurate financial data. GAO concludes that solving INS'financial management problems will take strong managementcommitment and leadership that must be sustained acrosssucceeding administrations.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991INSPECTORS GENERAL:  WORK PERFORMED BY THE DEPARTMENT OFLABOR INSPECTOR GENERAL IN 1988 AND 1989Order No.:  GAO/AFMD-91-24Pages:  15The Office of Inspector General audits and investigatesprogram agencies at the Department of Labor. It alsoinvestigates allegations of racketeering. During fiscalyears 1988 and 1989, both the Office of Audit and the Officeof Investigations spent a majority of their time andresources investigating projects at the Employment andTraining Administration and at the Employment StandardsAdministration. Most of the investigations done by theOffice of Investigations centered on alleged criminalactivity in Labor programs. The Office of Labor Racketeeringclassified more than half of the racketeering cases openduring fiscal years 1988 and 1989 as involving employeebenefit plans. GAO was told that all of the Office's casesinvestigated during the past two years involved allegedracketeering or related criminal activity. The Officepursued all of its cases under criminal statutes except fortwo cases pursued under the civil provisions of theRacketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organization Act.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991IMMIGRATION MANAGEMENT:  STRONG LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENTREFORMS NEEDED TO ADDRESS SERIOUS PROBLEMSOrder No.:  GAO/GGD-91-28Pages:  111The Immigration and Naturalization Service is faced withbalancing the demanding roles of enforcement and service. Onthe one hand, INS enforces laws meant to prevent the illegalentry of millions of poverty stricken, often repressedpeople naturally drawn to a better life in the UnitedStates. On the other hand, INS facilitates legal immigrationby processing millions of requests relating to citizenshipand asylum and by inspecting hundreds of millions of peopleat ports of entry. This report, one in a series of generalmanagement reviews of major federal departments andagencies, concludes that over the past decade weakmanagement systems and inconsistent leadership at INS haveallowed serious problems to go unresolved. As a result, theagency has degenerated into a group of segmented autonomousprograms, each trying to handle its own set of problems withlittle attention to their interrelatedness. Compounding thislack of overall direction is a chaotic budget developmentprocess that has produced budgets that are simplycompilations of program submissions with littleaccountability for funds or attention to agencywidepriorities. The current INS organizational structure, markedby complicated lines of authority and communication, adds toand perpetuates the agency's segmented management. AlthoughlNS' problems did not happen overnight, the agency needs totake immediate action to improve both enforcement andservice operations. In the long run, the Department ofJustice and INS must articulate a vision of how INS is toeffectively implement the nation's immigration policy.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991POSTAL SERVICE:  CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE--EXPRESS ANDPRIORITY MAIL TRANSPORTATIONOrder No.:  GAO/GGD-91-13Pages:  4GAO reviewed the Postal Service's award of an express andpriority mail transportation contract to Air Train, Inc.(later renamed Emery Worldwide Airline, Inc.) and thecontractor's performance under that contract.  The contractsays that the minimum acceptable performance for meetingexpress and priority mail delivery times at destinationcities is 98 percent of the time. GAO found that after theinitial start-up week, the on-time performance requirementwas met for 54 of 57 weeks. In addition to the on-timerequirement, the contractor is expected to deliver allexpress and priority mail to destination cities withoutleaving any mail behind, either at the originating city orat the hub (where the mail is sorted). GAO found that AirTrain failed to meet these standards 10 out of 57 weeks.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA:  INFORMATION ON COURT ORDERED TENANTEVICTIONSOrder No.:  GAO/GGD-91-29Pages:  20This report provides information on court ordered tenantevictions in the District of Columbia, almost 3,000 of whichtook place in fiscal year 1990. GAO discusses (1) the timethat elapsed between the landlord's filing of an evictionrequest, the court issuance of the eviction order, and theactual eviction by U.S. deputy marshals for evictionscarried out in fiscal year 1990; (2) reasons for the elapsedtimes; and (3) whether using contractors to carry out theevictions, instead of deputy marshals, would be legal andappropriate.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991REGULATORY FLEXIBILITY ACT:  INHERENT WEAKNESSES MAY LIMITITS USEFULNESS FOR SMALL GOVERNMENTSOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-16Pages:  23Have federal agencies been sufficiently analyzing the effectof their proposed regulations on small governments (townswith less than 50,000 inhabitants)?  Further, has the goalof the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980--to reduceregulatory burdens on small businesses, small governments,and nonprofit organizations--been met for small governments?GAO found that federal agencies are not doing as manyanalyses for small governments as they might, largelybecause of weaknesses in the act. First, the Small BusinessAdministration may be unable to monitor compliance with theact because it lacks expertise in small government issues.Second, that act has no provisions for ensuring federalagency compliance. Third, neither the act nor SBA hasprovided criteria or definitions for determining whetherfederal rule-making agencies are conducting sufficientanalyses of regulations affecting small governments and howthese analyses should be done. GAO is concerned thatproposed legislation--S. 1758, the Small GovernmentsRegulatory Partnership Act--would not address theseweaknesses. GAO believes that SBA should develop theexpertise needed to better implement provisions relating tosmall governments.  GAO also believes that Congress may wishto consider amending the Regulatory Flexibility Act torequire SBA, in consultation with OMB, to develop criteriaon whether and how federal agencies should conduct analysesfor small governments.  It should also consider expandingSBA'S existing authority to review and comment on proposedagency regulations affecting small governments. Thisexpansion should direct SBA to work with OMB to ensureagency compliance with the provisions of the act.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MAJOR ISSUES FACING THE 102ND CONGRESSOrder No.:  GAO/T-OCG-91-1Pages:  19GAO'S 1988 transition series sought to alert the President-elect and the new Congress to the many challenges facing thenation. This testimony updates the status of the issues GAOcited in 1988.  The Comptroller General first reviews theoverall state of the economy and the budget, cautioning thata protracted war in the Middle East, the recession at home,and further increases in the cost of deposit insurance couldtrigger another explosive rise in the deficit over the nextseveral years; the general fund deficit--excluding thesurpluses in the Social Security and other trust funds--already appears likely to top $400 billion in 1991.  He thendiscusses critical policy problems in the following programareas:  defense, the financial sector, health,transportation, agriculture, energy, the environment,financial management, and the public service. In some casesGAO reports significant progress, but that is the exception.Many of the problems, including some of the most importantones like the thrift crisis, have become more severe. Giventhe rapid developments in international affairs--asevidenced by changes in the Warsaw Pact countries and by theeconomic and political integration of Western Europe--theComptroller General believes that it is time to revisit thequestion, What is required of our government?  If the UnitedStates is to succeed in this new world order, theComptroller General believes that several prerequisites mustbe satisfied.  First, we must have a government that works,one that operates efficiently and effectively, both in itsinternal functions and in its delivery of services to theAmerican people.  To reach that goal, investment ingovernment, its people, its facilities, and its technologyis needed.  Second, we must have a government whosefinancial performance relates properly to the national andworld economy.  For that to be achieved, the United Statesmust move toward a long term fiscal policy that recognizesthe need for a much higher level of national savings.Third, we must have a financial system in whose safety andsoundness the American people can have complete confidence,so that our market economy can effectively allocate capitalto the most productive uses.  To accomplish that, we mustresolve the thrift crisis, restore the soundness of thebanking industry, and ensure an efficient and effectivelyregulated structure of capital markets.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MEDICAID:  LEGISLATION NEEDED TO IMPROVE COLLECTIONS FROMPRIVATE INSURERSOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-25Pages:  32As a public assistance program, Medicaid was expected to payfor health care only after Medicaid recipients had used alltheir other health care resources.  GAO found that two majorproblems hinder states from collecting from private insurersfor recipients' covered health care costs.  First, statescannot prohibit some out-of-state insurers from trying toavoid paying state Medicaid agencies for such costs.  Statesnow lack jurisdiction over insurers that operate onlyincidentally in the state.  Second, states' limitedauthority over plans covered under the Employee RetirementIncome Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) does not allow them toprohibit these plans from trying to avoid payments forrecipients' covered costs.  Further, many states have notexercised the authority they do have to mandate that noERISA plan include any contract provision that might limitor exclude payments for Medicaid recipients' health carecosts.  While  state officials found it hard to pinpointlosses resulting from their payment systems, examples ofstate Medicaid losses obtained by GAO suggest that theproblem may be substantial--perhaps millions of dollars inlosses each year--and growing.  To minimize future losses,federal legislation is needed to clarify Medicaid's role asa payer of last resort and to enhance the ability of statesto collect from out-of-state insurers and ERISA plans.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MEDICAL MALPRACTICE:  FEW CLAIMS RESOLVED THROUGH MICHIGAN'SVOLUNTARY ARBITRATION PROGRAMOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-38Pages:  31The current ways of resolving medical malpractice claims inthis country are neither efficient nor equitable.  Claimstake a long time to be resolved, awards and settlements areunpredictable, and legal costs are steep.  Concern about theexisting system has inspired alternative proposals forclaims resolution, including fault-based and no-fault basedapproaches.  This report looks at one of the fault-basedalternatives-the Michigan Medical Malpractice ArbitrationProgram. GAO assessed (1) the extent of hospital, healthcare provider, and patient participation under the Michiganplan; (2) the arbitration alternative's effect on medicalmalpractice claims resolution; and (3) whether arbitrationcontributed to reducing medical malpractice insurance costs.GAO'S conclusions about the program are limited becauseprogram participation has been low. GAO does not foreseesignificant increases in program participation because ofthe voluntary nature of the program and because of the lackof incentives for patient participation.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MEDICARE:  MILLIONS IN POTENTIAL RECOVERIES NOT BEING SOUGHTBY MARYLAND CONTRACTOROrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-32Pages:  9As part of a broader GAO effort to evaluate the adequacy ofthe Medicare contractor budget for claims-processing andprogram safeguard activities, GAO discovered a situationthat it believes warrants congressional attention. GAO foundthat Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Maryland--a Medicareclaims-processing contractor--has paid at least $8.8 millionin claims for which it has identified other health insurersthat may have primary payment responsibility under theMedicare secondary payer provisions.  In this case, thecontractor--through its investigative efforts--hasidentified other parties that may owe Medicare sizable sums.However, the contractor lacks the resources to recover theseamounts. GAO concludes that any additional funding of thecontractor's activities to recover these payments may yieldconsiderably more than each dollar so expended.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991SOCIAL SECURITY:  ANALYSIS OF A PROPOSAL TO PRIVATIZE TRUSTFUND RESERVESOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-22Pages:  40This report analyzes a proposal by a Member of Congress tocreate a new system of individual Social Security accounts.Under this proposal, the accumulating reserves of the SocialSecurity Trust Fund would be returned to workers andinvested in individual accounts in the private sector, wherethey would be held until the workers' retirement.  Ineffect, the proposal would partially and temporarilyprivatize Social Security.  GAO found that the proposalcould be integrated with the existing progressive benefitstructure and, given favorable financial market conditions,could improve retirement incomes.  If implemented, theIndividual Social Security Account may change the mix ofpublic and private saving but not necessarily the magnitudeof national saving.  The proposal also raises manyadministrative difficulties and policy issues that need tobe addressed before Individual Social Security Accountscould be considered a fully working alternative to the useof trust fund reserves.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991SOCIAL SECURITY:  PRODUCTION INITIATIVES IN OHA'S REGION VCOMPLY WITH LAW AND GUIDELINESOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-36BRPages:  24Persons denied Medicare and Social Security benefits mayappeal such decisions to Administrative Law Judges in 132hearing offices around the country. The Social SecurityAdministration's Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) isresponsible for managing these judges.  GAO reviewedproductivity initiatives underway in OHA'S Chicago RegionalOffice and found that they complied with AdministrativeProcedure Act and OHA guidelines.  GAO also found that byincluding dispositions of regional chiefs and retired judgesin hearing office statistics, average production figures forthe Chicago region and some hearing offices were slightlyoverstated.  However, in terms of distribution of monetaryawards, the only apparent gain from the overstatement wasthat one hearing office received an additional $3,529 forawards and bonuses to support staff for which it would nothave been otherwise eligible. As OHA studies and redesignsits system of productivity measures for its AdministrativeLaw Judges, it should ensure that whatever measurementsystem it designs fairly recognizes the work done byindividuals and by offices.  In the interim, GAO believesthat when calculating the productivity of its hearingoffices, OHA should count regional chiefs and any retiredjudges as resources for those hearing offices that receivedcredit for their dispositions.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991TAX SYSTEM MODERNIZATION:  STATUS OF IRS' INPUT PROCESSINGINITIATIVEOrder No.:  GAO/IMTEC-91-9Pages:  34Through its input processing initiative, IRS is attemptingto drastically reduce manual handling of paper income taxreturns, tax payments, and other tax information. Theinitiative--part of IRS' overall effort to modernize its taxprocessing system--is intended to speed the way taxinformation is fed into computers for processing.  Thisreport describes the status of the three major componentsdesigned to automate the labor-intensive aspects of enteringtax return and other information into IRS computers. GAOidentifies each component's anticipated costs, expectedbenefits, and progress toward implementation, as well asissues requiring further attention by IRS.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991ADP BUDGET:  POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS TO THE DEPARTMENT OFDEFENSE'S BUDGET REQUESTOrder No.:  GAO/IMTEC-91-17BRPages:  26To assist Congress in its continuing oversightresponsibilities, GAO reviewed the Department of Defense'sfiscal year 1991 budget request for information technologyresources.  GAO identified potential reductions of $460.1million--$72 million from the Army, $74.1 million from theAir Force, $14 million from the Defense Logistics Agency,and another $300 million from DOD'S operation andmaintenance request.  These potential reductions are basedon GAO'S assessment of budget justifications, scheduleslippages, and program changes. This report also providesinformation on DOD'S Corporate Information Managementinitiative.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991COMMAND AND CONTROL:  DEFENSE'S USE OF ENGINEERINGCONTRACTORS FOR ACQUIRING AUTOMATED SYSTEMSOrder No.:  GAO/IMTEC-91-19Pages:  17The Department of Defense relies on both in-house andoutside technical expertise to design and develop highlycomplex command, control, communications, and intelligencesystems.  This report examines the extent to which DOD usesengineering support contracts for advice and direction inacquiring automated data processing systems.  DOD data showthat from fiscal years 1985 through 1989 show that DOD spentabout $3.4 billion for engineering and technical support ofsystem acquisitions.  Air Force was by far the largest user,accounting for over $2 billion of the $3.4 billion spent.DOD'S annual expenditures went from $494.5 million in fiscalyear 1985 to $891.7 million in fiscal year 1989, an 80-percent increase.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MAINFRAME PROCUREMENTS:  STATISTICS SHOWING HOW AND WHAT THEGOVERNMENT IS ACQUIRINGOrder No.:  GAO/IMTEC-91-13Pages:  32GAO has previously issued a series of 10 reports oncompatible computer procurements.  Those reports looked atthose agencies that obligated $50 million or more formainframe computers and mainframe peripheral acquisitions.This capping report provides consolidated statistics onmainframe computer and mainframe peripheral procurements by35 federal agencies. In particular, GAO looked at the extentto which the 35 agencies required compatibility with IBM orother equipment manufacturer. GAO found that during the 3-1/2 fiscal years ending in March 1989, the agenciesobligated $1.9 billion for mainframe and mainframeperipheral procurements.  Eighty-two percent ($1,587.8million) of all the procurements required compatibility withexisting systems. IBM-compatible procurements comprised 64percent of the compatibility-limited procurements and 52percent of all procurements. With a 47 percent share of thetotal federal market, IBM was the largest vendor; Unisys,with a 20-percent share, was the next largest. Almost 60percent of the total value of all procurements involved onlyone vendor.  When GAO used the number of procurements--rather than dollars--for comparison, it found that theagencies had 3,225 procurements for mainframe and mainframeperipherals and over 90 percent required some kind ofcompatibility. The agencies required IBM compatibility 60percent of the time. When IBM compatibility was required,IBM equipment was supplied 68 percent of the time.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991INTERNATIONAL BANKING:  IMPLEMENTATION OF RISK-BASED CAPITALADEQUACY STANDARDSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-80Pages:  41Concerned that banks may not be holding enough capital toensure their safety and soundness, Congress passedlegislation in 1983 encouraging other countries to maintainor improve banks' capital bases.  In 1988 the BasleCommittee on Banking supervision, which includedrepresentatives from 12 nations, adopted a framework tomeasure capital adequacy and to establish minimum capitalstandards for banks operating internationally.  Included inthe framework are minimum capital adequacy standards thatare to be fully achieved by the end of 1992.  This reportlooks at (1) steps regulators and financial institutions aretaking to implement the framework, (2) progress made towardmeeting the framework's objectives, and (3) issues thatremain unresolved in implementing the framework.  GAOreviews implementation in the United States, France,Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Japan.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991FOREIGN ASSISTANCE:  RESETTLEMENT OF PANAMA'S DISPLACED ELCHORILLO RESIDENTSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-63BRPages:  20The Panama Defense Force headquarters, located in the ElChorillo District in Panama City, was a major target duringthe December 1989 U.S. invasion of Panama.  During thefighting, about 2,200 households in the El Chorillo districtwere uprooted.  This briefing report (1) assesses the livingconditions at the Albrook facility, the largest of the sevendisplaced persons camps; (2) determines the status of theprogram to find permanent replacement housing for thedisplaced El Chorillo residents; and (3) identifies factorsthat may impede further progress in providing permanenthomes.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991U.S. FOOD EXPORTS:  FIVE COUNTRIES' STANDARDS AND PROCEDURESFOR TESTING PESTICIDE RESIDUESOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-90Pages:  26The 1989 controversy over Alar, a substance applied toapples, intensified public fears about the use of pesticidesand chemicals on produce.  Concern about food residues hasalso spread overseas and has led to losses in U.S.agricultural exports.  This report discusses (1) U.S.government efforts to prevent or resolve trade disputesarising over pesticide use; (2) specific procedures used byforeign governments in selected Pacific Rim countries andAustralia to set tolerances and test for pesticides on U.S.produce exports; and (3) the technical capabilities of theseforeign governments to conduct pesticide testing.  Toevaluate testing and technical capabilities, GAO visitedAustralia, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand. GAOfound that the five countries lack information about whichpesticides and other chemicals are being used on U.S.produce. Further, while the five countries have thenecessary testing capabilities, they use a variety ofstandards in testing for pesticidesThe above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991CAMBODIA:  MULTILATERAL RELIEF EFFORTS IN BORDER CAMPSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-99FSPages:  9Waves of Cambodians first fled the Khmer Rouge regime andlater the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia. As a result, anestimated 350,000 refugees and displaced persons now live inThai border camps. This fact sheet discusses (1) the eventsleading up to the current situation in the camps, (2) theamount of money being spent to support the camps, (3) howthe money is being put to use, and (4) the control andaccountability systems in place to manage the funds.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991U.S. EMBASSY, MOSCOW  ALTERNATIVES FOR RECONSTRUCTION ANDTHEIR COSTSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-43FSPages:  3Using Soviet construction workers, the United States beganbuilding a new embassy in Moscow in 1979. By the mid-1980s,it was discovered that the building was riddled with Sovieteavesdropping devices, and construction was halted. Thisunclassified version of a classified report looks at theState Department's proposal to demolish the unfinishedembassy and to rebuild atop the old foundation. GAOdiscusses (1) the basis for the current cost estimate of$270 million for demolition and reconstruction and (2) thealternatives considered by the State Department for a newembassy in Moscow and their costs. GAO is concerned that theState Department's estimates for demolition and rebuildingmay be too low. Regardless of which option is eventuallyfunded, GAO notes that construction agreements with theSoviets are still pending for the new office building andfor other land and buildings in adjacent sites. Furtherdelays in concluding these agreements could affectconstruction costs and schedules.  In addition, State hasnot prepared cost estimates on the additional property andfacility needs for the Moscow complex.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991DRUG INTERDICTION:  FUNDING CONTINUES TO INCREASE BUTPROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS IS UNKNOWNOrder No.:  GAO/GGD-91-10Pages:  23Drug interdiction programs established by the Coast Guard,Customs Service, and Border Patrol, with support provided bythe Department of Defense, are designed to stop smugglersand/or their shipments by focusing on the mode oftransportation. These efforts are thus referred to as land,marine, air, and commercial cargo interdiction programs. GAOexamines (1) the available measures of drug interdictionprogram performance and whether performance can be comparedbetween different programs, (2) funding for the interdictionprograms, (3) quantities of drugs seized through theinterdiction programs, and (4) the relationship between drugseizures and the use of advance information (priorintelligence) on the drug shipments.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991ACQUISITION REFORM:  DEFENSE MANAGEMENT REPORT SAVINGSINITIATIVESOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-11Pages:  18The 1986 Packard Commission made many recommendations forimproving operations at the Department of Defense. Inresponse, DOD developed the Defense Management Report, whichoutlines steps to improve DOD management. GAO found that DODhas implemented several Defense Management Report savingsinitiatives and has begun to realize some savings, but thelarger, more complex initiatives are still in the planningstages. To fully implement the initiatives and achieve DOD'Ssavings goal, GAO believes that continued management supportis necessary. Although the initiatives were estimated tosave about $39 billion over fiscal years 1991-95, theseestimates did not always rely on cost analyses supported byhistorical facts or empirical cost data. GAO'S review of$24.5 billion in estimated savings showed that about 82percent of these savings were based primarily on managementjudgment, suggesting that the reliability of the estimatesmay vary.  DOD officials said that current budgetnegotiations and international security developments--including Operation Desert Shield--will not delay theimplementation of the efficiencies to generate thesesavings.  As of June 1990, none of the Packard Commission'srecommendations to streamline and reduce the acquisitionwork force had been made; in fact, the number of acquisitionpersonnel increased slightly. DOD estimates that over fiscalyears 1991-95, Defense Management Report initiatives willeliminate almost 2,400 civilian and almost 2,000 militarypositions from the acquisition work force. The fiscal year1991 National Defense Authorization Act, however, requiresmuch deeper cuts in acquisition and headquarters personnel.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991DEFENSE MANAGEMENT:  EFFORTS TO STREAMLINE ACQUISITIONMANAGEMENT STRUCTUREOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-15Pages:  16GAO reviewed the military services' efforts to streamlinetheir acquisition management structure in accordance withDOD'S 1989 Defense Management Report, which was issued inresponse to the Packard Commission's 1986 recommendations.The Packard Commission concluded that DOD acquisitionmanagement had become so encumbered and unproductive thatweapons systems frequently cost more than planned and tooktoo long to develop and deliver. GAO found that--asprescribed in the Defense Management Report--each militaryservice has revised (1) its three-tier structure and (2) theroles of its materiel and systems command. GAO believes thatthese revisions, if fully implemented as intended will moreclearly separate the streamlined acquisition structure fromthe service's existing structure by (1) appointing ServiceAcquisition Executives and Program Executive Officers whoare devoted full-time to acquisition matters, (2) givingthree-tier officials more control over acquisition matters,and (3) removing unnecessary review layers from theacquisition process. Until DOD issues guidance onimplementing the Defense Management Report changes and theservices update their policies and procedures, GAO cannotdetermine whether or not DOD'S management accountabilitygoal will be fully achieved.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991ARMY ACQUISITION:  AIR DEFENSE ANTITANK SYSTEM DID NOT MEETOPERATIONAL TEST OBJECTIVESOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-51Pages:  19The Army selected its current line-of-sight forward heavyair defense system--known as the "Air Defense AntitankSystem"--in November 1987 to provide needed air defense tothe maneuver force. However, GAO found that operationaltesting did not demonstrate that the system wasoperationally suitable. The system fell far short of itsavailability requirements, in large part because many systemcomponents were unreliable, and many effectivenessrequirements were not met. While the Army acknowledges thesystem's problems, it believes that the system hasdemonstrated sufficient operational effectiveness to warrantcontinuation of the program. In August 1990, the Army optedto defer production of the system for two years in hopes ofresolving the system's problems. Because the system has notproven that it can meet established requirements, by law theArmy cannot obligate any procurement funding after fiscalyear 1989 until the system meets or exceeds the Army'soperational test performance criteria.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MILITARY EXPORTS:  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECENT OFFSETLEGISLATIONOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-13Pages:  8Offsets are a range of industrial and commercialcompensation practices required by foreign governments andfirms as conditions for the purchase of military exports.There is a growing perception that offset arrangements erodethe U.S. industrial base as technology and componentproduction is transferred to foreign sources to satisfyoffset commitments. This report looks at steps taken by theexecutive branch to (1) establish a comprehensive U.S.policy on offsets addressing technology transfer, U.S.financing of offset arrangements, and the effects of offsetson specific subsectors of the U.S. industrial base; (2)negotiate with foreign governments to limit the adverseeffects of offsets; and (3) require U.S. industry to notifyDOD of offset arrangements exceeding $50 million.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991WEAPONS PRODUCTION:  IMPACTS OF PRODUCTION RATE CHANGES ONAIRCRAFT UNIT COSTSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-12Pages:  12GAO reviewed the sensitivity of estimated procurement costsof selected military aircraft programs to reductions innumbers of aircraft purchased each year. Aircraftprocurement unit costs generally increase as theirprocurement rates decrease. However, some mature Air Forceand Navy procurement programs, including those for the KC-135R engine modification, F/A-18, F-16, AV-B, and F-15 wouldnot show as significant a unit cost increase as otheraircraft programs if their procurement rates were cut.According to contractors, the procurement unit cost of somemature aircraft is less sensitive to procurement ratereductions when at least one of the following factors ispresent  (1) contractors have a chance to manage overheadand other costs in anticipation of production rate changes,(2) foreign customers' requirements can offset reductions inthe U.S. procurement quantities, and (3) multiyearprocurement can be used to stabilize prices over a longerproduction period. Contractors also said that unit cost isespecially sensitive to sudden unanticipated changes inproduction rates. In GAO'S view, these circumstancesunderscore the importance of program stability. Whenprocurement rate decreases are necessary, contractors shouldbe given enough advance notice so they can eliminateunnecessary facility, overhead, and other costs before theproduction rate decreases begin.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991TEST AND EVALUATION:  THE DIRECTOR, OPERATIONAL TEST ANDEVALUATION'S CONTROLS OVER CONTRACTORSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-60Pages:  17The Director, Operational Test and Evaluation, usescontractors to assist with the operational test andevaluation of major weapon systems. Concerns have arisenthat some of these contractors may have a conflict ofinterest; that is, they could be assessing the operationaltesting of the very weapon systems that they had helped todevelop. This report (l) describes the nature and extent ofthe Director's management controls over contractor support,including measures to address possible conflicts of interestunder omnibus contracts; (2) provides GAO'S views on theDirector's use of Federally Funded Research and DevelopmentCenters, particularly the Institute for Defense Analyses;and (3) determines the Director's use of the Instituteduring fiscal years 1987 through 1989 and identifies anypossible conflicts of interest and the Institute's controlsto avoid such conflicts.  While the Director's policies andprocedures for managing contractors comply with existingguidelines, GAO is concerned that the Institute is not nowrequired to disclose to the Director possible conflicts ofinterest arising either from its work for no organizationsresponsible for system acquisitions and development andtesting or from its use of consultants.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991DOD PROCUREMENT:  CHANGES TO MILITARY SPECIFICATIONS FORTESTING INDUSTRIAL FASTENERSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-84Pages:  8Concluding that several military aircraft accidents werecaused by poor quality fasteners, the Air Force made thetesting specifications for class 3 threaded fasteners morestringent. GAO found that the Air Force followed applicableDOD guidance in making the change. To implement the morestringent testing specifications, the Air Force and the Navyprocured a specific gage--called an indicating gage--thatanalyzes deviations in fastener threads. When procuringthese gages, the Air Force and the Navy followed competitiveprocurement practices specified in DOD regulations and theCompetition in Contracting Act.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991BIOLOGICAL WARFARE:  BETTER CONTROLS IN DOD'S RESEARCH COULDPREVENT UNNEEDED EXPENDITURESOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-68Pages:  20The Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention of 1972, whichprohibits development, production, and stockpiling ofbiological and toxin weapons, counts over 100 nations amongits signatories. Yet the number of countries having orsuspected of having biological programs has more thandoubled since then. Starting in fiscal year 1984, Congressbegan appropriating funds--$370 million so far--for thedevelopment of countermeasures to defend against abiological weapons attack. However, GAO found that the Army,lacking adequate internal controls in its medical researchprogram, unnecessarily spent funds on research anddevelopment efforts that did not address validated threatsand may have duplicated the research efforts of otherfederal agencies.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MILITARY BASES:  RELOCATING THE NAVAL AIR STATION AGANA'SOPERATIONSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-83Pages:  58To accommodate a growing tourist industry and to promoteeconomic development, Guam wants to expand its internationalairport onto property occupied by the U.S. Naval Air StationAgana. The government of Guam has asked the United Statesmany times to transfer the station facilities and land toits control. This report looks at (1) the feasibility ofrelocating Agana operations to Andersen Air Force Base,Guam; (2) the estimated costs of such a relocation; (3) thepotential costs of making enough Navy land available at theAir Station to expand the international airport and relatedfacilities without relocating all of the Navy's operations.GAO concludes that while it is possible to consolidate Navyand Air Force operations at Andersen Air Force Base, itwould take over 100 years to recover the costs of relocatingthe Navy's operations. Although not endorsing any approach,GAO outlines four options that would allow the airport toexpand without requiring the Navy to relocate. Navy and Guamofficials, however, have expressed concerns about each ofthese options and have said that none would fully satisfytheir needs.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MILITARY BASES:  PROCESS USED BY SERVICES FOR JANUARY 1990BASE CLOSURE AND REALIGNMENT PURPOSESThe fiscal year 1991 National Defense Authorization Actestablished a new, independent commission to evaluate DOD'Sbase closure and realignment proposals, and DOD mustreevaluate its January 1990 candidate bases against criteriayet to be established. This report provides information onDOD'S processes before passage of the act. GAO discusses (1)how DOD had selected the domestic military bases announcedas candidates for disclosure and realignment by theSecretary of Defense in January 1990 and (2) whether themilitary services had developed realistic cost estimates forclosing and realigning the forces at those bases.  GAO foundthat DOD did not provide specific written guidance to theservices on how to choose bases for closure and realignment.Instead, the Secretary of Defense spoke to the services ingeneral terms, instructing them to consider anticipatedforce structure and budget reductions in selecting candidatebases. In selecting candidate bases, none of the servicesused a process as comprehensive and well documented as theone followed by the 1988 Commission on Base Realignment andclosure.  Further, the processes used by the services inselecting bases for closure varied.  The Navy did notdevelop cost and savings estimates prior to the Secretary'sJanuary 1990 announcement, and the Army and Air Force costand savings estimates were only preliminary; efforts torefine these estimates were suspended with passage of thefiscal year 1991 Defense Authorization Act.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991ANTISUBMARINE WARFARE:  TACTICAL SURVEILLANCE SONOBUOY ANDRELATED SOFTWARE NEED TO BE TESTED TOGETHEROrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-41Pages:  13Sonobuoys, which are dropped into the ocean fromantisubmarine aircraft, can pick up noises from enemysubmarines and transmit this information by radio to theplane; this data can then be used to identify, locate, andattack the submarines. GAO found that the Navy's revisedacquisition strategy adds risk to the Tactical SurveillanceSonobuoy Program because the sonobuoys may need to bemodified if deficiencies are revealed during operationaltesting in fiscal year 1993. Also, if the development of theaircraft software is further delayed, the Navy will beunable to use the sonobuoys for some time after they aredelivered. Finally, the revised strategy contradicts Navyguidance, which generally requires operational test andevaluation of an entire system before production isauthorized. The Tactical Surveillance Sonobuoy Program isnot an exception to this rule. Consequently, GAO recommendsthat the Navy not authorize further production of thesonobuoy until testing proves that it will work when it isintegrated with the new aircraft software.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991OVER-THE-HORIZON RADAR:  BETTER JUSTIFICATION NEEDED FOR DODSYSTEMS' EXPANSIONOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-61Pages:  25The Air Force's Over-the-Horizon Backscatter radar, whichcan detect and track bomber-size aircraft, was originallydeveloped to provide the North American Aerospace DefenseCommand's continental air defenses with early warnings of anattack. The Navy's Relocatable Over-the-Horizon Radar wasdesigned to provide air surveillance and warnings of bomberattacks on Navy battle groups and other U.S. and alliedtactical forces.  This report (1) examines DOD's plans touse the Air Force radar for counterdrug purposes and (2)provides information on the cost, design, acquisition anddeployment, missions, and inoperability of both the AirForce and Navy radar programs.  GAO concludes that DOD needsto clarify the primary purposes of the central radar system.If the main purpose is for air defense, rather than thecounterdrug mission, future budget requests should bejustified on that basis, describing what threat the systemis expected to detect. Before providing funds for anyadditional Over-the-Horizon Backscatter radar sectors,Congress may wish to have in hand satisfactory operationaltest results on the east coast radar system.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991NAVY BUDGET:  POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS IN AIRCRAFT PROCUREMENTBUDGETOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-65Pages:  16GAO reviewed the Navy's aircraft procurement budget requestfor fiscal year 1991 and appropriations for the precedingtwo years to identify potential budget reductions andrescissions, including amounts that are not being used forthe purposes appropriated. GAO identified $972.1 million inpotential reductions and rescissions for congressionalconsideration. If the proposed procurement of certainaircraft is reduced or deferred, $658.8 million would beavailable from the fiscal year 1991 budget request. Anadditional $313.3 million in fiscal years 1989 and 1990appropriated funds could be rescinded since they are notbeing used for the original purposes identified in thebudget requests.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991NAVY BUDGET:  POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS IN WEAPONS PROCUREMENTOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-22BRPages:  30This briefing report looks at the Navy's justification forits fiscal year 1991 Weapons Procurement budget request andprior year appropriations. GAO found potential reduction inthe following six weapon and ordnance systems  Trident II(D-5) missile, Tomahawk cruise missile, High Speed Anti-Radiation Missile (HARM), MK-48 advanced capability torpedo,MK-50 advanced lightweight torpedo, and 16-inch gunammunition. Although no reductions are involved, GAO alsoreviewed the following five weapon systems to report ontimely programmatic issues  Phoenix missile, StandardMissile, Rolling Airframe Missile, Penguin missile, andVertical Launched Antisubmarine rocket.  GAO also identifiedprior year funds that were no longer needed for purposesspecified in the selected weapon system procurementprograms.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991NAVY BUDGET:  STATUS OF FLYING HOUR AND STEAMING DAYPERFORMANCE INDICATORSOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-62Pages:  5In 1988 Congress asked that the Navy provide budgetjustifications for its aircraft flying hour and shipsteaming day programs. These justifications were to includemeasurable mission-related goals and the resources need tomeet them, a method for measuring the degree to which thegoals have been met, and an explanation of any differencesbetween the goals and the actual results. GAO found that theNavy added three performance indicators in its fiscal year1990 steaming day budget justifications. The Navy has notyet developed performance indicators for its flying hourbudget justifications but expects that indicators will beincorporated into the fiscal year 1992 budgetjustifications.  In addition, the Navy has made an effort toquantify the relationship of flying hours and steaming daysto proficiency and mission readiness. However, becausefactors other than the number and frequency of flying hoursand steaming days--such as personnel, equipment, materiel,and maintenance--affect proficiency and mission readiness,quantifying the relationship between budget requests andaccomplishment of program goals is difficult. The increasedoperational requirements of Operation Desert Shield willfurther complicate the process. Thus, the Navy cannot relateactual versus planned program performance in terms ofprogram expenditures.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991DEFENSE INVENTORY:  DOD'S HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE PROGRAMOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-87FSPages:  16GAO reviewed DOD'S Humanitarian Assistance Program and itseffect on the utilization and donation programs run by theGeneral Services Administration. Under the HumanitarianAssistance Program, DOD can make available for humanitarianrelief any nonlethal excess supplies in its system. In themid 1980s, the program was used to donate excess property tohelp refugee and resistance groups in Afghanistan and to flywounded Afghans to the United States and Europe for medicaltreatment. Since then, DOD has transferred excess propertyto an increasing number of other countries.  This fact sheetprovides information on (1) the quantity and category ofexcess material and equipment donated through the program onan annual basis; (2) the value of these items, based on theacquisition cost or other valuation; (3) a list of countriesand organizations within those countries that have receivedexcess property; (4) the annual costs for transportingexcess property; and (5) an assessment of how well excessproperty has been used.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991ENLISTED FORCE MANAGEMENT:  PAST PRACTICES AND FUTURECHALLENGESOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-48Pages:  61Direct costs for enlisted personnel, who comprise over 85percent of the total U.S. active-duty military force,account for one-sixth of the annual defense budget. The highcost of maintaining a balanced and ready enlisted forceunderscores the need for efficient and effective managementof these resources, particularly as the services move towardsmaller forces. This report examines how the services (1)manage the size and composition of their enlisted forces,(2) are planning for enlisted force reductions, and (3)comply with DOD requirements for enlisted force management.Because the Navy and the Marine Corps do not keep records onkey enlisted force management data submitted to DOD, GAOonly reviewed the Air Force and the Army.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991BATTLESHIPS:  ISSUES ARISING FROM THE EXPLOSION ABOARD THEU.S.S. IOWAOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-4Pages:  64In the April 1989 explosion aboard the U.S.S. Iowa, 47sailors died when bags of gun powder ignited in one of thebattleship's gun turrets. GAO asked the Department ofEnergy's Sandia National Laboratories to review the Navy'stechnical analysis of the incident; the Navy had concludedthat the explosion was caused by a deliberate act and not bya defect in the gun or propellent.  While Sandia couldneither confirm nor deny the Navy's conclusion, it dididentify a plausible alternative explanation--that due toits impact sensitivity, the gun powder could have explodedas it was being rammed against the base of a shell. As aresult of Sandia's findings, the Navy halted all firings ofthe 16-inch guns. With Sandia's help, it is doing moretesting. On the basis of that testing, and because of thebattleships' role in Operation Desert Shield, the Navy haslifted the firing suspension for the U.S.S. Missouri and theU.S.S. Wisconsin.  GAO found no evidence of any systemicsafety or serviceability problems aboard the battleships.GAO did discover problems with the adequacy of supervisorypersonnel levels, including the personnel for operating theturrets, and with training for 16-inch gun operations.   GAOrecommends that, unless current Middle East operationsconvincingly demonstrate the utility of the battleships tosupport an amphibious assault, the Navy decommission theMissouri and the Wisconsin.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991DEFENSE PROCUREMENT:  NOT PROVIDING TECHNICAL DATA MAY LIMITDEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY COMPETITIONOrder No.:  GAO/NSIAD-91-53Pages:  9Full and open competition involves allowing all sourcescapable of meeting the government's needs to compete. Of the1,047 contracts valued at over $25,000 awarded by theDefense General Supply Center in Richmond, Virginia, duringthe third quarter of fiscal year 1988, less than two percentwere classified as based on other than full and opencompetition; the rest were considered fully competitive.However, GAO found that almost half of these contracts wereactually based on solicitations giving only part numbers asitem descriptions. In general, GAO believes that thesepurchase descriptions were inconsistent with full and opencompetition. Although the Defense Logistics Agency hasrecently stopped classifying and processing solicitations asfully competitive on the basis of part numbers, otherproblems remain that may be causing opportunities forcompetition to be missed. This report discusses actionsneeded to ensure that Defense Logistics Agency supplycenters award future contracts on the basis of full and opencompetition.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991COST AND FINANCING OF OPERATION DESERT SHIELDOrder No.:  GAO/T-NSIAD-91-3Pages:  15The Comptroller General testified that the total U.S. costof Operation Desert Shield could exceed $130 billion infiscal year 1991. This estimate consists of three componentsthe baseline cost of the U.S. forces committed to DesertShield ($100 billion); the incremental cost of mounting theoperation, including troop deployment, calling up thereserves, and providing required additional support for theforces ($30 billion); and related costs like debtforgiveness for Egypt and humanitarian assistance ($7billion). The first component involves funds that would bespent whether the troops were in the Middle East orelsewhere.  To date, 35 countries have furnished troops andequipment.  Yet contributions to defray U.S. expenses aresmall relative to the total U.S. cost of the operation; DODhas reported receipt of cash contributions of about $4.3billion and in-kind contributions of about $379 million. Asa result of Operation Desert Shield, DOD is obligating itsfiscal year 1991 appropriations at a rapid pace and willexhaust some of these funds by spring. A supplementalappropriation to cover the costs of Operation Desert Shieldseems inevitable, the Comptroller General testified. Becauseof many uncertainties in the cost estimates, however, GAObelieves that it would be inappropriate to provide a lumpsum supplemental now. Instead, Congress should provideperiodic appropriations during the fiscal year, as actualcosts become clearer. Some of the uncertainties are (1) theunknown value of offsets like assistance in kind, includingfuel and water; (2) inadequate DOD guidance on whatconstitutes Desert Shield costs (an important factor in anyemergency appropriations under the Budget Enforcement Act);and (3) other factors like a decision to implement arotation policy.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991RANGELAND MANAGEMENT:  BLM EFFORTS TO PREVENT UNAUTHORIZEDLIVESTOCK GRAZING NEED STRENGTHENINGOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-17Pages:  16Unauthorized livestock grazing on public rangelands--knownas grazing trespass--can take several forms, includinggrazing more livestock than allowed by permit, grazing inareas that are closed to livestock, or grazing duringunauthorized times of the year. An effective trespassprogram must reasonably ensure that offenders, especiallywillful ones, (1) will be detected and (2) when detected,will be assessed a penalty that will not only penalize thembut serve as a deterrent to others. However, GAO found thatthe Bureau of Land Management's trespass enforcement effortsdo not meet either of these requirements. Because manygrazing areas are inspected infrequently or not at all,offenders are unlikely to be detected. Even when offendersare detected, BLM often exacts no penalties and--for themore serious violations--seldom assesses the minimumpenalties its own regulations require. BLM staff attributethe shortfalls in trespass detection and deterrenceprimarily to insufficient staff levels. While more staffwould undoubtedly improve performance, GAO believes thatmore effective and aggressive detection and deterrence arepossible with existing staffing levels.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991MINERAL REVENUES:  FUNDING FOR THE IDAHO INITIATIVE PROJECTOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-50Pages:  4The U.S. Geological Survey's Office of Mineral Resourcesseeks to identify areas having significant mineralpotential. One such effort is the Idaho Initiative, a $4.5million, three-year study of roadless and undevelopedfederal lands in Idaho. This report traces $1 million infiscal year 1989 expenditures for that project.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991OREGON DUNES RECREATION AREA:  PATENTING OF MINING CLAIMSCOMPLIES WITH LAWOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-8Pages:  39Under the Mining Law of 1872, U.S. citizens and businessesare allowed to locate mining claims on most federal landsand then to obtain full title to them. In 1959 mining claimswere filed for silica sand along the Oregon coast--a sitewhich in 1972 became the Oregon National Dunes RecreationArea. In October 1989, at the request of the claim holder,the federal government transferred title through the patentprocess to 780 acres of mining claims in this scenic area.GAO found that the federal government acted properly when itconcluded that the claims contained an uncommon variety ofsand and, therefore, the claims were subject to the patentprovision of the Mining Law of 1872. In addition, the claimholder and the federal government complied with the legaland administrative requirements for patenting. GAO notes,however, that this situation does raise questions about theconsistency of the mining law's patent provision with morerecent national natural resource policies that call for thefederal government to maintain ownership of federal landsand to obtain fair market value for public resources.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991PARKS AND RECREATION:  RESOURCE LIMITATIONS AFFECT CONDITIONOF FOREST SERVICE RECREATION SITESOrder No.:  GAO/RCED-91-48Pages:  64The Forest Service runs the largest inventory of outdoorrecreation sites in the country.  About 13,000 of thesesites are developed, featuring campgrounds, picnic areas,and boating and interpretive sites.  GAO estimates that theForest Service had a $449 million backlog of unmetmaintenance and reconstruction needs at these sites, morethan double the amount the agency reported in 1986. GAOdeveloped its own estimate of the backlog because the ForestService lacks a reliable system for monitoring or reportingon the nationwide condition and maintenance needs of itsdeveloped recreation sites. Forest Service officialsattributed the backlog to a lack of personnel and funds. GAOfound that little of the agency's overall recreation budgetis devoted to making the needed repair, and factors likeaging facilities and increased usage are compounding theproblem. GAO is concerned that deferred maintenance couldultimately result in the loss of many sites. Resourcelimitations were only one of several factors affectingchanges in the size and type and to a lesser extent thenumber and length of season of developed recreation sites.However, resource limitations have reduced and eliminatedservices like garbage collection and site cleaning. TheForest Service is now relying on volunteer and apublic/private cost-share program to help compensate forlimited resources. GAO believes that this strategy--whilehelpful--faces constraints that will limit its effectivenessin reducing the backlog.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT:  FEDERAL SUPPORT TO THE STATES HASDECLINEDOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-51Pages:  40The Refugee Act of 1980 authorized federal assistance toresettle refugees in the United States on a uniform basis,regardless of their country of origin. Upwards of 900,000refugees have entered this country over the past decade.Although funds have been appropriated since the expirationof the act in 1988, the amounts involved have declined,shifting refugee resettlement costs to state and localgovernments. As a result of this and diminished funds tostates for job training and other services, Department ofHealth and Human Services assistance per refugee fell 48percent in 1989 constant dollars--from $6,921 to $3,600.This report provides (1) estimates of the costs transferredfrom the federal government to states as a result of recentcuts in federal refugee assistance, (2) information from andviews of public and private sector officials on whetherrecent reductions have resulted in service cutbacks torefugees, and (3) data on changes in the percentage ofrefugees receiving cash assistance and changes in otherindicators of refugee self-sufficiency.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991LOW-INCOME HOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE:  STATES CUSHIONED FUNDINGCUTS BUT ALSO SCALED BACK PROGRAM BENEFITSOrder No.:  GAO/HRD-91-13Pages:  52The Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program provideseligible households with assistance for home energy costs.Assistance is available to (1) help families with coolingcosts, (2) prevent energy cutoffs in crisis situations, and(3) help families make their homes more energy efficient.GAO found that between fiscal years 1986 and 1989, thestates--while offsetting about one-fourth of the cuts infederal funding for the program, mainly with oil overchargefunds resulting from legal settlements with major oilproducers--scaled back energy assistance benefits Inaddition, most states served fewer households, although 43percent attributed the decrease to factors other thanfederal funding cuts, such as improved economic conditionsthat reduced the need for assistance. States generallycomplied with key program requirements by assuring theDepartment of Health and Human Services that they were (1)doing outreach activities, especially for the elderly andhandicapped, and (2) targeting benefits to households mostin need. Also, the four states GAO visited had incorporatedfiscal controls to prevent erroneous payments. GAO foundthat in nearly all states, other government and privatesector programs provide home energy assistance to low-incomehouseholds In fiscal year 1989, this assistance amounted toabout $200 million.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991TAX ADMINISTRATION:  EFFECTIVENESS OF IRS' RETURN PREPARERPENALTY PROGRAM IS QUESTIONABLEOrder No.:  GAO/GGD-91-12Pages:  73Almost half the individual income tax returns filed in 1989were done by paid return preparers. The Internal RevenueService has had problems with what it characterizes asincompetent and unscrupulous tax return preparers whounderstate their clients' tax liabilities. GAO found thatIRS needs to better ensure that preparers engaged innegligent or abusive tax practices are penalized. AlthoughIRS generally assesses the right penalty once it decides topenalize a preparer, penalty cases are often not opened whenpotential preparer misconduct was evident on returns with atleast $5,000 in taxes owed. This limits IRS' ability topenalize preparers who are guilty of misconduct and mayweaken the agency's ability to deter preparer misconduct forthe large number of returns not reviewed in IRS' examinationprogram. IRS examiners and their supervisors said that theywere reluctant to pursue the penalties because of the lowdollar amounts involved.  Even though preparer penalties maynot yield significant revenues, GAO believes that theirpotential long-term effect in encouraging voluntarycompliance by preparers and their clients should also beconsidered. GAO also found that IRS district officessometimes assess different penalties and penalty amounts forsimilar misconduct. IRS referral of taxpayer preparers fordisciplinary action can provide further incentives forcompliance. However, the effectiveness of this process islimited because referrals are often not made when required.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991INTERNATIONAL AVIATION:  IMPLICATIONS OF RATIFYING MONTREALAVIATION PROTOCOL NO. 3Order No.:  GAO/RCED-91-45Pages:  18The U.S. government has long been dissatisfied with the lowlevel of compensation allowed under international law forinjuries or deaths resulting from international aviationaccidents. Under current agreements to which the UnitedStates is a party, an airline is liable for a maximum ofonly $75,000 per passenger. A new agreement--MontrealAviation Protocol No. 3--is now before the U.S. Senate forratification, accompanied by a plan to provide supplementalcompensation for victims of international aviationdisasters. Overall, GAO concludes that American victims ofinternational aviation accidents and their families would bebetter compensated under Protocol No. 3 than under existinginternal agreements. Claimants would no longer have to provethat the airline was at fault before they receivedcompensation, and incentives would be provided for airlinesto settle claims quickly. Claimants' costs would be reducedbecause in many cases a trial would be avoided. In addition,the Protocol would raise the airlines' liability limit,provide funds for additional compensation of victims, anddecrease the proportion of the damage awards that go topaying claimants' legal costs. The Protocol and the planwould also increase the likelihood that Americans' lawsuitswould be tried in U.S. courts if compensation offers areunsatisfactory, resulting in U.S. standards of compensationbeing used in determining damage awards. Finally, GAOconcludes that Protocol No. 3 is unlikely to harm airlinesafety.  Adverse economic impacts due to aviation accidentsand government safety regulations--not fear of litigation--are the primary incentives for airlines to operate safely.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991TRUCK SAFETY:  IMPROVEMENTS NEEDED IN FHWA'S MOTOR CARRIERSAFETY PROGRAMOrder No:  GAO/RCED-91-30Pages:  28To promote the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles,the Federal Highway Administration is required to develop away to ensure the safety fitness of owners and operators. InOctober 1986, FHWA began a safety review program to educatemotor carriers--persons or companies that transport goods orpassengers as a business--about federal safety regulationsand to rate the safety management controls that carriershave in place to comply with these regulations. GAO foundthat FHWA had rated about 40 percent of the interstate motorcarriers in business as of May 1990. While the agency hasaccomplished a great deal, about 129,000 carriers still needto be rated before FHWA'S established deadline of September30, 1992. GAO believes that FHWA is unlikely to meet thisdeadline because (1) the universe of carriers is constantlychanging (due to the entry of new carriers and carriers thatmerge and go out of business) and (2) FHWA has assigned alimited number of safety investigators to this task.Although 70 percent of the motor carriers assessed under thesafety review program received a less than satisfactoryrating, FHWA has not adequately implemented its two follow-up procedures for ensuring that carriers correctdeficiencies in safety management controls--certificationletters from carriers and compliance reviews. Until FHWAknows whether carriers have improved their controls, itcannot be sure that its safety review program is promotingthe safe operation of commercial vehicles.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List CopyrightFEDERAL/INDUSTRY WATCHDOG via NewsNetMAY, 1991AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL:  EFFORTS TO MODERNIZE OCEANIC SYSTEMDELAYEDOrder No.:  GAO/IMTEC-91-2Pages:  13Air traffic control services in non-radar oceanic areasremain essentially unchanged from the 1950s, with oceanicair traffic controllers still manually updating flightprogress on the basis of periodic radio reports receivedfrom pilots. This labor-intensive and time-consuming processresults in large separation distances between aircraft, longflights, and lost opportunities for fuel savings. While FAAhas started to provide oceanic controllers with automationsupport, the agency's primary modernization effort--theOceanic Display and Planning System, still not fullyoperational, is over three years behind schedule, and is nowmore than three times the original contract cost. FAA'Slong-term strategy is to use satellites to provide accurate,near real-time control information on oceanic flights;however, because this strategy now relies on the successfuldeployment of the Oceanic Display and Planning System, theoutcome of this approach is unknown.The above-described report is available free from the U.S.General Accounting Office, P.O. Box 6015, Gaithersburg, MD20877, 202-275-6241.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-29IA060-000326-B020-167http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt19.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021035 text/html 17539HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:08:50 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:54 GMTContent-length: 17350Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt19.html Sample Issue Copyright FTC FOIA LOG via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (57 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (40 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (72 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (54 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (45 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (64 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (25 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (37 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (43 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (34 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (86 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (45 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (36 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (46 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (37 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (31 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (34 words) COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. (58 words) CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0866 DATE: 12/14/95REQUESTED BY: Arthur Jackson The Arthur Jackson Group 4279 Roswell Rd.,#102-111 Atlanta, GA 30342MATERIAL REQUESTED: Jackson requests any information pertaining to himself,J. Trevor Woodhams, MD or the Woodhams Eye Clinic and the "FTCinvestigation into advertising of Radial Keratotomy and corrective eyesurgery." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0867 DATE: 12/15/95REQUESTED BY: Amina Khan, Esq. 1350 Beverly Rd. Suite 115-109 McLean, VA22101MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any information pertaining to All Tune and LubeInternational, Inc. or GNC Nutrition Centers. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0868 DATE: 12/1595REQUESTED BY: Isao Kasubuchi Embassy of Japan 2520 Massachusetts Ave. NWWashington, DC 20008MATERIAL REQUESTED: Enforcement statistics, in particular the consumerprotection "mission accomplishment table," the number of initial and fullphase investigations opened in fiscal years 1994 and 1995 by thecompetition and consumer protection bureaus and the number ofadministrative complaints leveled, per year, since fiscal year 1993. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0869 DATE: 12/19/95REQUESTED BY: Robert P. Petrie Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue 1450 G St., NWWashington, DC 20005-2088MATERIAL REQUESTED: Documents released to Robert Schramm of Schramm,Williams & Associates in response to his FOIA request (T94-0071, dated01/28/94) for information regarding slotting allowances. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0870 DATE: 12/19/95REQUESTED BY: Martin J. Thompson Riordan & McKinzie California Plaza 300 S.Grand Ave. Los Angeles, CA 90071MATERIAL REQUESTED: "[A] November 22, 1995 letter to Richard B. Smith,Esq., regarding 'HSR Coverage Issue.'" ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0871 DATE: 12/20/95REQUESTED BY: Tanya B. Vanderbilt Epstein Becker & Green 1227 25th St. NWWashington, DC 20037-1156MATERIAL REQUESTED: "A letter from me to Melea Epps, Esq. of the FederalTrade Commission Premerger Notification Office dated November 8, 1995" andany notes that might have found their way onto that letter at the FTC. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0872 DATE: 12/21/95REQUESTED BY: Don WillinghamMATERIAL REQUESTED: Any complaints against Visa International of SanFrancisco. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0873 DATE: 12/21/95REQUESTED BY: Daniel A. Edelman Edelman & Combs Suite 2040 135 S. LaSalleSt. Chicago, IL 60603MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any documents relating to Chicago AcceptanceCorporation. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0874 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Miguel A. Sancho Inside Edition 402 E. 76th St. New York, NY10021MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any complaints against the Hair Club for Men, a/k/a CySperling's Hair Club for Men. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0875 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Gary O'Neill 410 Kleman Rd. Gilbertsville, PA 19525MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any information regarding Combined Resource Technology,Inc. of Baton Rouge, Louisiana. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0876 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Deborah L. Parandes 9215-H Bridle Path Ln. Laurel, MD 20723MATERIAL REQUESTED: Materials released to Jo Seymour of Covington & Burlingin response to a FOIA request (T95-0808, dated 11/27/95) for "[a] letteraddressed to FTC chairman Robert Pitofsky from the National Association ofChain Drug Stores and Citizen Action urging the FTC to reconsider itsproposed consent order on Lilly's acquisition of the pharmaceutical benefitmanagement company, PCS and the FTC response." ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0877 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Ron Kahr 17734 San Candelo St. Fountain Valley, CA 92708MATERIAL REQUESTED: Documents pertaining to an FTC study of the tunafishing industry, which the requester believes was conducted in the 1970s. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0878 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Michael K. Powers Statler Office Tower 1127 Euclid Ave.,Suite 376 Cleveland, OH 44115-1601MATERIAL REQUESTED: Documents relating to Mace Security International, Inc. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0879 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: John E. Byfield, M.D., Ph.D. Memorial Hospital IndependenceCommittee 3550 Q St., Suite 102 Bakersfield, CA 93301MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any information regarding the proposed merger of MercyHealthcare Bakersfield and Memorial Hospital Bakersfield. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0880 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Richard M. Brenner Brenner & Dienstag 21 Southeast First Ave.Suite 800 Miami, FL 33131MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any complaints against Boatmen's National Mortgage,Inc. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0881 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Michael J. Ravnitzky 612 Lincoln Ave. #301 St. Paul, MN55102-2829MATERIAL REQUESTED: The 1995 FOIA Case Log. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0882 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Stuart Lee Friedel Davis & Gilbert 1740 Broadway New York, NY10019MATERIAL REQUESTED: Any correspondence with Tutor Time franchiseoperations. ----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC FOIA LOG  via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996 COMPETITIVE INFORMATION: Summaries ofFreedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests received by the U.S. FederalTrade Commission between December 14 and December 22, 1995. FTC CONTROL NO.: T95-0883 DATE: 12/22/95REQUESTED BY: Stan Harbuck P.O. Box 1643 Salt Lake City, UT 84110-1643MATERIAL REQUESTED: "[D]ata from the Real Estate Consumer Survey Dataobtained in the early 1980's which later became part of the FTC report 'TheResidential Real Estate Brokerage Industry' published in December, 1983from the Los Angeles office."Back to Headline List WT03-B40-30IA060-000326-B020-196http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt18.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021052 text/html 38955HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:09:05 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:54 GMTContent-length: 38766Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt18.html Sample Issue Copyright THE FTC AND ANTITRUST DIVISION TODAY via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Schnuck Markets, Inc. Seeks Approval to Divest Twenty-three Supermarkets in St. Louis Area (539 words) Praxair to Settle FTC Charges Over CBI Acquisition; Will Divest Four CBI Plants to Restore Competition (709 words) Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation Petitions to Modify an Agreement in Connection with its Acquisition of Healthtrust, Inc. (385 words) Comments of the Staff of the Bureau of Consumer Protection in the Matter of Direct-to-Consumer Promotion (3322 words) Calendar for Week of January 15, 1996 (266 words) CopyrightTHE FTC AND ANTITRUST DIVISION TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Schnuck Markets, Inc. Seeks Approval to Divest Twenty-threeSupermarkets in St. Louis AreaFOR YOUR INFORMATION......................JANUARY 10, 1996     Schnuck Markets, Inc. has applied for Federal TradeCommission approval to divest 23 St. Louis, Missouri-areasupermarkets to Family Company of America, which intends tooperate the stores as a single grocery chain under the "National"trade name (see attached list of stores proposed fordivestiture).  The application will be subject to public commentuntil Feb. 9.     Schnucks is based in St. Louis.  Family Company of Americais a newly-formed company, also based in St. Louis, and itssenior management consists largely of former senior managers ofthe National Holdings, Inc. supermarket chain.  The divestituresare required under a 1995 consent order Schnucks signed to settleFTC charges that the firm's acquisition of supermarkets owned byNational Holdings, Inc. would violate federal antitrust law andpotentially lead to anticompetitive pricing and other conductthat could hurt supermarket customers in the St. Louis area.  Theconsent order requires 24 supermarket divestitures so as torestore competition.  Schnucks stated in its application that itstill is seeking a buyer for the 24th store.     According to the application, the proposed divestiture planwill establish a "substantial competitive force in the market." Family would be the third-largest competitor in the market andits size "will enable it to take advantage of available economiesof scale, especially in such areas as purchasing and advertising,and its use of the  National' trade name will help ensure animmediate procompetitive impact," the application states. Schnucks also maintains that the proposed subleases of realestate on which some of the stores are owned "will not adverselyaffect the ability of incentives of Family, Schnucks, or anyother party to compete."     Comments on the application should be addressed to the FTC,Office of the Secretary, 6th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue,N.W., Washington, D.C. 20580.   Copies of the application and theorder are available from the FTC's Public Reference Branch, Room130, 6th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.20580; 202-326-2222; TTY for the hearing impaired 202-326-2502. To find out the latest news as it is announced, call the FTCNewsPhone recording at 202-326-2710.  FTC news releases and othermaterials also are available on the Internet at the FTC's WorldWide Web site at: http://www.ftc.gov STAFF CONTACT:      Roberta Baruch, Bureau of Competition                     202-326-2861(FTC Docket No. C-3585)(Schnucks Application--01/10/96)  Stores Proposed for DivestitureNational Stores:#15, 2700 Grand Avenue, St. Louis#22, 850 Jungerman, St. Peters#30, 5433 Southwest Avenue, St. Louis#35, 1716 Vandalia Road, Collinsville, Illinois#45, 6 South Old Orchard, Webster#46, 10431 St. Charles, St. Ann#47, 13041 New Halls Ferry, Florissant#50, 8945 Riverview Drive, St. Louis#60, 1605 S. Jefferson, St. Louis#62, 421 N. Kirkwood Road, Kirkwood#63, 7434 Olive Street Road, University City#64, 1290 Camp Jackson Road, Cahokia#65, 1200 Sugar Creek Square, Fenton#70, 215 Arnold Cross Road, Arnold#77, 4432 Lemay Ferry Road, Mehlville#80, 4 Market Place, Fairview Heights, Illinois#85, 14855 Clayton Road, ChesterfieldSchnucks Stores:#103, 9719 Crestwood Road, Crestwood#124, 3661 Reavis Barracks, St. Louis#126, 1355 South 5th Street, St. Charles#130, 10223 Lewis & Clark, Bellefontaine#175, 1435 Vaughn Road, Wood River#195, 6965 Parker Road, St. LouisBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE FTC AND ANTITRUST DIVISION TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Praxair to Settle FTC Charges Over CBI Acquisition;Will Divest Four CBI Plants to Restore CompetitionFOR RELEASE:  JANUARY 11, 1996     Praxair, Inc. has agreed to divest four atmospheric gasesproduction plants to settle Federal Trade Commission charges that its $2billion acquisition of CBI Industries, Inc. would violate federalantitrust laws, reduce competition and raise prices in the market foratmospheric gases produced off-site for industrial customers in severalareas of the country.     Praxair, based in Danbury, Connecticut, is the largest supplier ofindustrial gases, including atmospheric gases, in America, and the thirdlargest supplier worldwide.  CBI, which competes with Praxair, isheadquartered in Oak Brook, Illinois.       The products at issue in the case are "merchant" atmospheric gases-- nitrogen, oxygen and argon -- supplied to customers via tanker truckor in cylinders (as opposed to atmospheric gases produced for customerson-site or near their production facilities.)  Merchant nitrogen is usedin industrial applications such as heat treating, chemical blanketingand freezing.  Merchant oxygen is used in foundries, steel and glassproduction and for medical purposes.  Merchant argon is primarily usedfor welding. There are no adequate substitutes for any of the threegases, the FTC alleged.     According to the FTC complaint detailing the charges, theacquisition would reduce competition in the merchant oxygen and nitrogenmarkets in both northern and southern California, and also would reducecompetition for merchant nitrogen, oxygen and argon in easternConnecticut and western Wisconsin/southeastern Minnesota.  Entry by anew firm in those markets would be time consuming, costly and unlikely,the complaint says.  Thus, the proposed acquisition would violatefederal antitrust laws in those areas by:     -- eliminating direct competition between Praxair and CBI;          -- enhancing the likelihood of collusion or other anticompetitivepractices among the      remaining competitors in California;     -- eliminating competition between the two closest competitors ineastern Connecticut      and the two closest competitors in westernWisconsin and southeastern Minnesota;     -- increasing the likelihood that Praxair would unilaterallyexercise market power in      eastern Connecticut, western Wisconsin andsoutheastern Minnesota; and,     -- increasing the likelihood that prices for the gases wouldincrease in those geographic  areas.     The proposed consent agreement to settle the charges and restorecompetition would require Praxair to divest, individually or in somecombination, CBI's atmospheric gas production facilities in Vacavilleand Irwindale, California; Bozrah, Connecticut; and Madison, Wisconsin.The proposed divestitures would have to be completed within 12 monthsfrom the date the order becomes final.  If Praxair were to fail todivest the assets within the specified time frame, the Commission couldappoint a trustee to divest the four plants.      To remedy any anticompetitive effects of the acquisition pendingdivestiture, Praxair must maintain the four CBI production facilities asviable, independent competitors of Praxair's nearby plants. Accordingly, Praxair has agreed to hold the plants separate from itsother businesses and take steps to assure that no confidentialinformation is exchanged between the plants and those other businesses.      The Commission vote to accept the proposed consent agreement forpublic comment was 5-0.  The proposed consent agreement will bepublished in the Federal Register shortly and will be subject to publiccomment for 60 days, after which the Commission will decide whether tomake it final.  Comments should be addressed to the FTC, Office of theSecretary, 6th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.20580.NOTE: A consent agreement is for settlement purposes only and does notconstitute an admission of a law violation.  When the Commission issuesa consent order on a final basis, it carries the force of law withrespect to future actions.  Each violation of such an order may resultin a civil penalty of $10,000.     Copies of the complaint, the proposed consent agreement and ananalysis of the agreement to aid the public in commenting, are availablefrom the FTC's Public Reference Branch, Room 130, at the address listedabove; 202-326-2222; TTY for the hearing impaired 202-326-2502.  To findout the latest news as it is announced, call the FTC NewsPhone recordingat 202-326-2710.  FTC news releases and other materials also areavailable on the Internet at the FTC's World Wide Web site at:http://www.ftc.gov STAFF CONTACT:           James H. Holden, Jr., or Christina Perez,Bureau of Competition                       202-326-2682 (FTC File No. 961 0017) Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FTC AND ANTITRUST DIVISION TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation Petitions to Modifyan Agreement in Connection with its Acquisition ofHealthtrust, Inc.FOR YOUR INFORMATION...........................JANUARY 11, 1995     Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation, of Nashville,Tennessee, has petitioned the Federal Trade Commission to modifyan agreement between the firm and the agency reached inconnection with the firm's acquisition of Healthtrust, Inc..  Therequested modification would eliminate Columbia/HCA's obligationsto "hold separate" the Utah Healthtrust assets pendingdivestiture of a lease for commercial office space in a third-party-owned building in the Salt Lake City area afterColumbia/HCA's divestiture of certain Utah hospitals.  The FTC isseeking public comments on the petition for 10 days, until Jan.22.  Columbia/HCA stated in this petition that, shortly, it willsubmit a second petition in which it will seek to end itsobligation to divest the lease.     The agreement at issue accompanies a consent order thatColumbia/HCA signed to settle FTC charges that its $3 billionmerger with Healthtrust would impair hospital competition --leading to higher prices, reduced services, or both -- in areasof Florida, Louisiana, Texas and Utah.  To restore thatcompetition, the consent order requires a total of sevendivestitures and mandates that Columbia/HCA terminate itsparticipation in a joint venture.  Under the accompanying "holdseparate" agreement, Columbia/HCA is required to operate theassets to be divested independently of its other hospitals.     Columbia/HCA maintains in its petition that the lease is foroffice space used by a company, Infusamed, that provided homehealth/home infusion services and pharmacy services. The consentorder did not require Columbia to divest Infusamed.  And this isa different market than the market at issue in the FTC case,which is acute care inpatient hospital services, the petitionstates.     Comments should be addressed to the FTC, Office of theSecretary, 6th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington,D.C. 20580.     Copies of the petition, and of the consent order and holdseparate agreement are available from the FTC's Public ReferenceBranch, Room 130, 6th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.,Washington, D.C. 20580; 202-326-2222; TTY for the hearingimpaired 202-326-2502.  To find out the latest news as it isannounced, call the FTC NewsPhone recording at 202-326-2710.  FTCnews releases and other materials also are available on theInternet at the FTC's World Wide Web site at: http://www.ftc.govSTAFF CONTACT:      Daniel P. Ducore, Bureau of Competition                    202-326-2526(FTC Docket No. C-3619)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FTC AND ANTITRUST DIVISION TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Comments of the Staff of the Bureau of Consumer Protection inthe Matter of Direct-to-Consumer PromotionBEFORE THE                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICESFOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION               In the Matter of Direct-to-Consumer                    Promotion; Public Hearing                       Docket No. 95N-0227                     Comments of the Staff of                the Bureau of Consumer Protection                   and the Bureau of Economics                 of the Federal Trade CommissionJanuary 11, 1996    Introduction.     The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has requestedcomments regarding the promotion of prescription drug productsdirectly to consumers (DTC) through print, broadcast, and othermedia.  Among other things, the agency announced that it "isparticularly interested in exploring whether, and, if so, how,the agency's current regulatory approach should be modified."  The staffs of the Bureau of Consumer Protection and the Bureau ofEconomics of the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) offer thefollowing comments to assist the FDA in its deliberations, basedon our experience in analyzing the effects of information inconsumer product markets and in considering legal requirementsthat address information issues.     The FTC enforces the Federal Trade Commission Act, whichamong other things prohibits deceptive or unfair practices in oraffecting commerce.  One of the FTC's primary responsibilities isto enforce the law prohibiting deceptive practices in nationaladvertising.  The FTC considers the prevention of deceptivehealth-related advertising claims to be of utmost importance, andhas taken action in numerous cases involving deceptive health-related claims about OTC drugs, food products, dietarysupplements, and medical devices.  In implementing its mandate,the FTC has developed considerable expertise in the role ofadvertising in the consumer information environment.     The staff of the Commission also has experience examiningthe effects of laws affecting advertising on market performance,including in the prescription drug market.  While importantdifferences between advertising for prescription drugs andadvertising for other products might lead to differentapproaches, we believe that the staff's experience, particularlyregarding marketing and economic issues, has a bearing on many ofthe DTC advertising issues on which the FDA is seeking comment.     Truthful and non-misleading advertising can help consumersmanage their own health care.  Advertisements can, for example,provide timely information regarding medical advances, remindconsumers about good health care practices, and supplyinformation needed by consumers to understand and evaluate theirphysician's recommendations.  On the other hand, deceptive ormisleading advertisements in the prescription drug area canimpose particularly high costs on consumers.  Whether or not aparticular advertisement might mislead consumers will turn on thespecific facts associated with that ad (and a determination ofthe claims being made).  Any analysis of the likelihood ofdeception would therefore depend on a case by case evaluation. The FTC staff believes that the Commission's Deception PolicyStatement and its Statement on Advertising Substantiation mayassist the FDA in evaluating prescription drug advertisements.II.  The Potential Effects of DTC Advertising on Consumers and     the Marketplace.      Assessments of DTC regulatory options are likely to dependon one's understanding of DTC advertising's effects on consumersand the marketplace.  In this section we consider this issue. First, we consider the incentives to provide consumers withinformation about drug therapies.  Second, we describe the uniquerole of advertising, in general, and of DTC prescription drugadvertising, in particular, in the consumer informationenvironment.  Third, we describe the potential effects of DTCadvertising on competition.  Finally, we consider how regulationscan be designed to encourage the potentially beneficial effectsof advertising while discouraging its potentially harmfuleffects.     A.   Incentives to Provide Consumers with Information About          Alternative Drug Therapies.     We believe this is a particularly good time to examine thepotential value of DTC advertising.  With the growth of managedcare organizations, consumers are expected to become moreactively involved in their health care decisions and to demandmore information on alternative therapies.  The recent growthof DTC pharmaceutical advertising expenditures is consistentwith the view that consumers are demanding more productinformation.      Substantial information about drug therapies is provided toconsumers by independent parties.  Newspapers report on newdrugs, books describe drug options, magazines discussalternative therapies, and public health organizations providea wealth of information.      Despite the existence of these sources, economic reasoningsuggests that advertising can be an important supplemental sourceof information.  Information, like most goods, is costly toprovide.  However, in contrast to most products, information isnot used up when it is consumed, and it is often possible to useinformation without paying for it, that is, to "free ride."  As aresult, markets may tend to provide consumers with less than theoptimal amount of information.     Advertising can reduce this problem.  Firms will providehealth information to consumers when it is profitable to do so. Profitability depends on several factors that affect the marginal benefits and costs of advertising.  For example,extensive disclosure requirements can substantially increase thecost of advertising, thereby decreasing a firm's incentive toadvertise. (Of course, such disclosures may nonetheless beneeded sometimes to prevent deception).     Firms have strong incentives to provide information aboutdisease conditions and possible treatments if they can associatethe information with products they sell.  Although firms withrelatively large market shares may find it profitable to provideadvertising messages that do not make such an association,smaller competitors are less likely to find such advertisingprofitable, due to the "free-riding" phenomenon.       Incentives to advertise are also enhanced when firms caninitiate new campaigns quickly.  For example, the soonerinformation on product improvements reaches consumers, the soonerfirms can begin through sales to recoup research and developmentinvestments and advertising expenditures.  Similarly, theincentive to advertise is likely to be greater when firms canrespond rapidly to advertising by competitors.     B.   Prescription Drug Advertising as a Unique Source of          Some Information that Can Enhance Consumer Welfare.     Prescription drug advertising, like any type of advertising,represents only one component of the total consumer informationenvironment, which includes the media, package inserts, referencebooks, doctors, and pharmacists.  Advertising, like any of thesecomponents, is better at some tasks than others.  For example,broadcast advertisements are relatively good for disseminatingshort bits of information to large audiences but not forproviding complex information.  Complex information is oftendisseminated more effectively at another point in the productconsideration and purchasing process, such as through labeling atthe point of sale.  Although reference books that describe drugcharacteristics are useful, they may lack information aboutrecent innovations and may not reach a wide audience.  Incontrast, advertising can inform about product innovations assoon as they are brought to market.  Advertising can also remindpeople of information that they might already know but that hasfaded from memory.     Different forms of advertising may have different advantagesand disadvantages as means of communicating information.  Complexinformation is often communicated more effectively through printmedia than through broadcast media.  Internet advertising may beparticularly efficient at reaching small sub-populations with astrong interest in certain types of drugs.       Obviously, one concern with advertised information is thatmanufacturers will be inclined to favor their products. Although some forces weigh against this outcome, they may beinsufficient to prevent firms from making unfounded claims,whether intentionally or inadvertently.  Deceptive claims in theprescription drug area can have serious consequences.     Although prescription drug advertising shares manycharacteristics of advertising in other markets, prescriptiondrugs have several characteristics that make the analysis ofprescription drug advertising to consumers distinctive.  Forexample, product safety and efficacy is a particularly importantissue in this advertising market.  At the product level, thisconcern is addressed by the requirement that all prescriptiondrugs be pre-approved by the FDA for safety and efficacy.       Concerns about product safety and efficacy are reflected incontrol of access to prescription drugs.  Doctors must prescribethem, and they must be dispensed by pharmacists.  These controlsshould help ensure that inappropriate drugs are not used.     Advertising may make consumers aware of more convenient orotherwise more desirable versions of drugs than those theycurrently use.  Advertising may encourage consumers to see adoctor for advice about conditions they might have previouslyignored or for further information about conditions already beingtreated.  Advertising may cause consumers to inquire aboutdiagnostic tests that might not otherwise be performed.  Betterinformed consumers will be better able to understand and discusstheir individual needs with their doctors and pharmacists.  Thus,advertising can help consumers make decisions about their healthcare and health care costs.       C.   Potential Effects of Prescription Drug Advertising on          Price and Quality Competition.     Advertising is an important catalyst for price and qualitycompetition.  Advertising can put downward pressure on prices byspurring competition among alternative therapies.  To theextent that prescription drugs compete with OTC drugs,prescription drug advertising potentially can lead to loweraverage prices for both product categories.  We recognize,however, that the ultimate effect is likely to depend on theevolution of the health care market and on the individualcharacteristics of drug classes and disease conditions.       Quality competition can also be motivated by advertising. Advertising can help foster product improvements by deliveringinformation to consumers on quality variables that they may nototherwise know about.  If consumers prefer products with theadvertised qualities and receive prescriptions for these productsafter consulting with their doctors, then their demand for theadvertised products is reflected in sales and the market reflectsconsumer preferences.     D.   Considerations Regarding Regulation.     We believe that truthful and non-deceptive DTC advertisingcan contribute to consumers' health information environment and consumer welfare.  A review of some recent DTC advertisingsuggests beneficial outcomes are likely, because manyadvertisements focus on the types of claims that we would expectto help consumers, such as, for example, improved convenience andcost advantages.  In addition, recent consumer research evidencesuggests that DTC advertisements are likely to encourage peopleto seek advice from their doctors, which may result in improvedhealth care.      In a regulatory scheme for DTC advertising, therefore, wewould encourage balancing the benefits and the risks of allowingpharmaceutical manufacturers greater latitude in theiradvertising.  In particular, it is important to protect consumersfrom deceptive information but not to stifle truthful informationthat could benefit consumers.  As discussed below, we believethat the net benefits of DTC advertisements can be increased bylimiting current disclosure requirements and by adjustingdisclosure requirements according to the characteristics ofdifferent advertising venues.III. The FTC's Approach to Advertising.     During the FDA's public hearings on October 18 and 19, 1995,regarding DTC prescription drug advertising, many commentatorssuggested that the FDA consider adopting an approach similar tothat used by the FTC.  In light of these suggestions, it may behelpful for us to describe the framework used by the FTCconcerning deceptive advertising.     The Commission's policy with respect to deceptiveadvertising is set out in its Deception Policy Statement andits Statement on Advertising Substantiation.  An advertisementis considered deceptive if it contains a representation oromission that is likely to mislead consumers acting reasonablyunder the circumstances, and the representation or omission ismaterial, that is, it is likely to affect consumers' decisionsregarding purchase or use of a product.  Thus, the FTC'sapproach involves identifying the claims that are conveyed by anadvertisement, both expressly and by implication, and determiningwhether those claims are truthful and substantiated.       In analyzing an advertisement, the FTC focuses on the netimpression it conveys rather than on the individual elements ofthe ad in isolation.  Because advertisements can misleadconsumers by what they do not say as well as by what they do say,the omission of material information may also render anadvertisement deceptive in some circumstances.  Deception canoccur through omission of information when that information isnecessary to prevent an affirmative representation from beingmisleading, or simply by remaining silent, if doing soconstitutes an implied but false representation.  TheCommission has made clear, however, that "[n]ot all omissions aredeceptive, even if providing the information would benefitconsumers."  An omission is considered deceptive only if theabsence of the information causes the advertisement to convey aninaccurate impression about a material fact.        The FTC's focus when analyzing the adequacy of disclosuresis on their effectiveness in communicating the necessaryinformation in the context of the advertising at issue.  Whendisclosure of information is necessary to prevent anadvertisement from conveying an inaccurate impression, the merephysical presence of the information may not be sufficient toprevent the ad from being considered deceptive.  Thus, theinformation must be included in a manner that is calculated to benoticed, read (or heard, if orally presented), and comprehendedby consumers.IV.  Considering DTC Prescription Drug Advertising Issues in     Light of the FTC's Approach.     A.   The "Brief Summary."     The FDA in its Federal Register Notice asked whether, and ifso, how, the "brief summary" disclosure requirements forprescription drug advertising should be modified in the contextof consumer directed advertising for prescription drugs.       Under an FTC deception analysis, the primary questions wouldbe whether the brief summary requirements are necessary toprevent deception, and, if so, whether they effectivelycommunicate the necessary information to consumers.  Pursuantto the FTC's deception authority, this would be a case-by-caseanalysis, as the focus would be on the net impression conveyed bya specific advertisement, and whether any or all of the briefsummary requirements would be necessary to prevent thatadvertisement from conveying a deceptive impression.     The FTC's experience in enforcing the law pertaining todeception indicates that it is often difficult to effectivelycommunicate information to consumers.  More complicated messagesare more difficult to convey to consumers in an understandablemanner.  Fine print disclosures, whether in print or broadcastadvertising, are often insufficient to effectively communicateimportant information.     The "brief summary" that currently appears in consumerdirected prescription drug advertising is obviously highlytechnical, complicated, and lengthy.  It is often presented infine print, in language that is designed for health careprofessionals rather than lay persons.  We believe that theinformation contained therein is therefore unlikely to be readilyfocused on and understood by consumers.      Moreover, if the "brief summary" included information thatwas necessary to prevent deception or other consumer injury, wewould be concerned that it would not be effectively communicatedby the current format.  The sheer volume of information requiredto be disclosed may itself contribute to a reduced comprehensionof any such specific important information.     Alternative means could be considered for ensuring consumeraccess to information that is important for consumers to have butthat is not necessary to prevent deception or injury.  Forinstance, certain kinds of DTC advertisements could provide an"800" number for consumers to call for further information, oran alternative source for consumers to obtain the information. They could also encourage consumers to ask their doctors aboutproduct risks and benefits and to ask their pharmacists forpackage insert information.     B.   Tailoring Regulation to the Advertising Medium.     The FDA also asked whether broadcast advertisements shouldbe subject to the same "brief summary" requirements asadvertisements in other media.       Differences among media may affect the likelihood ofdeception from advertising claims and, therefore, theappropriateness of particular approaches to preventing deception. Television advertising typically is presented in thirty to sixtysecond lengths, although fifteen and even ten secondadvertisements are not uncommon.  The brevity of televisionadvertising makes it very difficult to include lengthy or complexdisclosures, or to do so in a comprehensible manner.  Printadvertising, on the other hand, is more conducive tocommunicating relatively complex information than TV advertisingbecause people can read print advertisements at their own speed,and even re-read the information if so inclined.  Similarly,advertising on the Internet can be read at one's own pace and canbe saved or printed for future reference.  Thus, a claim readquickly in a broadcast advertisement might present a differentlikelihood of deception than does the same claim appearing in aprint or on-line format.  Given the variety of media in whichadvertising appears, it may be appropriate in designing measuresto prevent deception, such as disclosure requirements, to takeinto account practical differences among various advertisingvenues.  For instance, the FTC has recognized these differencesand in some cases in which disclosures have been imposed hasdesigned abbreviated versions for use in broadcast media.  Ifnecessary, abbreviated disclosures could be supplemented throughrequirements that more detailed information be made available onrequest and that consumers be made aware of this option.     The FDA has also requested comments regarding the regulationof new advertising technologies, such as the Internet.  Althoughdeveloping information technologies present new possibilities forthe innovative delivery of valuable information to consumers,these technologies can be used to deceive consumers.  Althoughnew media such as the Internet clearly present new challengeswith respect to monitoring and enforcing laws against deception,we believe that the core principles underlying the FTC'sdeception policy apply as well to these developing technologiesas to more traditional advertising media.     C.   Identifying the Source of an Advertisement.     The FDA also seeks comment concerning infomercials andmanufacturer-supported DTC promotions that appear to be sponsoredby independent third-party services.     Consumers' evaluation of information may be affected by aninaccurate perception regarding its sponsorship.  A potential fordeception therefore exists when consumers do not know that whatappears to be a news broadcast or other programming is really aninfomercial, or that what appears to be independently suppliedinformation is really supplied by a product's manufacturer.     This concern about infomercials underlies numerous actionsin recent years by the FTC, challenging the formats used asdeceptive.  In these cases, the FTC typically barredadvertisers from misrepresenting the nature of the "program" andrequired them to disclose, at the beginning of an infomercial andimmediately before any product ordering information, that whatconsumers are watching is a paid commercial.     The FTC also has addressed the third-party endorsementissue, both in its Guides Concerning the Use of Endorsements andTestimonials in Advertising and in law enforcement actions. The Guides suggest that the connections between an endorser and aseller of an advertised product that "might materially affect theweight or credibility of the endorsement (i.e., the connection isnot  reasonably expected by the audience')," should bedisclosed.  The FTC has applied the standards described in theGuides in particular cases, involving endorsers that werebusiness associates of the marketer, an endorser that was anofficer or director, an endorser that was an employee of theadvertiser, and an endorser that was a product distributor. The concern in these cases is that the endorsers had anundisclosed financial interest in promoting the products.  Again,the likelihood of deception depends on the specifics of anindividual ad, and the analysis is therefore conducted on a case-by-case basis.     D.   Regulation of Price Advertising.     As the FDA reviews its advertising regulations, one issuenot mentioned in the Notice may also deserve attention.  TheFDA's existing brief summary requirements may have theinadvertent effect of unnecessarily restricting the disseminationof price information.  While the FDA regulations exempt certaintypes of price claims from the brief summary requirement, theexemption is narrow and apparently would apply only toadvertisements of the price of a specific quantity of a drug, andnot, for instance, to comparative price claims, coupons or otherforms of price reduction information.       The brief summary requirement adds to the cost ofadvertising and may be expected therefore to reduce the amount ofadvertising.  With respect to price advertising, therefore, thebrief summary requirements may result in less price competition. Price advertising can result in lower prices for consumers.  Wetherefore suggest that FDA evaluate whether its limitations onthe exemption for price claims are necessary and desirable.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE FTC AND ANTITRUST DIVISION TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Calendar for Week of January 15, 1996Issue No. 96-02                 For the week of January 15, 1996                       COMMISSION MEETINGS          (Meetings and agendas are subject to change)Wed. Jan. 171:45 p.m.      Closed to the public:  Consideration of proposed               enforcement action in two non-public Part II               matters.               HEARINGS/TESTIMONY BEFORE CONGRESS       (Dates and times are subject to change by Congress)                       Nothing Scheduled.            HEARINGS BEFORE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGESContinues thru Jan. 199:30 a.m.      Subject:  International Association of Conference               Interpreters (et al.); Matter No. D09270;               Administrative Law Judge James P. Timony; Lead               Counsel, Kent E. Cox               Purpose:  Trial               Location:  FTC Headquarters Building, 6th Street                and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.,               Room 532                            SPEECHESMon. Jan. 152:30 p.m.           Commissioner Christine A. Varney will speak                    on the topic, "Vertical Issues: The Federal                    View," followed by a panel discussion, at the                    11th Annual Advanced American Law Institute-                    American Bar Association's Course of Study on                    Product Distribution Marketing.  Cliff Lodge,                    Snowbird, Utah.Tues. Jan. 1611:20 a.m.          Commissioner Christine A. Varney will speak                    on the topic, "Advertising and Unfair                    Competition: FTC Enforcement," followed by a                    panel, at the ALI-ABA meeting.  Cliff Lodge,                    Snowbird, Utah.Thurs. Jan. 18(time notavailable)          Jodie Bernstein, Director of the FTC's Bureau                    of Consumer Protection, will speak at a                    program titled, "Direct Consumer Promotions                    of Prescription Drugs" sponsored by the                    National Consumer's League.  Embassy Row                    Hotel, 2015 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.,                    Washington, D.C.Check the Sunshine Phone, 202-326-2711, for any daily updates on                    the FTC's weekly events.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-31IA060-000326-B020-247http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt17.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021227 text/html 89394HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:10:15 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:53 GMTContent-length: 89205Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt17.html Sample Issue Copyright FTC:WATCH via NewsNet January 17, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Merger Watch End of the line for pipeline deal (513 words) Atmospheric gas merger challenged Three little gases; no little substitutes (487 words) Cranial shunt divestiture ordered in Johnson & Johnson merger (381 words) Going public - A different divestiture (297 words) Merger briefs (158 words) For the next five years -- Buy your toys in Pennsylvania (229 words) Cigarettes under siege: The tobacco industry's two-front federal battle (834 words) Lighter hand proposed for prescription drug advertising (179 words) Self-regulation may move to labels; but NLEA not part of the plan (371 words) Federalism: Maine goes it alone against debt collectors (318 words) Top 10 Scams: Somethings old, nothing new (198 words) RIP: Six more rules deep sixed (463 words) Viaticals: Advice on how you can take it with you before you go (133 words) "Made in U.S.A." Workshop scheduled for late March; consumers reacting (292 words) Arizona therapist network unlikely to cause problems (232 words) Antitrust immunity raises international shipping rates? (364 words) Care Labeling, Take Two (229 words) Briefs Dead Animals (I): People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has (481 words) Antitrust/Consumer Protection Calendar January 24- Deputy Assistant Attorney General David S. Turetsky will (1077 words) Thomas says: antitrust (1632 words) FTC Enforcement Recovery room telemarketer must get $250,000 bond backing (206 words) Indictment filed in job promotion case (212 words) Calorie claims don't add up for Mama Tish's ice cups, agency alleges (194 words) "Project Telesweep" cleans up again (194 words) Training program part of Funeral Rule settlement (193 words) Columbia/HCA's oops (191 words) Persist in prior approval? (126 words) FOR THE RECORD GM order changed (146 words) HEALTHSOUTH divestiture (78 words) Columbia/HCA to divest EMS (83 words) Schnuck supermarket divestiture (111 words) Shell Oil divestiture approved (61 words) Pharmacy divestiture okayed (93 words) Final Order reporter Santa Clara County Motor Car Dealers Assoc. (84 words) Franchise show promoting (80 words) Modified: natural gas pipeline (151 words) News transcripts (88 words) PEOPLE Robert F. Leibenluft has taken over as Assistant Director for Health Care (116 words) Remembering Phil Areeda by Robert Pitofsky (773 words) Employment (103 words) CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996End of the line for pipeline dealHours after the FTC entered federal court to block Questar Corporation fromacquiring a 50 percent interest in Kern River Gas Transmission Company fromTenneco, Inc., the parties called off the deal.  In the past, the partieswould nevertheless be facing a lengthy administrative trial, the price forhaving forced the FTC's hand.  But under the Commission's new enforcementpolicy, the matter is now moot.The $226 million transaction would have given Questar a monopoly over naturalgas transmission services in the Salt Lake City area, the FTC charged in itsshort-lived suit.Questar had a monopoly until 1992, the FTC said, when the Kern River pipelineopened to provide competition in the area.  Kern River is jointly andequally-owned by Tenneco and Tennessee Gas Pipeline Company.  Allowing Questarto gain half ownership in Kern River would halt newly emerged competition inthe area, according to the agency.A senior FTC official said the agency is paying "special attention" toacquisitions in this newly deregulated industry and assigned at least 10Competition Bureau attorneys to this investigation.  In this instance, theofficial said, the staff identified an unusually strong "potentialcompetition" case:  although the acquired company hadn't made a single sale inthe market in which the acquiring company was selling, it had been makingoffers and Questar allegedly always lowered its price and won the business.The case, filed in federal district court in Utah, bears a strikingresemblance to the Justice Department's successful attempt to halt theacquisition of one California natural gas company by another area company inthe 1960s.  The district court allowed that transaction to proceed.  But theSupreme Court, in U.S.  v.  El Paso Natural Gas Co., et.  al.  (376 U.S.  651)reversed the district court, ruling that mere attempts by the acquired companyto enter the market -- though unsuccessful -- had a "powerful influence" onthe market.Questar's decision to abandon the transaction effectively ended theCommission's enforcement activities in this case.  In the past, Questar couldhave been facing administrative litigation.  FTC decisions on whether toproceed with administrative litigation have been made on a case-by-case basis,but respondents rarely escaped.For instance, in 1991, the Commission chose not to proceed to administrativelitigation after going into court to enjoin Wiggins Teape Appleton plc fromacquiring a Vancouver, Washington paper mill owned by Boise CascadeCorporation.  Wiggins did not abandon that transaction until 20 days after theFTC asked a federal court for a preliminary injunction.Under the Commission's new policy it is standard for the agency to close casesonce the acquisition in question is abandoned.  The FTC previously pursuedmost cases administratively when the parties pushed the matter into court,even if only to get an order requiring prior approval of future transactions.Prior approval provisions in orders are now the exception, not the rule, underthe Commission's new policy.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, December 27Civ. 2:95CV 1127S (D. Utah)Contact: William J. Baer, 202/326-2932FAXLine No.  1684 (9 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Atmospheric gas merger challengedThree little gases; no little substitutesThe $2 billion pairing of Praxair, Inc., America's largest industrial gassupplier, and CBI Industries, Inc.  would likely harm competition foratmospheric gases in several parts of the country, the FTC charged last week.The U.S.  market as a whole would not suffer, but parts of California, themidwest and the northeast could be hard hit in markets for nitrogen, oxygenand argon, according to the FTC.  Praxair has agreed to divest four merchantatmospheric gas production plants to settle those charges.Those who stayed awake through science class know that nitrogen, oxygen andargon are the three "atmospheric gases."  They are also very popularcommercial, or "merchant," gases and are shipped to customers either as aliquid, by tanker truck, or in cylinders.Nitrogen is used to create inert environments for heat treating and chemicalblanketing.  Food industries and others also use nitrogen for freezingproducts.  Oxygen is used for combustion and oxidation in foundries, steel andglass plants and for medical purposes.  Argon is used primarily for welding.The common trait of all three gases is that they have no common traits withother gases; there are no suitable substitutes for any of the three.But the gases also have their differences, and the FTC's case against Praxaircarefully balances those differences.  Nitrogen and oxygen can be economicallyshipped only 150 to 300 miles, for instance, while argon -- a more expensivegas -- can be economically shipped much longer distances, up to about 1,000miles, according to the FTC.If Praxair were to acquire CBI, unfettered by divestiture, the Northern andSouthern California markets for nitrogen and oxygen could be hard hit, theagency charged.  In both areas, five competitors would become four.  InNorthern California the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) would jump 431 pointsto 3366, and Praxair would control 32 percent of the market, the FTC said.  InSouthern California, the HHI would take a similar jump, 440 points, landing at2727 in a market where Praxair would dominate with a 34.8 percent share.Nitrogen and oxygen markets in the Northern Midwest and Northeastern U.S.  --and narrower markets therein, such as the Western Wisconsin/SoutheasternMinnesota area and Eastern Connecticut -- could also be harmed, according tothe FTC.The same goes for the merchant argon markets in Eastern Connecticut and theWestern Wisconsin/Southeastern Minnesota area, where Praxair and CBI are "eachother's closest geographic competitor."  CBI's share of the argon market issmall, the FTC said.  But because its plant is so close to Praxair's in thosetwo areas, "localized unilateral anticompetitive effects are likely."Praxair has agreed to divest four of CBI's atmospheric gas productionfacilities.  Plants will be divested in Vacaville, California; Irwindale,California; Bozrah, Connecticut; and Madison, Wisconsin.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, January 11961-0017; Contact: James H. Holden, Jr., 202/326-2682FAXLine No.  1691 (36 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Cranial shunt divestiture orderedin Johnson & Johnson mergerJohnson & Johnson's $1.8 billion merger with Cordis Corporation snagged in themarket for cranial shunts last month.  Johnson & Johnson has agreed to divestthe Cordis's neuroscience business to a Commission-approved buyer within oneyear to settle charges that the acquisition would place 85% of the U.S.neurological shunt market into the hands of only two firms.Neurological shunts are used to treat patients -- primarily children --suffering from the potentially fatal brain disorder hydrocephalus, whichinvolves excessive pressure on the brain from an increase of fluid in theskull.  The shunts, once installed, divert cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) into thebloodstream of patients suffering from hydrocephalus.Combining the shunt businesses of Johnson & Johnson and Cordis would raise theHerfindahl-Hirschman Index to 4059 for the market, the FTC charged.  Themerger would likely lead to higher prices and reduced innovation in themarket, according to the agency.Johnson & Johnson has agreed to divest the Cordis neuroscience business, whichincludes shunts, intracranial pressure drainage systems and neuroendoscopyproducts, tools used to install shunts.  The FTC alleged competitive problemsonly in the market for shunts.  But "[significant synergies between theproducts manufactured and sold by the [Cordis neuroscience business] exist,and Cordis's shunts are sold as part of a broader product line," the FTC staffsaid in its analysis.  "Therefore, a divestiture of the whole business isnecessary to maintain competition in the shunt market."There is one potential snag to the divestiture:  a joint venture betweenCordis and Nobles-Lai Engineering, Inc.  to research, develop and manufactureneuroendoscopy products.  If Nobles-Lai asserts contractual rights, thedivestiture could be held up, allowing Nobles-Lai to benefit from Johnson &Johnson's marketing outlet and possibly giving Johnson & Johnson control overCordis, a situation the proposed order was meant to prevent.To prevent that from occurring the proposed order includes an insurancepolicy.  If Nobles-Lai asserts contractual rights, Johnson & Johnson hasagreed not to contract with Nobles-Lai to research, develop or market anyneuroendoscopy products.  Johnson & Johnson further agreed not to purchasefrom or distribute for Nobles-Lai any such products.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, December 20961-0014; Contact: Ann Malester or Michael R. Moiseyev202/326-2682 or 202/326-3106FAXLine No.  1681 (31 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Going public - A different divestitureOerlikon-Buhrle Holding AG has proposed using Wall Street to divest one of itssubsidiaries in the first divestiture by initial public offering (IPO) ofstock overseen by the FTC.  As envisioned, the company would not directlydivest to another company its turbomolecular pump subsidiary, Balzers-PfeifferGmbH, but would instead offer the shares in Balzers-Pfeiffer.  After that, thepump unit would operate as a stand-alone business.Divestiture of Balzers-Pfeiffer is required under a 1995 order settlingcharges that Switzerland-based Oerlikon-Buhrle's acquisition of Leybold AG, aGerman corporation, would harm competition in the U.S.  turbomolecular pumpmarket.  Turbomolecular pumps are small "jet engine-like devices" whichproduce high vacuum atmospheres used in the production of semiconductors.[FTC:WATCH No.  422, November 7, 1994]The FTC has requested public comment until February 1 on the proposed IPO,though no details of the plan are currently available.  Oerlikon-Buhrle mustfirst jump through Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) hoops beforeBalzers-Pfeiffer can go public, and securities law prohibits disclosure of allbut the most basic data about an IPO until a registration statement has beenfiled with the SEC.  Once that statement has been filed, the Commission plansto offer the public an additional opportunity to comment, though notnecessarily an additional 30 days.The FTC has approved novel forms of divestiture in the past.  In March, 1994it approved Valspar Corporation's plan to combine four of its own plants andfive plants from a company it acquired into a new company, which was then spunoff to shareholders.  That divestiture settled concerns raised when Valsparacquired the Resin Products Division of Cargill, Inc.  [FTC:WATCH No.  408,March 14, 1994]REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 2C-3555; Contact: Daniel P. Ducore, 202/326-2526FAXLine No.  1694 (1 page)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Merger briefsAntitrust issues in the Time Warner - Turner Broadcasting proposed mergerremain far from resolved as the parties have yet to comply with an FTC requestfor additional information.The L'Oreal S.A.  and Maybelline, Inc.  deal is in for a tough time at theAntitrust Division says a source familiar with the Division's investigation,which is being "pursued vigorously."  The parties announced December 26 thatthey had received a request for additional information and said they "hope tofurnish the requested information as promptly as practical."Illinois Tool Works Inc.'s acquisition of Hobart Brothers Co.  remains stalledas ITW searches for a buyer for assets it will have to dispose of to make theFTC go away.Thermo Instrument Systems is still searching for a solution to antitrustproblems the FTC raised in connection with Thermo's pending acquisition ofFisons plc's Scientific Instruments Division.SUSAN NOTE: Merger Watch Dept. ends here.Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996For the next five years --Buy your toys in PennsylvaniaPennsylvania's attorney general has persuaded Playmobil USA, Inc.  to donate$201,000 to 12 charities and another $50,000 to the state's litigation fund tosettle allegations that the firm and its German parent, geobra BrandstaetterGmbH & Co.  KG have been keeping the prices of "toy figures, playsets andaccessories" artificially high through a resale price maintenance program.The agreement, filed in U.S.  District Court for the Middle District ofPennsylvania, also enjoins Playmobil from "entering into any contract,combination, conspiracy, agreement or arrangement with any Pennsylvania dealerto fix, raise, maintain or stabilize the retail prices at which Playmobilproducts are sold to the public, or at which Pennsylvania dealers mayadvertise Playmobil products."  [emphasis added]Playmobil is also enjoined "from adopting or establishing any cooperativeadvertising policy that denies or reduces advertising rebates or allowances toa Pennsylvania dealer for any reason related to that dealer's advertisedprices."  [emphasis added]The consent decree also bars Playmobil from cutting off dealers ordiscriminating against them with regard to supply or credit terms "for failingto adhere to any of Playmobil USA's suggested retail price for thoseproducts."On the other hand, Playmobil may continue to suggest prices.The order terminates in five years.REFERENCE: Pennsylvania v. Playmobil USA, Inc.Civil Action No. 1: CV-95-0287FAXLine No. 1696 - 14 pagesBack to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Cigarettes under siege:The tobacco industry'stwo-front federal battleWhile the tobacco industry dug in to fight against tobacco advertisingregulations proposed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the FTC poiseditself to attack from the rear last month.  The agency staff, responding tosuggestions from the National Cancer Institute (NCI), is busy readying aproposal for the FTC that could change the way cigarette tar, nicotine andcarbon monoxide values are determined and how they are advertised.An NCI panel announced it would suggest changes a year ago after concludingthe FTC testing procedures yield tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide figuresthat do not accurately reflect the amount of those substances consumersactually get from smoking.  The tobacco industry may agree with thatconclusion, according to a December 28 Wall Street Journal report.  The reportquotes an internal Philip Morris document that said the FTC testing method"should be retained:  It gives low ratings."Consumer Protection Bureau Chief Jodie Bernstein acknowledged that her staffis working on a proposal based on the NCI panel's suggestions.  The NCI hasnot yet released an official report of the two-day conference conducted by itspanel in December 1994 but the report is expected within the month.  The panelitself released its findings at the conclusion of the conference.  [FTC:WATCHNo.  425, December 19, 1994]The NCI panel recommended modifications to the FTC's testing methodology totest the "ranges" of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide levels in cigarettes.Those ranges should be graphically depicted on each pack of cigarettes sold,according to NCI, which further suggested use of "appropriate" disclaimers onpackages and in ads for cigarettes classified as either "light" or "ultralight."  The disclaimers would inform consumers that, at best, evidencesuggests minimal health benefits from smoking lower tar cigarettes.The FTC staff is exploring ways to change the machine testing protocols tomore accurately reflect the way smokers actually smoke, according toBernstein.  The staff proposal will also focus on changes in advertising thatwould more accurately reflect the levels of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxidesmokers actually get from smoking.  A graphic depiction of the ranges is amongthe proposals under consideration at the FTC.The NCI panel's suggestion of a graphic depiction of the ranges on every packis a recommendation that could run up against the Cigarette Labeling andAdvertising Act.  That law mandates rotating health warnings on cigarettepackages and bars the FTC from requiring any alternative warning.  But the Actdoes not restrict the FTC from requiring alternative health warnings inadvertising.  It is in ads, not on packages, that the FTC staff is consideringmandating the graphs of tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide values.At the FDAThe FDA attempt to restrict tobacco advertising in the name of children istaking heat off any FTC effort at tobacco advertising regulation.  The tobaccoindustry launched a major legal strike against the FDA proposal earlier thismonth, on the deadline for comments.  As the media scrambled to cover thetobacco industry offensive, the FTC's comment to the FDA got lost in theshuffle.But those comments supported the FDA's goal -- to make cigarettes lessaccessible and less attractive to children.  The FTC recommended narrowlytailoring the regulations to that goal to avoid a First Amendment fight butencouraged the FDA to "consider a coordinated regulatory enforcement approachwith state and local government agencies."Commissioner Mary L.  Azcuenaga concurred with the FTC filing of comments atthe FDA, but only "insofar as it reflects the Commission's expertise inanalyzing advertising claims."  The constitutionality of the FDA's regulationsis not for the FTC to consider, she said.  "I would have preferred that theCommission's comment focus on the empirical basis for the assumptions on whichthe proposed regulations rest."  Azcuenaga would also have preferred that heragency's comments have addressed those studies not contained or referenced inthe FDA notice that could "undermine the basis for the proposed regulations."FDA will have to face that issue sooner or later if there is a First Amendmentchallenge, she opined.The FTC comments also noted that the panel's Notice of Proposed Rulemakinglinked use of tobacco products by kids with advertising but did "not indicatethat tar, nicotine and carbon monoxide ratings play any role in the decisionsof children and adolescents to use tobacco products, or to choose among thevarious products."Advertising industry associations added their voices to the FDA's mountain ofcomments.  It is the FTC, not the FDA, that has jurisdiction over tobaccoadvertising issues, according to the American Association of AdvertisingAgencies (AAAA).  The AAAA also opposes the FDA proposal on First Amendmentgrounds but was careful to limit its objections to advertising issues alone.The ad group did not address whether the FDA has authority to regulate tobaccoproducts as drugs.REFERENCE:  FTC Press Advisory, January 3 (FTC comments to FDA); Contact:  Lee Peeler, 202/326-3090 FAXLine No.  1681 (32 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Lighter hand proposed forprescription drug advertisingThe Food and Drug Administration (FDA) should use a looser, less regulatorystyle for direct-to-consumer (DTC) advertising of prescription drugs, the FTCstaff has advised.  Important benefits can come from DTC advertising.  But thecurrent structure required in ads could be limiting those benefits, said staffmembers of the FTC's Economics and Consumer Protection Bureaus in comments tothe FDA last week.Currently, disclosures that appear in ads -- known as "Brief Summaries" -- are"highly technical, complicated and lengthy," the FTC staff said.  A bettersolution might be simple disclosures advising consumers to check with theirdoctors for more information.The FDA's existing brief summary requirement may also inadvertently preventprice advertising and the use of coupons and other price reduction devices,according to the FTC staff.  Because price advertising can result in lowerprices, the FDA should consider whether limitations on price advertising are"necessary and desirable."REFERENCE: FTC staff comments (January 11, 1996); FDA Docket No. 95N-0227; Contact: Susan Cohn, 202/326-3053 or Jan Pappalardo, 202/326-3380FAXLine No.  1693 (30 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Self-regulation may move to labels;but NLEA not part of the planThe current self-regulatory mandate for the advertising industry should beextended to include claims made on product labels, a panel of advertisingindustry experts has recommended.  But it is not the industry's business toconsider whether labels meet specific Food and Drug Administration (FDA)labeling requirements, the panel said.  The National Advertising ReviewCouncil (NARC), overseer of industry self-regulation efforts, is expected tovote on the group's recommendations within the next few months.The National Advertising Division (NAD) of the Better Business Bureau, thefirst stop for ads in the industry's self-regulation process, has looked atlabel claims in past cases.  But it has done so cautiously, admitting in a1994 case report that "labels are not normally held to be within thejurisdiction of the NAD."  The panel's recommendations, if accepted, wouldmake label inquiries commonplace.But it is the duty of the NAD to evaluate only whether the ads are false,deceptive or misleading, not whether the labels violate FDA or othergovernment regulations, the panel stressed.  The FDA maintains rules fornutrition labeling, promulgated under the Nutrition Labeling Education Act(NLEA), that are stricter than the FTC standards for food advertising.In other news:* Champion's Jogbra may be "technically unsurpassed," but the company hadinsufficient evidence that its product was superior to all others in thecategory "across-the-board," NAD ruled.  Champion promised to cooperate withthe NAD and "communicate more clearly" intended claims.* John O.  Butler Company submitted test data for its Secure Denture AdhesivePaste showing consumers preferred Secure to other denture adhesives.  The testwas flawed, the NAD ruled, and could not back claims that Secure "outholds theleading brands."  The disputed ads are scheduled to run through January 1996,after which they will not be repeated, the company said.* Life Services Supplements, Inc.  agreed to modify ads for its Citri-ThinDiet Supplement after the NAD expressed concerns that the ads might suggestthat Citri-Thin alone could help shed and keep off pounds.  The ads shouldinclude a statement informing consumers that a proper diet and exercise shouldsupplement Citri-Thin.REFERENCE: For copies of NAD or NARB case reports contact Eve Carr, 703/247-9316.Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Federalism:Maine goes it aloneagainst debt collectorsWell before the GOP-dominated Congress decided to give more power to thestates, the state of Maine decided it would seek a little power on its own.In 1994 Maine asked to be exempt from the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act(FDCPA).  The FTC granted that request just before the new year.The FDCPA, passed in 1978, has always allowed states the option ofindependently regulating debt collectors.  In theory, the Act is a minimumsafety net -- states are allowed to pass stricter regulations, but theirregulations must be at least as strict as those outlined in the FDCPA if theyhope to be exempt from the Act.The FTC has now ruled unanimously that Maine's laws protect consumers at leastas well as the FDCPA.  In some instances, the agency noted, the state offersbetter protection.  For instance, Maine has a staff in its Bureau of ConsumerCredit Protection (BCCP) dedicated to protecting the state's consumers fromunfair debt collection practices.  The staff can pursue leads and bringactions the federal government does not have the manpower to pursue.  Andbecause Maine takes a "hands-on" enforcement approach, unfair practices can bestopped quicker, the FTC said, before much damage is done.Civil penalties are lower under Maine's law than under the FDCPA.  But thatState has an enforcement tool the federal government does not -- revocation ofa debt collector's license.  Maine's "strengths more than offset theweaknesses," the FTC said.  And Maine consumers may still privately sue debtcollectors under the FDCPA.Maine is required to file a report with the FTC every two years to keep theCommission apprised of its activities.  The FTC solicited public comments onthe State's proposal in May, 1994.  [FTC:WATCH No.  413, May 23, 1994]REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 28Contact: John F. LeFevre, 202/326-3209FAXLine No.  1685 (37 pages) Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Top 10 Scams:Somethings old, nothing newThe names change and one scam may be more popular one year than the next, butcon artists continued to rely on all the old tricks last year.  As theTelemarketing Sales Rule took effect to ring in the new year, the FTC staffcompiled its list of top 10 scams of 1995.  If this sounds familiar, it is:1. Sweepstakes - You have not won $25,000.2. Travel Scams - Impossible-to-meet restrictions apply.3. Gemstones - Absolutely worthless! How much would you pay?4. Recovery Rooms - Sorry you lost money. Want to lose some more?5. Business Opportunities - Vending machines + a little spare time = disappointment.6. Charitable Solicitations - Sometimes, a small portion of your contribution actually goes to a charity, but not often.7. Advance Fee Loans - Money down for empty promises.8. Toner Rooms - Overpriced office supplies are our specialty.9. Work at Home Plans - Make Christmas ornaments at home; earn millions.10. Credit Repair - Able to fix only what's not really broken.REFERENCE: FTC Press Releases, December 29Contact: Eileen Harrington, 202/326-3127 or Allen Hile, 202/326-3122FAXLine No.  1686 (2 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996RIP: Six more rules deep sixedBeing a consumer in the 1960s was tough.  The lucky ones dodged thepotentially fatal effects of inhaling quick-freeze aerosol glass frostingspray and steered clear of nasty itching fits from fiberglass curtains.  Butstill they were liable to succumb to shady salesman looking to make a fastbuck on non-prismatic binoculars, too-tiny sleeping bags and tablecloths, andextension ladders that didn't quite do the job.The FTC made some rules to stop all that.  All that stopped.  Now, those ruleshave gone the way of disco, and not a decade too soon.  By repealing six morerules, the Commission has now killed seven rules and eight guides.* The Quick Freeze Spray Rule (1969-1995) required manufacturers of aerosolspray products used for frosting beverage glasses to warn consumers thatinhaling the product could be fatal.  The product left the market in 1982,according to the FTC staff, ushered out by that bastion of good taste, Ronco,Inc., marketer of the Popiel Pocket Fisherman.  No product, no rule, theCommission said in repealing the rule.* The Fiberglass Curtain Rule (1967-1995) was likewise unnecessary, sincefiberglass curtains are no longer sold for consumer use.  They were popular inthe 1960s because they were fire retardent.  They were also, well, fiberglass,which says "itchy" to anyone who knows the material.  But technology hasevolved and many fire-retardent fabrics that do not cause skin irritation havereplaced fiberglass fabrics.  No product, no rule.* The Binocular Rule (1964-1995) required marketers of non-prismaticbinoculars to say that their product was non-prismatic.  Technology has driventhe price of prisms down since the rule was promulgated, and nearly allbinoculars today use prisms.  Those that don't -- opera and field glasses, forinstance -- are clearly marketed in a category separate from binoculars, theFTC staff reasoned.  No product, no rule.* The Sleeping Bag Rule (1963-1995) and the Tablecloth Rule (1964-1995) bothgoverned the measurements manufacturers could use when advertising, labelingand marking their products.  The National Conference on Weight and Measures'Uniform Packaging and Labeling Regulation, adopted by 47 states, now governsthe very same thing, for sleeping bags, tablecloths, etc.  State rules in, fedrules out, said the FTC.* Finally, the Extension Ladder Rule (1969-1995) set out rules for labelingextension ladders.  Surprised?  American National Standards Institute (ANSI)standard A14 does the same.  Industry standard in, fed rule out.The FTC's review of old rules continues.  The initiative was started wellbefore President William Jefferson Clinton and his sidekick, Albert Gore, Jr.,decided to reinvent government, but they're not complaining about "overzealousderegulation" at the FTC, either.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 21Contact: Carol J. Jennings, 202/326-3010FAXLine No.  1682 (39 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Viaticals: Advice on how you can take it with you before you goTerminally ill patients are increasingly cashing in their life insurancepolicies and enjoying (or at least using) the money while they can.  Theviatical business is booming and the FTC is now offering a brochure to keepthe dying from going bust.For the families of the terminally ill, instant cash for a life insurancepolicy may seem like money from heaven.  "But viatical arrangements arecomplicated, and must be approached cautiously and with great care," said FTCConsumer Protection Bureau Director Jodie Bernstein.A new FTC brochure, "Viatical Settlements:  A Guide for People with TerminalIllnesses," explains the legal, financial and tax consequences of viaticalsettlements.  Copies are available through the FTC's Public Reference Branch,202/326-2222.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 26Contact: Eileen Harrington, 202/326-3127Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996"Made in U.S.A." Workshopscheduled for late March;consumers reactingJudging from the latest consumer comments to hit the public record in theFTC's search for a "Made in the U.S.A."  advertising and labeling standard,the Commission's old standard is still the best standard.The FTC has historically required unqualified Made in the U.S.A.  claims to bebacked by a product made entirely, or virtually entirely, in the UnitedStates.  Manufacturers, citing the increasingly global marketplace, haveargued that few products can nowadays meet such a stringent standard.Consumers, however, have asked the FTC to maintain that high standard forunqualified claims.  "If 75% of the product was made in the USA and 25% wasmade in China, then state that on the label," says one commenter.  Moregruffly, another expressed the same sentiment:  "If a shoe is 20% foreign +80% [Made in the] USA, say so -- we can handle it."The Alabama Textile Manufacturers Association, Inc.  agreed.  "The consumer isentitled to know where a product is manufactured.  We believe any attempt to'fuzzy' that information is wrong," the association said in urging the FTC toretain is standard.The Commission will grapple with "Made in the U.S.A."  advertising andlabeling issues at a public workshop to be held March 26, 27 and possibly even28, 1996, depending "on the number of issues raised."  Requests to participatein the conference are due by January 16.Commissioner Roscoe B.  Starek III dissented without comment on the 4-1Commission decision to schedule the workshop.  Starek has consistentlyresisted efforts to take "Made in the U.S.A."  claims out of the case log andinto the public policy arena.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 19Contact: Elaine Kolish, 202/326-3042FAXLine No.  1679 (9 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Arizona therapist networkunlikely to cause problemsAn Arizona network of physical, occupational and speech therapists is unlikelyto run afoul of the antitrust laws, according to the FTC staff.  In a December7, 1995 letter to an attorney representing the proposed Southern ArizonaTherapy Network, Inc.  (SATNET), the FTC gave a clean bill of health to theventure which, among other things, will rely on a messenger model whencollecting fee information and reporting that information to its members.Under the messenger model, SATNET will act merely as a messenger of feeinformation, collecting it from third-party payers and reporting thatinformation to its members without recommendation.  The FTC/DOJ Health CareStatements set out a safety zone for messenger model ventures that leave up tothe venture's individual members decisions on whether to accept or rejectreimbursement levels.SATNET's plans to collect non-fee information also fall within the safetyzones in the policy statements, the FTC staff said.  And potential futureplans for SATNET to coordinate the setting of capitation rates for its membersis unlikely to cause problems because of the low number of therapistsparticipating in the plan.  Only 13% of physical therapists in the area, 6% ofoccupational therapists and 1% of speech therapists have signed on.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 19Contact: David R. Pender or Judith A. Moreland, 202/326-2549 or 202/326-2776FAXLine No.  1678 (7 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Antitrust immunity raisesinternational shipping rates?Collusion is illegal in most industries, but not in the international shippingindustry.  In fact, collusion is actually encouraged in the shipping industry,and that may lead to higher rates with few offsetting benefits, according to anew government report.Paul S.  Clyde of the DOJ's Antitrust Division and James D.  Reitzes, formerlyof the FTC's Economics Bureau, argue that the use of shipping conferences toset prices for international shipping leads to higher rates when the marketshare of the conference participants is high.  The Shipping Act of 1984,overseen by the Federal Maritime Commission (FMC), grants antitrust immunityto these conferences, which have existed since the 19th century.  While theconferences do not act as perfect cartels, they don't promote perfectcompetition either, say Clyde and Reitzes in their December, 1995 report, "TheEffectiveness of Collusion Under Antitrust Immunity:  The Case of LinerShipping Conferences."Conference participants must submit rates to the FMC for review and approval.The FMC is charged with assuring the rates are neither too high nor too low.In some conferences, shippers are legally allowed to discount the fees theyfile.  But in many others, discounting is deemed rebating, a practice that theFMC condemns.  Between 1985 and 1989, the FMC assessed more than $12 millionin penalties for rebating, the report states, essentially charging companieswith the egregious practice of competing on price.The evidence "indicates that conferences do not act as perfect cartelsmaximizing the joint profits of their members," according to the report."Nonetheless, we find that the level of freight rates is significantly loweron routes where conference members are free to negotiate service contractsdirectly with shippers."The authors note that higher prices were found "on routes where theconference's market share is relatively high (over 80%)."  There may beefficiencies that spring from conferences.  But "even if collective pricing isrequired to encourage efficiency-enhancing investment, the associatedanticompetitive harm may still outweigh the efficiency benefits."REFERENCE:  FTC Press Release, January 4 "The Effectiveness of Collusion Under Antitrust Immunity:  The Case of Liner Shipping Conferences;" Contact: Timothy P.  Daniel, 202/326-3520; FAXLine No.  1689 (32 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Care Labeling, Take TwoIn November, the Commission asked whether its proposal to allow symbols inlieu of words on garment care labels was a good idea.  While pondering thatquestion (until the comment deadline of January 31), consider these other CareLabeling Rule teasers:* Should the mention of new technologies, such as "professional wet cleaning,"be allowed on care labels?* If a garment can be washed or dry-cleaned, should manufacturers be requiredto let consumers know how to wash the product at home?  The rule now allowssuch garments to be labeled with the words "dry clean," though they may notbear the tag "dry clean only."* Should the FTC clarify what constitutes a "reasonable basis" for careinstructions?* Should the definition of water temperatures be changed to reflect currentwashing machine settings?Proposed answers to those questions will be accepted until March 12 as theFTC's review of the Care Labeling Rule continues.  The FTC proposed allowing"care symbols" on garment tags last November in furtherance of the goals ofthe North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).  [FTC:WATCH No.  445,November 20] The FTC staff reasoned that symbols cross borders between theU.S., Canada and Mexico better than words.  ?Comprende?REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 28R511915; Contact: Constance M. Vecellio, 202/326-2966FAXLine No.  1687 (30 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Dead Animals (I):  People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) hasDead Animals (I):  People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) hasweighed in on the FTC's review of its Guides for Select Leather and ImitationLeather Products.  PETA, a combative animal rights group, has proposed"ordering" manufacturers to come up with simpler labels for leather andnonleather goods.  The group recommends that all leather products be labeled"Animals Suffered to Make This Product."  Any non-leather good could belabeled a "Cruelty-free Product."  In this respect, PETA differs from theNational Consumers League (NCL), which has asked the FTC to examine the use ofgeneral claims such as "cruelty-free."  NCL believes such claims are fuzzy.Dead Animals (II):  Leather Industries of America, Inc.  has asked theCommission to set a minimum leather content standard -- 75% -- for productslabeled as "bonded leather."  Bonded leather is leather and non-leather bondedtogether to make a consumer product.  The FTC's Leather Guides currently allowuse of the term bonded leather even if only 1% of a product is leather,according to Leather Industries President Charles S.  Myers.Stephen F.  Quill, President of Ecological Fibers, Inc.  suggests callingproducts with a low leather content "reinforced bonded leather."  Quill's firmmakes book bindings that contain 20% leather.  That's not 100% leather, but"we certainly believe that if you add the word 'reinforced' anyone would knowthat it is not directly from the cow," Quill told the FTC.Sunsetting:  Got an FTC administrative order more than 20 years old?  No youdon't.  Orders now automatically sunset on their 20th birthday.  January 2marked the mass sunset of old orders under the Commission's new automaticsunset policy.  Oly oly in free.Trustees wanted:  The FTC is looking for a few good individuals or "otherentities" to serve as trustees, here's your big chance.  Send your name,experience and areas of expertise to:  Daniel P.  Ducore, Assistant Director,Compliance Division, Bureau of Competition, Federal Trade Commission, Suite2115, 601 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Washington, DC 20580.Global Competition Hearings:  Hurry!  January 26 is the deadline for writtencomments to be added to the record of the FTC's Global Competition.  [FAXLineNo.  1683 (1 page)]Mobile Radio:  A federal district court judge has granted the FTC's requestfor a preliminary injunction barring Falcon Crest Communications from usingfalse claims when selling brokerage services to consumers who hold federalpaging and mobile radio licenses.  The licenses themselves were often thenot-so-valuable fruit of a previous investment scam, according to the FTC.Falcon Crest offered to find high-paying buyers for those licenses, a feat itwas unlikely to accomplish, the FTC charged.  The PI bars false claims andfreezes the assets of Falcon, its parent company, Republic CommunicationsCorp., and company officers and salesmen Joel H.  Cohen, Jordan Drew, GaryPerry and Nicholas Vasti.  [FTC Press Release, December 27; Contact:  StephenGurwitz, 202/326-3272]Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996January 24- Deputy Assistant Attorney General David S.  Turetsky willJanuary 24- Deputy Assistant Attorney General David S.  Turetsky will providea luncheon update on "Communications and Antitrust Issues" at aTelecommunications and Deregulation Conference sponsored by the AmericanConference Institute, New York City.January 24- FTC Commissioner Mary L.  Azcuenaga will speak at the "1996Institute on Computer-Related Technology and Intellectual Property Law in theYear 2000," Palm Springs, CaliforniaJanuary 25- FTC Commissioner Mary L.  Azcuenaga will speak at an American BarAssociation-American Law Institute program "Antitrust/Intellectual PropertyClaims in High Technology Markets," San FranciscoFTC Competition Bureau Director William J.  Baer speaks at the New York StateBar Association Annual Dinner Meeting, Marriott Marquis Hotel, New York City.January 26- "Mergers & Acquisitions in the 90s," Practicing Law Instituteprogram, New York City.  Everything but antitrust.  Fee:  $995.00 Contact:PLI, 800-260-4PLI (4754)January 16-17 - Practicing Law Institute Advanced Antitrust Seminar ondistribution and marketing, New York City featuring, among others, PrincipalDeputy Assistant Attorney General Joel L.  Klein, Wisconsin Assistant AttorneyGeneral Kevin J.  O'Connor, FTC Competition Bureau Assistant Director (Policyand Evaluation) Willard K.  Tom.  Fee:  $895.  Contact 800-260-4PLI.January 17 - "Using the Internet and Other Electronic Media" luncheon programsponsored by the D.C.  Bar's Investment Management Committee (Corporation,Finance and Securities Law Section) with, among others, SEC Market RegulationDivision Associate Director Larry E.  Bergman and Counsel to SEC CommissionerSteven M.H.  Wallman, Emanuel D.  Strauss.  Cost:  $20-$32.  Place:  Ballroom,Marriott at Metro Center, 775 12th St.  NW.  Contact:  202-626-3463.February 1 - FTC Competition Bureau Director William J.  Baer is to be theluncheon speaker at a Business Development Associates' "Antitrust for Hi-TechCompanies" program, the Westin Hotel at San Francisco Airport, California.February 1-2 - Practicing Law Institute Advanced Antitrust Seminar ondistribution and marketing, Los Angeles, with FTC Los Angeles Regional OfficeActing Director Susan L.  Frauens, California Senior Assistant AttorneyGeneral Thomas Greene and U.S.  Antitrust Division Civil Task Force I ActingChief Christopher J.  Kelly.  Fee:  $895.  Contact 800-260-4PLI.February 15-16 - ABA Antitrust Section CLE Institute, "Advanced AntitrustCounseling - the Tough Problems," a "limited enrollment" workshop offersadvice from, among others, former FTC Competition Bureau director Mary LouSteptoe (Skadden, Arps) and former deputy assistant attorney general JudyWhalley (Howrey & Simon).  The Scottsdale Plaza Resort, Scottsdale, Arizona.Tuition:  $695-$740.  Contact:  312-988-5522.  Maximum attendance:  60.February 22 - FTC Competition Bureau Director William J.  Baer will speak tothe National Health Care Lawyers Association, Washington, D.C.February 28 - FTC Chairman Robert Pitofsky and Assistant Attorney General AnneK.  Bingaman are among the speakers at a Bar Association of the District ofColumbia Antitrust Committee Annual Symposium at the Four Seasons Hotel.Other speakers:  FTC Competition Bureau Director William Baer, AntitrustSection Civil Task Force II Chief Mary Jane Moltenbrey, former FTC CompetitionBureau director Mary Lou Steptoe, and former FTC General Counsel Robert Paul.Fee:  $230.00 (additional persons $210.00).  Contact:  202-223-6600.March 7- FTC Policy Planning Director Susan DeSanti will speak at theConference Board, New York City.March 13-15 - FTC Commissioner Mary L.  Azcuenaga joins the faculty at aPracticing Law Institute Advanced Antitrust Workshop in Key Biscayne, Fla.Fee:  $1,095.  Contact 800-260-4PLI.March 22 - FTC Competition Bureau Deputy Director Mark Whitener will addressthe North Carolina State Bar Association's Antitrust and Trade RegulationSection in Cary.  .HEADLINE You must remember this ...  .TEXT Speeches andtestimony by FTC commissioners and senior staff in 1995Texts are available from the FAXLine or from our daily update on Lexis, TheFTC and Antitrust Division TodayChairman Robert Pitofsky 04/20/95  opening statement at IVDS/DBS news conference 08/07/95  different approach to antitrust enforcement 10/26/95  international antitrust/FTC perspective Commissioner Janet D. Steiger 01/23/95  to ABA re: harmonizing antitrust law w/NAFTA 03/24/95  testimony before House Appropriations Committee04/07/95  to ABA "Report From the Federal Trade Commission" 04/10/95  at Global Info Infrastructure Conference 04/11/95  to NY Bar, Antitrust Breakfast Group re: Merger Enforcement04/24/95  at American Resort Develpment Assoc. on Consumer Protection07/06/95  competition law & policy in the new Europe 11/09/95  healthcare antitrust enforcement issuesCommissioner Mary L. Azcuenaga 01/26/95  intellectual property and antitrust03/15/95  mergers from the view of the FTC 05/11/95  advertising regulation and the free market 05/12/95  merger & antitrust law enforcement Commissioner Christine A. Varney06/06/95  competition in food marketing industry08/07/95  reforming merger enforcement at the FTC 07/25/95  cooperation between enforcement agencies07/17/95  vertical merger enforcement challenges10/06/95  antitrust and technology issues 10/13/95  Franchise Rule Review 11/01/95  privacy in the electronic age10/23/95  healthcare/antitrust interface issues 05/10/95  health industry consolidation/corporatization 05/02/95  efficiency justifications in hospital mergers04/12/95  Chicago Assn Law Symp re: Associations/Antitrust04/05/95  to ABA re: consumer protection policy for 21st Century04/03/95  to telemarketers re: Telemarketing Rule 03/27/95  managed care revolution/competition policy03/15/95  antitrust and intellectual property protection02/22/95  to DC Bar re: Antitrust and Standard Setting02/16/95  to Natl Health Lawyers Assn re: vertical mergers, etcCommissioner Roscoe B. Starek02/24/95  at New Age in Antitrust" conference03/17/95  limits of antitrust cooperation/merger policy 04/25/95  the Environmental Marketing Guidelines05/10/95  reasserting the competitive edge06/07/95  dissenting statement in closure of Nestle/Alpo06/07/95  consumer protection/information revolution09/29/95  international aspects of antitrust enforcement10/13/95  environmental/food advertising issues General Counsel Steven Calkins09/12/95  testimony re: government in the Sunshine ActSecretary Donald Clark 04/21/95  - to Natl Assn Customer Accounting Admins re: Robinson-Patman Act 06/07/95  speech re: the Robinson - Patman ActCompetition Bureau Director William Baer08/09/95  recent antitrust developments at the FTCDeputy Competition Bureau Dir. Mark Whitener12/05/95  to Amer Enter. Instit re: antitrust/medicare Whitener & Policy Planning Dir. Susan DeSanti01/13/95  vertical restraints and mergers Competition Bureau Asst. Dir. Ronald Rowe08/31/95  - testimony re: FTCs power over grain/   livestock products Economics Bureau Director Jonathan Baker09/28/95  vertical restraints/horizontal consequencesConsumer Protection Bureau Dir. Jodie Bernstein12/07/95  opening statement at Green Guides workshopAssoc. Dir. for Advertising Practices C. Lee Peeler02/23/95  advertising & the law in the electronic ageFormer Competition Bureau Dir. Mary Lou Steptoe 02/22/95  trade association/analytical standards 03/14/95  New Remedies/Increased Enforcement 03/02/95  to Conference Bd. - competition/collaboration04/05/95  to ABA re: healthcare boycotts, mergers,    provider networksConsumer Protection Bureau Dir. Chris White*02/10/95 - Commission testimony re:  Regulatory Flexibility Act compliance*now in office of general counselBack to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Thomas says: antitrustAt the end of 1995, FTC:WATCH asked the House of Representatives computersystem how many bills involving antitrust issues had been introduced duringthe year.  Answer:  96.Here they are.  Those items having the largest concentration of the relevantterm ("antitrust") appear first in the list.1 .  Professional  Baseball Antitrust  Reform Act  of 1995  (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.386]2 .  To provide that professional baseball teams, and leagues composed of suchteams, shall be subject to the antitrust laws.  (Introduced in the House)[H.R.749]3 .  Major League Baseball Antitrust Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in theSenate) [S.416]4 .  To apply the antitrust laws to major league baseball in certaincircumstances, and for other purposes.  (Introduced in the Senate) [S.415]5 .  To provide that professional baseball teams, and leagues composed of suchteams, shall be subject to the antitrust laws.  (Introduced in the House)[H.R.106]6 .  Baseball Antitrust Restoration Amendment of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.105]7 .  Major League Baseball Antitrust Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in theSenate) [S.627]8 .  Major League Baseball Antitrust Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.1612]9 .  Charitable Gift Annuity Antitrust Relief Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.2525]10 .  Antitrust Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House) [H.R.1641]11 .  Antitrust Consent Decree Reform Act of 1995 (Reported in the House)[H.R.1528]12 .  Antitrust Consent Decree Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1528]13 .  Antitrust and Communications Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.411]14 .  National Pastime Preservation Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate)[S.15]15 .  Baseball Fans and Communities Protection Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.45]16 .  Baseball Fans and Communities Protection Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.365]17 .  Baseball Fans and Communities Protection Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.120]18 .  Charitable Giving Protection Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate)[S.978]19 .  National Commission on Professional Baseball Act of 1995 (Introduced inthe House) [H.R.735]20 .  Rural Health Improvement Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate) [S.806]21 .  Economic Revitalization Act (Introduced in the Senate) [S.1148]22 .  Rural Hospital Survival Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House) [H.R.424]23 .  Stop Turning Out Prisoners Act (Reported in the Senate) [H.R.2076]24 .  Giles Act (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2022]25 .  Health Care Accessibility Expansion Act of 1993 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.2051]26 .  Livestock Concentration Report Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.2506]27 .  Rural Health Development Act (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2411]28 .  Rural Health Development Act (Introduced in the Senate) [S.1268]29 .  Consumer Choice Health Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1424]30 .  Livestock Concentration Report Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate)[S.1340]31 .  Federal Fair Franchise Practices Act (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1717]32 .  Basic Health Care Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1234]33 .  Manufacturing Technology and Extension Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.1844]34 .  Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in theSenate) [S.240]35 .  Health Care Improvement Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2071]36 .  Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 (Enrolled Bill(Sent to President)) [S.227]37 .  Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 (Passed by theSenate) [S.227]38 .  Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 (Reported inthe House) [H.R.1506]39 .  Department of Energy National Security Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (Passedby the Senate) [S.1126]40 .  Department of Energy National Security Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (Placedin the Senate) [S.1126]41 .  Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and RelatedAgencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (Reported in the House) [H.R.2076]42 .  Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 (Reported inthe Senate) [S.227]43 .  Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and RelatedAgencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (House Bill Referred to a Senate Committee)[H.R.2076]44 .  Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and RelatedAgencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (Passed by the House) [H.R.2076]45 .  To make technical corrections in the Satellite Home Viewer Act of 1994and other provisions of title 17, United States Code.  (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.1861]46 .  Water Desalinization Research and Development Act of 1995 (Introduced inthe Senate) [S.811]47 .  Federal Buildings Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate) [S.204]48 .  Minority Business Development Act of 1993 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.114]49 .  Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2149]50 .  Propane Education and Research Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1514]51 .  Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate) [S.1356]52 .  Dioxin Reduction and Incinerator Alternatives Act of 1995 (Introduced inthe House) [H.R.2211]53 .  Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 (Introduced inthe House) [H.R.1506]54 .  USEC Privatization Act (Introduced in the Senate) [S.755]55 .  To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to preserve and reformthe medicare program.  (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2486]56 .  Department of Energy Abolishment Act (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1993]57 .  Communications Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House) [H.R.1555]58 .  Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and RelatedAgencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (Engrossed Senate Amendment) [H.R.2076]59 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Engrossed House Amendment) [S.244]60 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Placed in the Senate) [H.R.830]61 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Passed by the House) [H.R.830]62 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Reported in the House) [H.R.830]63 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House) [H.R.830]64 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Introduced in the Senate) [S.244]65 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Enrolled Bill (Sent to President))[S.244]66 .  Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (Reported in the Senate) [S.244]67 .  To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to preserve and reformthe medicare program. (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2425]68 .  Communications Act of 1995 (Reported in the House) [H.R.1555]69 .  Interstate Commerce Commission Sunset Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.1436]70 .  To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to preserve and reformthe medicare program (Introduced in the House) [H.R.2485]71 .  Communications Act of 1995 (Engrossed House Amendment) [S.652]72 .  To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to preserve and reformthe medicare program. (Reported in the House) [H.R.2425]73 .  To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to preserve and reformthe medicare program. (House Bill Referred to a Senate Committee) [H.R.2425]74 .  To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to preserve and reformthe medicare program. (Passed by the House) [H.R.2425]75 .  Transportation Regulatory Streamlining Act of 1995 (Introduced in theSenate) [S.1140]76 .  Job Creation and Wage Enhancement Act of 1995 (House Bill Referred to aSenate Committee) [H.R.9]77 .  Job Creation and Wage Enhancement Act of 1995 (Passed by the House)[H.R.9]78 .  Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the Judiciary, and RelatedAgencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (House Appropriation Bill as Passed bySenate) [H.R.2076]79 .  To further the goals of the Paperwork Reduction Act to have Federalagencies become more responsible and publicly accountable for reducing theburden of Federal paperwork on the public,...  (Passed by the Senate) [S.244]80 .  Family Health Insurance Protection Act (Introduced in the Senate) [S.7]81 .  Telecommunications Competition and Deregulation Act of 1995 (HouseAppropriation Bill as Passed by Senate) [S.652]82 .  Telecommunications Competition and Deregulation Act of 1995 (Passed bythe Senate) [S.652]83 .  Telecommunications Competition and Deregulation Act of 1995 (Reported inthe Senate) [S.652]84 .  Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (Reported in theSenate) [S.240]85 .  Omnibus Export Administration Act of 1995 (Introduced in the House)[H.R.361]86 .  Balanced Budget Reconciliation Act of 1995 (Placed in the Senate)[S.1357]87 .  Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Improvement Act of 1995(Introduced in the Senate) [S.3]88 .  Seven-Year Balanced Budget Reconciliation Act of 1995 (Reported in theHouse) [H.R.2491]89 .  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (Reported in theHouse) [H.R.1530]90 .  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (Placed in theSenate) [S.1026]91 .  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (House BillReferred to a Senate Committee) [H.R.1530]92 .  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (Passed by theHouse) [H.R.1530]93 .  Seven-Year Balanced Budget Reconciliation Act of 1995 (Introduced in theHouse) [H.R.2517]94 .  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (HouseAppropriation Bill as Passed by Senate) [H.R.1530]95 .  National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1996 (EngrossedSenate Amendment) [H.R.1530]96 .  Restructuring a Limited Government Act (Introduced in the House)[H.R.1923]Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Recovery room telemarketermust get $250,000 bond backingThe FTC accused Sherri L.  Pollock last January of participating in a schemethat combined two of the hottest cons on the telemarketing circuit:  therecovery room and telefunding.  Pollock last month agreed to post a $250,000surety bond before conducting telemarketing in the future as part of asettlement of those charges.  Pollock is the last defendant to settle in theFTC's case against PFR, Inc.When soliciting charitable donations or payments for prizes or awards, Pollockagreed not to falsely represent any material facts.  Pollock further agreed toavoid false representations when telemarketing any good or service.  She willmonitor her employees to make sure they avoid misrepresentations as well,under the terms of a stipulated final judgment filed in federal court lastmonth.The U.S.  Attorney's Office in Las Vegas, the Las Vegas office of the FederalBureau of Investigation and the Nevada Attorney General's Telemarketing Unitassisted the FTC with its case against PFR.  The case was jointly handled bythe FTC's Division of Service Industry Practices and the FTC's San FranciscoRegional Office.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, December 21Civ. CV-S-95-00074-PMP (LRL) (D. Nev.)Contact: Ra'ouf M. Abdullah, 202/326-3024 or Jerome M. Steiner, Jr., 415/356-5270Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Indictment filed injob promotion caseThe U.S.  Attorney's Office has charged Debra Mink, sole proprietor of anallegedly bogus job placement service operated under the name InternationalServices, with 45 counts of wire and mail fraud.  Ads for InternationalServices allegedly implied the company knew of available jobs, had ties toFortune 1000 companies and had an 80% placement rate, none of which was true.The suit could land Mink in a federal penitentiary for several years ifsuccessful, based on current Federal Sentencing Guidelines.  But first, thegovernment must find her.  Mink disappeared during the FTC's civil caseagainst her.  There is a warrant out for her arrest and the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation (FBI) is involved in the search.By accepting orders for her allegedly bogus service over the phone, Minkcommitted wire fraud, according to the indictment.  Ang sending checks throughthe mail or by Federal Express to pay for ads placed in newspapers across thecountry qualifies as mail fraud, the indictment states.Though ads promised significant job placement assistance, Mink's businessconsisted mainly of resume preparation, according to the indictment.Last September a federal district court judge ordered Mink to pay a$593,206.27 judgment, the amount the court determined had been taken in thescheme.Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Calorie claims don't add upfor Mama Tish's ice cups, agency allegesRepresentations for Mama Tish's Italian Specialties ice cups get a chillyreception from the FTC.  Ads praised the benefits of Mama Tish's ice cups,notably that they are "naturally low in calories."  But of the company's tenregular flavors and two Nutrasweet-sweetened flavors of ice cups, nonequalified as low in calories, the FTC charged.The Food and Drug Administration, in rules promulgated under the NutritionLabeling and Education Act (NLEA), defines a low calorie food as one having 40or fewer calories per serving.  Mama Tish's regular flavor ice cups containedbetween 104 and 145 calories per serving, according to the FTC, and the twoflavors sweetened with Nutrasweet contained 60 calories per serving.Mama Tish's has agreed not to misrepresent the amount of calories or "anyother nutrient or ingredient" in any frozen dessert products.  A safe harborin the proposed consent order against Mama Tish's would allow any claimspermitted under FDA regulations promulgated under the NLEA.The case was handled by the FTC's Chicago Regional Office.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, December 19942-3344; Contact: C. Steven Baker 312/353-8156FAXLine No. 1680 (12 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996"Project Telesweep" cleans up againA telephone vending machine seller has agreed to pay a $10,000 civil penaltyand hang up some of his alleged sales practices.  Fitzgerald Lewis, presidentof Quartercall Communications, Inc., was charged in July with failing toprovide his customers with disclosure documents required by the Franchise Rulewhen selling telephone vending machine business opportunities.  Chargesagainst Lewis stemmed from "Project Telesweep," an enormous federal/statecrackdown of business opportunity fraud.Budding entrepreneurs bought telephone vending machines from Lewis hoping toinstall them in some public location where they would bring in rates of aquarter a minute.  Lewis made claims of specific earnings, according to theFTC.  But Lewis neither backed those earnings claims in writing, nor providedhis customers with the required disclosure documents, the FTC charged.In addition to the civil penalty, Lewis has agreed not to violate theFranchise Rule.  He will not misrepresent material facts when selling anyfranchise or business opportunity in the future, under the terms of a proposedconsent order filed in federal court.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, January 2Civ. 95-935-A (E.D. Vir.); Contact: Eileen Harrington, 202/326-3127 or Allen Hile, 202/326-3122Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Training program part ofFuneral Rule settlementA.H.  Peters Funeral Home of posh Grosse Pointe (Michigan) allegedly failed toprovide its customers with a number of price lists as the FTC's Funeral HomeServices Rule requires.  A.H.  Peters also conditioned the sale of some goodson the purchase of other goods, the FTC charged, a no-no under the Rule.What's the funeral home to do?For starters, A.H.  Peters and its officers, Roy A.  Peters and David L.Peters, have agreed to pay a $60,000 civil penalty.  To make sure they won'tmake the same alleged mistake twice, they have agreed to institute a trainingprogram for the funeral home's employees to guarantee compliance with theRule.According to the FTC, the suburban Detroit funeral home failed to give itscustomers a general price list as the Rule requires.  Same goes for the casketprice list.  And the outer burial price list.  And an itemized writtenstatement of goods and services selected.A.H.  Peters has agreed not to violate the Rule in the future.REFERENCE: FTC Press Release, December 21Civ. 95-76163-DT (E.D. Mich.); Contact: Eileen Harrington, 202/326-3127 or Thomas A. Cohn, 202/326-3532Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Columbia/HCA's oopsRead the fine print.  That's the lesson for Columbia/HCA HealthcareCorporation lawyers, who have asked the Commission to remove a commerciallease from the company's divestiture requirements.  The fact that the leasewas slated to be divested at all is a "minor mistake," Columbia/HCA attorneysargue.Columbia/HCA has asked that the lease for office space used by Infusamed, aninfusion services company, be removed from a hold separate requirement andpromises to file a second request shortly asking that the lease be removedfrom the company's divestiture requirements.Columbia/HCA is required to divest properties in several areas of the countryto settle antitrust charges arising from its acquisition of Healthtrust, Inc.One of those areas is Salt Lake City, Utah, where Columbia/HCA has agreed todivest a package of assets referred to as the "Utah Healthtrust Assets."  Thelease got lumped in with that package mistakenly, according to Columbia/HCA.The public will have 10 days -- not the usual 30 -- to comment onColumbia/HCA's proposed change.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 11C-3619; Contact: Daniel P. Ducore, 202/326-2526FAXLine No.  1692 (8 pages)Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Persist in prior approval?Hoechst A.G.  and its U.S.  subsidiaries have asked the FTC whether theyshould continue to ask the FTC for approval every time they want to buy acetalassets.  A 1991 consent order requires the firms to seek prior approval beforesuch acquisitions.  The Commission policy on prior approval provisions inorders has changed since 1991.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 2; D-9216; Contact: Daniel P. Ducore, 202/326-2526S.C.  Johnson & Son, Inc.  asked much the same a few months ago, and theagency has now set aside a 1993 order against the company.  The prior approvalprovision was the only obligation left in the order.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 28; C-3418; Contact: Daniel P. Ducore, 202/326-2526Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GM order changedGeneral Motors has convinced the Federal Trade Commissioners to soften a 1979order that bars the car maker from placing the name of a car division on anengine label unless the car division also manufactured the engine (i.e., nofair identifying Oldsmobiles as having "Rocket 88" engines when the engineswere built by, say, the Chevrolet Division and installed in Chevy's as well).GM's corporate restructurings since 1979 have resulted in the removal ofengine production from the nameplate divisions that existed then.  Thisautomotive alchemy constitutes changed conditions of fact, determined theCommission, allowing it to reopen and modify the order.  Under the modifiedorder in C-2966, GM can display brand nameplates on engines that arematerially different from those displaying all other brand nameplates, andcannot display different brand nameplates on identical engines.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 22Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996HEALTHSOUTH divestitureEdgefield Rehabilitation L.L.C.  has expressed interest in buying HEALTHSOUTHCorporation's Nashville Rehabilitation Hospital, and HEALTHSOUTH and itssubsidiary, ReLife of Tennessee, Inc.  have asked the Commission whether thatdeal will fly.  Divestiture of Nashville Rehab is required under a 1995 ordersettling charges relating to the deal that made ReLife a subsidiary ofHEALTHSOUTH.  The public has until February 1, 1996 to comment.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 2C-3570; Contact: Elizabeth A. Piotrowski, 202/326-2623Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Columbia/HCA to divest EMSRural/Metro is poised to buy Emergency Medical Service (EMS) of Milton,Florida, but the FTC will have its say first.  Columbia/HCA HealthcareCorporation proposed selling EMS to Rural/Metro to satisfy one divestiturerequirement of a 1995 order settling charges that its $3 billion merger withHealthtrust would harm competition for hospitals in Florida, Louisiana, Texasand Utah.  The Commission must approve the divestiture before it can happen.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 2C-3619; Contact: Elizabeth A. Piotrowski, 202/326-2623Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Schnuck supermarket divestitureWhat goes around may come around, sort of.When Schnuck Markets, Inc.  acquired supermarkets owned by National Holdings,Inc.  the FTC charged the acquisition would harm supermarket competition inthe St.  Louis, Missouri-area.  To settle those charges, Schnuck has proposeddivesting 23 stores in that area to a newly formed company, Family Company ofAmerica, whose senior management "consists largely of former senior managersof the National Holdings, Inc.  supermarket chain."If the divestitures are allowed, Family would become the third-largestcompetitor in the area, Schnuck said in asking for approval of thedivestitures.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 10C-3585; Contact: Roberta Baruch, 202/326-2861Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Shell Oil divestiture approvedThe FTC has given Shell Oil Company the go ahead to divest its polypropylenebusiness to Union Carbide Corporation.  Divestiture of the business isrequired under a 1995 order settling charges relating to the formation of ajoint venture, Montell Polyolefins, between Shell and Montedison S.p.A.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 26C-3580; Contact: Daniel P. Ducore, 202/326-2526Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Pharmacy divestiture okayedRonald T.  Lim, a pharmacist for 23 years, will now own and operate thepharmacy business at the Thrifty store located on Highway #20 in Fort Bragg,California.  Stop in and say hi.Divestiture of the business to someone is required under a 1995 order settlingcharges that TCH Corporation's (now Thrifty PayLess, Inc.)  acquisition of thePayLess drug store chain would harm competition for prescription drug servicesin parts of California, Washington and Oregon.REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 22C-3519; Contact: Daniel P. Ducore, 202/326-2526Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Final Order reporterSanta Clara County Motor Car Dealers Assoc.Members of the Santa Clara County Motor Car Dealers Association must notboycott or refuse to deal with any media outlet, under the terms of an ordermade final on December 13.  The FTC charged the association with leading aboycott of the San Jose Mercury News after the paper ran an article in 1994 tohelp consumers figure out new car invoices.  [FTC:WATCH No.  440, September11, 1995]REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 26C-3630; Contact: Ralph E. Stone, 415/356-5270Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Franchise show promotingBlenheim Expositions, Inc., a franchise trade show promoter, must substantiateearnings claims it uses to draw prospective business owners to its shows.  Anorder, made final on December 22, settles charges that Blenheim misrepresentedthe results of a Gallup Poll, using overly rosy earnings claims in promotionalliterature.  Blenheim also agrees not to misrepresent polls or studies in thefuture.  [FTC:WATCH No.  442, October 9, 1995]REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, January 5C-3633; Contact: Tom Cohn, 202/326-3532Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Modified: natural gas pipelineThe FTC slightly modified its 1995 consent agreement with Phillips PetroleumCompany and Enron Corp.  last month, allowing the company to bypass theagreement's 10 year prior notification provision if it sells Transwestern No.3, located in Beaver and Ellis Counties, Oklahoma to Maxus Energy Corporation.In all other ways the agreement, made final on December 28, is identical tothe agreement the company signed in August settling charges that Phillips'sacquisition of two Enron subsidiaries would eliminate competition between thetwo companies.Under the order, 830 miles of specified natural gas pipeline Phillips was toacquire will stay with Enron.  Phillips will notify the Commission for thenext 10 years before acquiring more than five miles of gas gathering pipelinein the Texas and Oklahoma Panhandle region.  [FTC:WATCH No.  440, September11, 1995]REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 29C-3634; Contact: Ronald B. Rowe, 202/326-2610Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996News transcriptsReuters America, Inc., Federal News Service Group, Inc.  (FNS) and FNSpresident Cortes W.  Randell will not fix the price of news transcripts, underthe terms of an order made final on December 18.  The FTC charged them inSeptember with soliciting and entering into various agreements that had theeffect of allocating customers and fixing the prices at which the firms soldnews transcripts.  [FTC:WATCH No.  441, September 25, 1995]REFERENCE: FTC Press Advisory, December 27C-3632; Contact: Michael E. Antalics, 202/326-2821Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Robert F.  Leibenluft has taken over as Assistant Director for Health CareRobert F.  Leibenluft has taken over as Assistant Director for Health Care inthe FTC's Competition Bureau.  Leibenluft, previously a partner Hogan &Hartson's Washington, D.C.  office, served a 1-1/2 year stint at the FTC freshout of law school in the early 1980s in the Office of Policy Planning.  Hegraduated magna cum laude from Yale University in 1973 and received his J.D.from Boalt Hall School of Law, University of California, Berkeley in 1980.[Biography of Leibenluft:  FAXLine No.  1690 (6 pages)]Hal Shoup, Executive Vice President for the American Association ofAdvertising Agencies (AAAA), became a five star grandfather December 29th withthe birth of his grandson, Jack Taylor Stucky.Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Remembering Phil Areedaby Robert Pitofsky(Phillip Areeda died at the age of 65 Sunday, December 24.  1995)With the death of Phil Areeda last month, the academic community has lost atowering figure.  Those of us who teach law and try to engage in scholarshipknow better than most that, without him, the world is a lesser place.Much of Phil Areeda's public life was committed to antitrust scholarship andhis teaching at Harvard Law School.  I once mentioned to Phil that histreatise was the longest in the history of Western thought not written inGerman.  He enjoyed the description.  At the time he was still working onvolume six or seven, and his response was:  "you have no idea".  At his death,he was working on volume eleven (and anxious that there would not be timeenough to complete the task) and planning volume twelve.The treatise --unique in legal scholarship in its ambition and scope -- wasbegun jointly with Donald Turner and completed with the help of HerbHovenkamp.When work on this treatise started, antitrust was a jumble of conflictingideologies, irreconcilable cases and some diffuse and half--baked ideas.  Thegoal of the authors was nothing less than to bring some order out of thatchaos and they succeeded admirably.  It is amazing the way sections of thetreatise migrated directly to Court of Appeals and Supreme Court decisions andestablished the standard for competitive behavior.Other aspects of Phil Areeda's scholarship were special.  He was endlesslycareful and meticulous -- some scholars would conclude after two or threedrafts,that they were "close enough" to being right and move on.  Phil neverquit reworking a subject until he was fully-satisfied.  There is also aquality of "fairness" in his work -- to scholars with whom he might disagree,to legislative intent, to prior judicial opinions -- that is all too rare inscholarship.  It often appeared that Phil was at greater pains in statingfairly the position of adversaries than in elaborating his own views.  Healways tried to give judicial decisions the benefit of a best rather than aworst interpretation.  Even when he disagreed, he did so with respect andwithout rancor.  Finally, Phil was comfortable with ideology but practical aswell.  He recognized that people and courts are fallible, and that life is notinvariably rational, and his interpretations and conclusions reflect thatunderstanding.Much of the history of antitrust development in recent decades involves theintegration of economics into antitrust analysis.  Phil Areeda (along with DonTurner) were among the very best in bringing economic analysis to bear withoutallowing it to become overly technical or impractical.  It is common now forlegal briefs and scholarly analysis in the antitrust field to cite and discusseconomic insights as well as legal precedent.  That was not true (or at leastnot as true) before Phil helped reshape the field.While most people are aware of Phil's work through the treatise, his principalcommitment may have been as a teacher at the Harvard Law School.  He wasexceptionally popular in the classroom and invariably respected.  Some havedescribed his teaching (heavy with the traditional Socratic method) asorthodox and even "old-fashioned.  That is a fair description if"old--fashioned" means that he was rigorous in class, well organized, andconstantly courteous to his students.  Unlike the current style in somequarters, Phil in the classroom was not there to inculcate students with hispersonal views of the world, but rather to teach a subject.  He brought to theclassroom a sense that he thought his subject was interesting and important,and an infectious enthusiasm that never waned.Somewhere along the way, Phil developed a discriminating taste for good food,good wine, good books and opera.  His wine cellar was the most extraordinaryprivate collection I have seen.  Occasionally we would have lunch or dinner atexcellent places like Lutece, the famous French restaurant in New York.  Philwas a connoisseur and knew the best from second-best, but once the mealstarted, he never discussed the food or the wine -- he enjoyed them anddiscussed other interesting things.Through his teaching, Phil influenced the attitudes and careers of thousandsof Harvard students.  The Areeda Turner Treatise and his other scholarshipwere the most important and constructive influences on antitrust policy in ageneration.  Scores of scholars around the country can testify to hisgenerosity in offering advice, ideas, even inspiration.  Shortly before hisdeath, Phil said "my life has been teaching and writing."  It was a life welllived.Back to Headline List CopyrightFTC:WATCH via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996EmploymentThe Washington, D.C.  office of a growing national firm seeks attorney with6-8 years experience in antitrust counseling to help serve the firm's existingclients and to develop new business opportunities.  The candidate must haveproven ability to work with clients, be able to assume senior responsibilityfor handling client matters and possess intellectual curiosity, initiative anddrive to pursue new areas of practice.  Excellent academic credentials areessential; hands-on experience with antitrust enforcement agency greatlypreferred.  Please send a cover letter and resume to Tammi Curran, RecruitingCoordinator, Andrews & Kurth L.P.P., 1701 Pennsylvania Ave.  NW, Suite 200,Washington, DC 20006.  Back to Headline List WT03-B40-32IA060-000326-B020-280http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt22.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021322 text/html 33091HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:11:16 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:56 GMTContent-length: 32902Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt22.html Sample Issue Copyright THE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEW HOTLINE PROVIDES FUEL PRICE DATA (34 words) HOTLINE PROVIDES RADIO/TV LICENSING INFO (43 words) MONITOR UTILITY COMPANIES THROUGH STATE REGULATORS (188 words) FREE STATE ENERGY DIRECTORY (113 words) TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER FROM NASA (126 words) REPORT ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATION (63 words) AEROSPACE INDUSTRY YEAR-END REVIEW (76 words) GET A DISC FULL OF DEFENSE DATA (79 words) UPDATE ON ALTERNATIVE MOTOR FUELS (59 words) R&D FIRMS & MANUFACTURERS IN COLORADO (106 words) FREE MONTHLY NEWS OF CERAMICS RESEARCH (71 words) TRIO OF TRANSPORTATION INFO RESOURCES (123 words) GUIDE TO DEFENSE-RELATED INFORMATION (91 words) ASK THE EDITOR: CALIFORNIA COMPANIES (308 words) STATE UTILITY COMPANY REGULATORS (748 words) DIRECTORIES COVER GULF COAST OIL INDUSTRY (118 words) RULES FOR UPGRADING COMPANY SERVICE (75 words) BROOKINGS FOCUSES ON HEALTH CARE (112 words) BUSINESS LOCATIONS OF TOP 1,000 COMPANIES (99 words) ALMANAC PROVIDES DETAILED STATE DATA (102 words) DEVELOP CREATIVITY IN YOUR ORGANIZATION (60 words) NEW DIRECTION FOR EPA? (68 words) FACTS AND FIGURES ON AEROSPACE INDUSTRY (76 words) DIRECTORY CONTAINS 116,000 FAX NUMBERS (71 words) HOW FISCAL POLICY AFFECTS AGE GROUPS (64 words) COAL TRANSPORTATION COSTS AND PATTERNS (52 words) STUDY GEOLOGICAL HAZARDS BEFORE YOU BUILD (75 words) IMPORTANCE OF DERIVATIVES TO BANKS (63 words) FREEBIES FROM THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (121 words) CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996NEW HOTLINE PROVIDES FUEL PRICE DATAFind up-to-date information on gasoline and diesel fuel prices by calling a new FREE National Energy Information Center hotline at 202-586-6966.  The data were formerly provided by the now defunct Interstate Commerce Commission.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996HOTLINE PROVIDES RADIO/TV LICENSING INFOGet FREE telecommunications-related inform-ation through a new hotline at the Federal Communications Commission's Gettysburg, PA, Licensing Division.  Call the automated information system at 800-322-1117 between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. for guidance on availability of records, call sign assignments, form requests, and more.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996MONITOR UTILITY COMPANIES THROUGH STATE REGULATORSElectric power companies, natural gas providers, pipelines, and other public utilities are highly regulated at the state level.  They all file reams of valuable information with their respective states' Public Utility Commissions or equivalent regulatory authorities. Much of this material is readily available to the business researcher.  Current and recent historical information such as plant locations and facilities, fuel consumption, sales, smokestack emissions and other pollution data are yours for the asking.  So to is valuable information on future plans such as expansions, major equipment purchases, land acquisitions, and much more. Regulatory filings are generally the first items to go after.  These are normally provided promptly on request.  But don't overlook the rich source of material provided in conjunction with Public Utility Commission hearings, feasibility studies, and the like.  Unless you know of a specific item's availability, locating these collections of in-depth testimonies, exhibits, and studies will likely require a visit by you, a staff member, or a hired researcher.  Call the applicable Public Utility Commission for the location of its document facility, visit it, and pore through the file cabinets and binders for valuable intelligence.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996FREE STATE ENERGY DIRECTORYIf you need even more energy information sources at the state level than the utility company regulatory authorities found on pages 4-5 of this issue, request THE INFORMATION REPORT's FREE, (for subscribers only) DIRECTORY OF STATE ENERGY AGENCIES.  Included for each state is complete contact information for the State Energy Office, State Geologist, and Public Utilities Commission.  For many states, other energy-related offices are also listed-ranging from Alabama's State Oil and Gas Agency and Oil and Gas Board to the Wisconsin Energy Bureau and the Wyoming Oil and Gas Conservation Commission. Send a 32-cent stamped, self-addressed envelope with your request to Subscriber Services, Washington Researchers, Ltd., P.O. Box 19005, Washington, DC  20036-9005.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER FROM NASARead some 50 success stories showing how technology developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has been used by companies and other organizations. SPINOFF is a FREE report that provides case histories as well as showing how technology transfer works at NASA.  A companion report, AN EXPLORATION OF BENEFITS FROM NASA "SPINOFF", also FREE, indicates that more than 350 organizations have reapplied NASA R&D technology to their commercial products and services.  It provides an estimate of sales revenues created, taxes generated for the federal treasury, and jobs created through NASA tech transfer. For copies of either or both reports, contact the Center for AeroSpace Information, Technology Transfer Office, NASA, 800 Elkridge Landing Road, Linthicum Heights, MD  21090-2934, 301-621-0333; fax 301-621-0134; e-mail "tbhelp@sti.nasa.gov".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996REPORT ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS REGULATIONDespite the temporary federal government shutdown, departments and agencies are beginning to release annual reports on their activities.  Among the first is the Federal Communications Commission FCC). The FCC's 60TH ANNUAL REPORT, describing the Commission's regulatory activities for the past fiscal year, costs $9.50 from the Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15220-7954, 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.  Specify Order No. 004-000-00500-7.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996AEROSPACE INDUSTRY YEAR-END REVIEWHow did the aerospace industry fare in 1995?  You can get a detailed statistical picture, along with forecasts for 1996 in a FREE report just released by the Aerospace Industries Association (AIA). 1995 YEAR-END REVIEW AND FORECAST includes commentaries plus tables on sales by product group and type of customer, shipments, orders, backlog, profits, imports, and industry balance of trade. To obtain a copy, contact AIA, 1250 Eye Street, N.W., Washington, DC  20005-3922, 202-371-8400.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996GET A DISC FULL OF DEFENSE DATAYou can get an entire library of information published by the Department of Defense on a single low-priced CD-ROM. JOINT ELECTRONIC LIBRARY includes publications of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; selected Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps publications; military-related papers, articles, and studies; military indexes; terminology used by the defense services; and retrieval software. The LIBRARY, Order No. 008-000-00665-2, costs $15 from the Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15220-7954, 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996UPDATE ON ALTERNATIVE MOTOR FUELSALTERNATIVES TO TRADITIONAL TRANSPORTATION FUELS is a 97-page report that provides information such as the number of alternative fueled vehicles in use, alternative and replacement fuel consumption, and greenhouse gas emissions resulting from all motor fuels. The study, Order No. 061-003-00891-7, costs $7 from the Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15220-7954, 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996R&D FIRMS & MANUFACTURERS IN COLORADOThe BOULDER COUNTY R&D/MANUFACTURERS DIRECTORY provides detailed information on nearly 1,000 Colorado companies.  Each entry includes company name, address, phone and fax numbers, names of key contacts, product descriptions, SIC codes, and revenue range.  Advertising by listed companies provides additional information. The reference is divided into separate alphabetical sections for each category of high-tech company such as biotech, computers and peripherals, plastics, software, and telecommunications.  A standard alphabetical index plus three others arranging companies under categories covering exporters, importers, and number of employees, are included. The reference costs $28 from THE BOULDER COUNTY BUSINESS REPORT, 4865 Sterling Drive, Suite 200, Boulder, CO  80301-2349, 303-440-4950.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996FREE MONTHLY NEWS OF CERAMICS RESEARCHA FREE monthly newsletter briefs readers on all aspects of research into advanced ceramic materials and properties. The CIAC NEWSLETTER also keeps you informed on the wealth of new publications and services offered by the Ceramics Information Analysis Center, a Defense Department facility, including awareness bulletins, bibliographies, studies, and other resources. Send your subscription request to CIAC/CINDAS, Purdue University, 2595 Yeager Road, West Lafayette, IN  47906-1398, 800-224-6327; fax 317-496-1175.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996TRIO OF TRANSPORTATION INFO RESOURCESThe Bureau of Transportation Statistics offers many publications of interest to researchers focusing on highway, waterway, air or rail transport topics.  Three especially valuable FREE offerings are: NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION STATISTICS 1995.  This publication illustrates transportation activity for all major modes.  Trends in performance; safety; and motor vehicle sales, production, and costs are also presented. TELEPHONE CONTACTS FOR USERS OF FEDERAL TRANSPORTATION STATISTICS is a 20-page pamphlet that lists names and phone and fax numbers of transportation specialists in the federal government. TRANSPORTATION ACRONYM GUIDE contains definitions of acronyms used throughout the federal government. All are available from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Data User Services, U.S. Department of Transportation, 400 7th Street, S.W., Washington, DC  20590, 202-366-3282; fax 202-366-3640.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996GUIDE TO DEFENSE-RELATED INFORMATIONHOW TO GET IT:  A GUIDE TO DEFENSE-RELATED INFORMATION RESOURCES describes Defense-related information available through publications; organizations; programs and services; and software, data bases, and automated information services. The GUIDE, Order No. AD-A298436, costs $11 from the Reference Services Division, Defense Technical Information Center, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 0944, Fort Belvoir, VA  22060-6218, 800-225-3842; fax 703-767-9070; e-mail "msorders@dtic.mil".  The reference is also available on diskette in Word for Windows or Mac-compatible Word versions for $20.  For PCs, cite Order No. AD-M000517; for Macintosh, cite Order No. AD-M000518.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996ASK THE EDITOR:  CALIFORNIA COMPANIES"Dear Editor:  I am looking for a collection of printed resources covering smaller companies in California.  Do you have any recommendations?  C.F." You didn't specify an industry category, so our response is of necessity fairly broad.  You might want to check the following resources.  Review them at your California business reference library and decide which will be appropriate to your needs. CALIFORNIA MANUFACTURERS REGISTER:  Includes product descriptions.  Provides complete contact information, SIC codes, number of employees, locations of all facilities, sales, year established, and more. CALIFORNIA SERVICES REGISTER:  Includes the same type of information as provided in the California Manufacturers Register, but for firms offering services. CALIFORNIA INTERNATIONAL TRADE REGISTER:  Includes information on California companies involved in international trade.  Provides information on imports and exports, location of foreign offices, names and locations of foreign agents, and complete contact information for the California-based headquarters. DUN'S REGIONAL BUSINESS DIRECTORY:  Los Angeles Suburban Area:  Basic contact and financial information on companies in the region.  Includes SIC codes. ORANGE COUNTY BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DIRECTORY:  Provides company name, address, phone and fax number, number of employees, and names of key contacts. RICH'S HIGH-TECH BUSINESS GUIDE TO SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA:  Includes names, addresses, phone and fax numbers, number of employees, and more. WALKER'S MANUAL OF WESTERN CORPORATIONS:  Provides financial data on corporations in 13 Western states and Western Canada.  Excellent coverage of-but not limited to--banks and other financial institutions. For specific companies on your target list, consider subscribing to their headquarters home town newspapers and request that you be placed on their mailing lists.  In the case of companies whose securities are publicly traded, drop a note to the Director of Shareholder Relations, requesting that you be placed on the mailing list to receive quarterly and annual reports as well as press releases covering company activities.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996STATE UTILITY COMPANY REGULATORSAlabamaPublic Service CommissionOne Court SquareMontgomery StreetP.O. Box 991Montgomery, AL  36101-0991205-242-5218 AlaskaPublic Utilities Commission1016 West 6th Avenue, Suite 400Anchorage, AK  99501Phone:  907-276-6222Fax:  907-276-4533 ArizonaCorporation Commission1200 West WashingtonPhoenix, AZ  85007602-542-3931 ArkansasPublic Service Commission1000 Center StreetP.O. Box 400Little Rock, AR  72203-0400501-682-1794 CaliforniaPublic Utilities Commission505 Van Ness Avenue, Room 5222San Francisco, CA  94102415-703-1487 ColoradoPublic Utilities Commission1580 Logan Street, Office Level 2Denver, CO  80203303-894-2000, extension 302 ConnecticutDepartment of Public Utility ControlOne Central Park PlazaNew Britain, CT  06051203-827-2601 District of ColumbiaPublic Service Commission450 5th  Street, N.W., Suite 800Washington, DC  20001202-626-9176 FloridaPublic Service Commission2540 Shumard Oak BoulevardTallahassee, FL  32399-0850904-413-6051 GeorgiaPublic Service Commission244 Washington Street, S.W.Atlanta, GA  30334404-656-4501 HawaiiPublic Utilities Commission465 South King Street, Suite 103Honolulu, HI  96813808-586-2020 IdahoPublic Utilities CommissionState House MallBoise, ID  83720-6000Phone:  208-334-0366Fax:  208-334-0366 IllinoisCommerce Commission527 East Capitol AvenueBox 19280Springfield, IL  62794-9280217-782-7434 IndianaUtility Regulatory Commission302 W. Washington St., Suite E-306Indianapolis, IN  46204317-232-2701 IowaUtilities BoardLucas State Office BuildingDes Moines, IA  50319515-281-5256 KansasCorporation Commission1500 S.W. Arrowhead RoadTopeka, KS  66604913-271-3170 KentuckyPublic Service Commission730 Schenkel Lane, Box 615Frankfort, KY  40602502-564-3940 LouisianaPublic Service CommissionOne American Place, Suite 1630Baton Rouge, LA  70825504-342-4404 MainePublic Utilities CommissionState House, Station 18Augusta, ME  04333207-287-3831 MarylandPublic Service CommissionWilliam Donald Schaefer Tower6 St. Paul CentreBaltimore, MD  21202-6806Phone:  410-767-8067Fax:  410-333-6495 MassachusettsDepartment of Public Utilities100 Cambridge Street, 12th FloorBoston, MA  02202617-727-3500 MichiganPublic Service CommissionP.O. Box 302216545 Mercantile WayLansing, MI  48909517-334-6370 MinnesotaPublic Utilities Commission121 7th Place East, Suite 350St. Paul, MN  55101-2147612-296-7124 MississippiPublic Utilities StaffWalter Sillers State Office Building, Room 1738P.O. Box 1174Jackson, MS  39215-1174601-961-5493 MissouriPublic Service CommissionP.O. Box 360Jefferson City, MO  65102314-751-3234 MontanaPublic Service CommissionP.O. Box 2026011701 Prospect AvenueHelena, MT  59620-2601Phone:  406-444-6170Fax:  406-444-7618 NebraskaPublic Service Commission300 The Atrium1200 N StreetP.O. Box 94927Lincoln, NE  68509-4927402-471-3101 NevadaPublic Service Commission727 Fairview DriveCarson City, NV  98710702-687-6001 New HampshirePublic Utilities Commission8 Old Suncook RoadConcord, NH  03301-7319Phone:  603-271-2431Fax:  603-271-3878 New JerseyBoard of Public UtilitiesTwo Gateway CenterNewark, NJ  07102Phone:  201-648-2026Fax:  201-648-4195 New MexicoPublic Service Commission224 East PalaceSanta Fe, NM  87501-2013505-827-6940 New YorkPublic Service CommissionThree Empire State PlazaAlbany, NY  12223518-474-6530 North CarolinaPublic Utilities CommissionP.O. Box 2952Raleigh, NC  27626-2435919-733-2435 North DakotaPublic Service CommissionState CapitolBismarck, ND  58505701-328-2400 OhioPublic Utilities Commission180 East Broad StreetColumbus, OH  43266-0573614-466-3016 OklahomaCorporation CommissionPublic Utility Division500 Jim Thorpe Office BuildingOklahoma City, OK  73105405-521-2518 OregonPublic Utility Commission550 Capitol Street, N.E.Salem, OR  97310-1380503-378-6611 PennsylvaniaPublic Utility CommissionNorth Office, Room 118Harrisburg, PA  17105-3265717-783-1740 Rhode IslandPublic Utility Commission100 Orange StreetProvidence, RI  02903401-783-1740 South CarolinaPublic Service CommissionUtility DivisionP.O. Box 11649Columbia, SC  29211803-737-5125 South DakotaPublic Utilities Commission500 East CapitolPierre, SD  57501Phone:  605-773-3201Fax:  605-773-5559 TennesseePublic Service Commission460 James Robertson ParkwayNashville, TN  37243-0505Phone:  615-741-2904Fax:  615-741-5015 TexasPublic Utility Commission7800 Shoal Creek BoulevardAustin, TX  78757512-458-0388 UtahPublic Service Commission160 East 300 SouthBox 45585Salt Lake City, UT  84145801-530-6716 VermontPublic Service BoardCity Center Building, 3rd Floor, Drawer 2089 Main StreetMontpelier, VT  05620-2701802-828-2358 VirginiaState Corporation CommissionTyler Building, Box 1197Richmond, VA  23209804-371-9672 WashingtonUtilities and Transportation CommissionP.O. Box 47250Olympia, WA  98504-7250360-388-0090 West VirginiaPublic Service Commission201 Brooks StreetP.O. Box 812Charleston, WV  25323304-340-0426 WisconsinPublic Service Commission4802 Sheboygan AvenueMadison, WI  53707Phone:  608-266-9600Fax:  608-266-3957 WyomingPublic Service Commission700 West 21st StreetCheyenne, WY  82002307-777-7427Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996DIRECTORIES  COVER  GULF COAST  OIL INDUSTRYThree directories provide detailed information on thousands of companies involved in petroleum industries located in the Gulf Coast region. GULF COAST OIL DIRECTORY covers the oil industry and its nearly 10,000 companies in the five states along the U.S. Gulf Coast plus Mexico.  It costs $65. GULF COAST PETROPROCESS DIRECTORY covers the same region, focusing on petrochemical and refining industries.  Virtually every plant and refinery is included.  Contact information for more than 6,500 firms is provided.  It costs $65. HOUSTON/TEXAS OIL DIRECTORY features more than 9,500 oil and gas companies in Texas. It costs $55. All are available from I.E.I. Publishing, 1635 West Alabama, Houston, TX  77006, 800-654-1480 or 713-529-1616; fax 713-529-0936; e-mail "iei@mail.infohwy.com".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996RULES FOR UPGRADING COMPANY SERVICECompanies that have top service records with their customers can outperform the competition according to a new study by the Harvard Business School. WINNING THE SERVICE GAME presents more than 50 rules for creating and managing quality service.  The recommendations involve corporate marketing, operations, human resources, and management. The text costs $27.95 in major bookstores or from Harvard Business School Press, Customer Service Department, 60 Harvard Way, Box 230-5, Boston, MA  02163, 800-545-7685.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996BROOKINGS FOCUSES ON HEALTH CAREThe Brookings Institution has issued two major studies focusing on aspects of health care. PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:  ISSUES IN HEALTH CARE FINANCING AND SERVICE DELIVERY, 324 pages, $16.95, analyzes the acute and long-term needs of disabled Americans.  Included are sections on the market for private insurance and expenditures for health care. THE PROBLEM THAT WON'T GO AWAY:  REFORMING U.S. HEALTH CARE FINANCING, 298 pages, $16.95, suggests that comprehensive reform is not the way to go.  Rather, "bit-size" changes in health care financing are likely to be more widely accepted. Both are available from The Brookings Book Store, 1775 Massachusetts Avenue, N.W., Washington, DC  20036, 800-275-1447 or 202-797-6258; fax 202-797-6004.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996BUSINESS LOCATIONS OF TOP 1,000 COMPANIESMore than 90,000 U.S. branches, offices, affiliations, divisions, and subsidiaries of the largest 1,000 industrial and service companies are included in a new reference. AMERICAN BUSINESS LOCATIONS DIRECTORY provides the name and title of the chief executive, name of parent company, total number of employees, sales volume, ranking by sales, SIC code, facility contact information, and location type. The 7,000-page reference comes in four volumes covering the West, Midwest, Northeast, and South.  Each costs $150, or $575 for the complete set. Contact Gale Research, 835 Penobscot Building, 645 Griswold Street, Detroit, MI  48226, 800-877-4253; fax 313-961-6083.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996ALMANAC PROVIDES DETAILED STATE DATAThe ALMANAC OF THE 50 STATES contains 8 pages of information for each state plus the District of Columbia.  Included in each state entry of the 450-page reference are the following categories of information: State SummaryGeography and EnvironmentDemographics and Characteristics of the PopulationVital Statistics and HealthEducationSocial Insurance and Welfare ProgramsHousing and ConstructionGovernment and ElectionsGovernmental FinanceCrime, Law Enforcement, and CourtsLabor and IncomeEconomy, Business, Industry, and AgricultureCommunication, Energy, and Transportation The ALMANAC costs $47 from Information Publications, Order Department, 3790 El Camino Road, Suite 162, Palo Alto, CA  94306, 415-965-4449.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996DEVELOP CREATIVITY IN YOUR ORGANIZATIONExplore factors that are important to the development and promotion of creativity in organizations. CREATIVE ACTION IN ORGANIZATIONS:  IVORY TOWER VISIONS AND REAL WORLD VOICES, 360 pages, contains 51 chapters, each covering a specific aspect of organizational creativity and offering specific suggestions.  It costs $25.95 from Sage Publications, Inc., P.O. Box 5084, Thousand Oaks, CA  91359-9924, 805-499-9774; fax 805-499-9871.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996NEW DIRECTION FOR EPA?A new report provides an agenda for Congress and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to reform the agency in light of improved ability of states, communities, and businesses to tackle environmental problems. SETTING PRIORITIES, GETTING RESULTS:  A NEW DIRECTION FOR THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, 220 pages, costs $14 from National Academy of Public Administration, Publications Department, 1120 G Street, N.W., Washington, DC  20005, 202-347-3190; fax 202-393-0993.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996FACTS AND FIGURES ON AEROSPACE INDUSTRYFor a detailed statistical picture of U.S. aerospace industry activity, order the new edition of AEROSPACE FACTS & FIGURES. Included are 140 data tables showing trends over time and updates on topics such as missile programs, air transportation, employment, finance, production, space activities, research and development, and foreign trade in aerospace products and services. The reference costs $35 from the Aerospace Industries Association, Research Center, 1250 Eye Street, N.W., Washington, DC  20005, 202-371-8561.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996DIRECTORY CONTAINS 116,000 FAX NUMBERSFAXUSA 1996 is a 1,500-page directory that lists fax numbers for businesses, government offices, and major organizations throughout the United States.  Phone numbers and mailing addresses are also included. To help users identify the types of business and organizations listed, classification codes in each entry indicate the line of business or type of institution. The reference costs $80 from Omnigraphics, Inc., Penobscot Building, Detroit, MI  48226, 800-234-1340; fax 313-961-1383.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996HOW FISCAL POLICY AFFECTS AGE GROUPSA new report by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) shows how federal government fiscal policy affects people of different ages-from those living now to those yet to be born. The 66-page report, WHO PAYS AND WHEN?  AN ASSESSMENT OF GENERATIONAL ACCOUNTING,  is FREE from Linda Schimmel, CBO Publications, 413 Ford House Office Building, 2nd and D Streets, S.W., Washington, DC  20515, 202-226-2809.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996COAL  TRANSPORTATION  COSTS AND  PATTERNSA new study provides details on the cost of transporting coal throughout the United States and examines changes in domestic coal distribution patterns. ENERGY POLICY ACT TRANSPORTATION RATE STUDY, 148 pages, Order No. 061-003-00933-6, costs $10 from the Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15220-7954, 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996STUDY  GEOLOGICAL  HAZARDS  BEFORE  YOU BUILDA free report provides a description of the types of geological hazards that exist throughout the United States. LOOK BEFORE YOU BUILD, 54 pages, describes how geological information can be incorporated in the land-use development process.  It draws on examples from the San Francisco Bay area and elsewhere in the United States. For a FREE copy, request Circular No. 1130 from U.S. Geological Survey, Information Services, Box 25286, Federal Center, Boulder, CO  80225.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996IMPORTANCE OF DERIVATIVES TO BANKSFinancial derivatives have, in recent years, become an important and controversial product for commercial banks. A new study examines these financial products and evaluates the level of risk they impose on banks that offer them.  BANKS AND DERIVATIVES, Working Paper No. 95-12, costs $3 from the Working Papers, Department of Research, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, PA  19106.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996FREEBIES FROM THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATIONThe Food and Drug Administration (FDA) offers FREE Backgrounders-one- or two-page fact sheets on a variety of medical topics.  Recent offerings include those listed below. HACCP:  STATE-OF-THE-ART APPROACH TO FOOD SAFETYOLESTRA AND OTHER FAT SUBSTITUTESMONOSODIUM GLUTAMATEMILESTONES IN U.S. FOOD AND DRUG LAW HISTORYTHE NEW FOOD LABELFDA:  AN OVERVIEWREINVENTING DRUG AND MEDICAL DEVICE REGULATIONFDA MISSION:  PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTHSTREAMLINING THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATIONFDA HIGHLIGHTS:  HEALTH PROTECTION AND PROMOTIONFDA HIGHLIGHTS:  SPEEDING APPROVAL AND EXPANDING ACCESSFDA HIGHLIGHTS:  WOMEN'S HEALTHFDA HIGHLIGHTS:  HEALTH CARE FOR THE ELDERLYFDA HIGHLIGHTS:  CHILDREN'S HEALTH All are available from FDA, Office of Consumer Inquiries, HFE-88, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD  20857, 301-443-3170; fax 301-443-9057.Back to Headline List WT03-B40-33IA060-000326-B020-325http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt30.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021450 text/html 24160HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:12:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:56 GMTContent-length: 23971Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt30.html Sample Issue Copyright LIABILITY WEEK via NewsNet January 8, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES U.S. APPEALS COURT OVERTURNS LANDMARK VERDICT IN TOBACCO TRIAL (722 words) U.S. JUDGE RULES OUT PUNITIVE DAMAGES FOR FLIGHT 103 VICTIMS (471 words) TAIWAN GOVERNMENT HELD LIABLE IN JOURNALIST'S SLAYING (263 words) * NEWS FROM THE STATES * CALIFORNIA PUNITIVE DAMAGES UP SINCE 1987, TORT REFORMERS SAY (314 words) FLORIDA SUPREME COURT FINDS INSURANCE DOESN'T COVER SELF-DEFENSE (300 words) FLORIDA COMMISSIONER CHARGES LAWYERS WITH INSURANCE FRAUD (189 words) PENNSYLVANIA COURT HOLDS UNION ISN'T LIABLE FOR STRIKE VIOLENCE (186 words) PENNSYLVANIA COURT BARS WRONGFUL DEATH SUIT OVER PREMATURE TRIPLETS (120 words) UTAH SUPREME COURT HOLDS CITY, COUNTY & STATE LIABLE FOR FLOODING (103 words) WASHINGTON SUPREME COURT RULES INSURERS MUST PAY FOR WASTE CLEANUP (362 words) * WATCH ON THE MEDIA * LAWYER ATTACKS IDEA OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST FUND (250 words) CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990U.S. APPEALS COURT OVERTURNS LANDMARK VERDICT IN TOBACCO TRIALThe Third U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals overturned a precedent-setting jury verdict in a product liability suit against tobaccomanufacturers, setting aside the $400,000 award and sending the caseback because of errors it found in conduct of the trial.The 87-page verdict opened some new avenues of argumentfor plaintiff's attorneys and reinstated two tobacco companies asdefendants. But its temporary effect, at least, was to maintain theindustry's unbroken string of victories in product liability suitsbrought by smokers and their families.The verdict was returned in 1988 in a suit by Antonio Cipollone,widower of Rose Cipollone, who died of cancer in 1984 at the age of58 after more than four decades of smoking.Like the trial judge, the appeals court accepted a distinctionbetween tobacco companies' liability before and after 1966, when thegovernment began requiring warnings of health hazards on packs. Butinterpretations differed on several points.At the trial, only the Liggett Group Inc. was found liable becausebefore 1966 Rose Cipollone smoked only one of its brands. PhillipMorris Inc. and Lorillard Inc. were dismissed as defendants becauseshe smoked their cigarettes after that period.And the jury returned a verdict only for Antonio Cipollone, notRose's estate, because it found her principally responsible for herown injury.The appellate court overturned U.S. District Judge H. Lee Sarokin onboth counts.Elements of the Third Circuit's decision:* To prevail on the theory known as express warranty, plaintiffs'attorneys must prove not only that tobacco companies ran pre-1966advertisements implying that smoking wasn't harmful but also that theplaintiff relied on those representations.Rose Cipollone's reliance on the ads cannot be presumed but must beproved, the court said, and Liggett's lawyers should have the chanceto prove that Rose Cipollone either was unaware of the ads or didn'tbelieve their message."The advertising constituted an express warranty...as long as Mr.Cipollone can prove that Mrs. Cipollone was aware of theadvertisements and as long as Liggett does not prove that shedisbelieved them," the appellate court ruled.Sarokin had ruled that it was enough to show that the commercialswere in public use, and it was this ruling upon which the $400,000award to Antonio Cipollone was based.* New Jersey's comparative fault law mitigating the manufacturers'liability for failure to warn should be applied only to the periodbefore 1966.The jury found Rose Cipollone was 80 percent responsible forcontinuing to smoke and Liggett 20 percent responsible for failing towarn her of the dangers, so her estate received no award.But the appeals court ruled that the question of her responsibilityfor her actions applied only to the period before warning labels wererequired, rather than to her entire life."The jury should have been instructed that Mrs. Cipollone's post-1965conduct bore only on the apportionment of damages, but not on hercomparative fault for her own injuries," the court said.* The doctrine of inherent characteristics, which holds thatmanufacturers cannot be sued if the product's defects are bothinherent and well known, applies only to the period after 1966.For alleged injuries occurring before that period, a jury can decidethe facts on whether the average person can be expected to know aboutthe dangers of smoking and, if not, whether a company should be heldliable for defects of a product because its risks outweighed itsbenefits.Sarokin had ruled that the doctrine applied to the years before 1966and thus barred recovery from Liggett for health effects due to thedesign of the cigarettes.The appeals court rejected Liggett's claim there was insufficientevidence to prove that smoking the company's cigarettes caused thecancer."The jury could have reasonably concluded...that Mrs. Cipollone'ssmoking from 1952 to 1966...caused her lung cancer," the court said.Both plaintiffs' and defense attorneys claimed victory."We repeatedly stated that the verdict was wrong and would bereversed on appeal," said Liggett General Counsel Josiah Murray.Plaintiffs' attorney Cynthia Walters expressed pleasure in thedecision, even though it overturned the $400,000 award."From our standpoint, we won beyond dispute on two areas of greatconcern," she said.Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990U.S. JUDGE RULES OUT PUNITIVE DAMAGES FOR FLIGHT 103 VICTIMSU.S. District Judge Thomas J. Platt of New York ruledJan. 3 that an international agreement bars families of victims ofthe 1988 bombing of Pan American Flight 103 from suing the airlinefor punitive damages.The ruling "adds insult to injury in today's world," Platt said, butthe Warsaw Convention covering international flights limits relief tocompensatory damages.He said "it is simply not within this court's power to construe thetreaty in a manner inconsistent with the contracting parties'expectations."Central to the plaintiffs' case is a charge that Pan Am received awarning of a bomb threat but neither increased security adequatelynor notified passengers of the risk.Many of the 259 victims on the plane were American college studentsstudying abroad who were returning home for the Christmas vacation.Flight 103, en route from Germany to the United States, blew up overLockerbie, Scotland, apparently as the result of a terrorist bomb.Suits brought by families across the country have been consolidatedinto one proceeding in the Eastern District of New York, in Brooklyn.Of more than 150 plaintiffs involved, 95 are represented by the NewYork law firm of Kreindler & Kreindler, which specializes in aviationlitigation.The firm's Lee Kreindler indicated there will be an appeal of JudgePlatt's ruling."I don't think this is the last word on it," he said.The Warsaw Convention limits compensatory damages to $75,000 unlesswillful misconduct is proven. It doesn't explicitly address punitivedamages, but Platt said the ban is implicit."While the Warsaw Convention does not expressly refer to punitivedamage claims, it appears that the Warsaw Convention bars such claimswhether or not willful misconduct exists," he said.He said those who drew up the treaty in 1929 had a "sharedexpectation" of setting "some uniform limit on an airline carrier'sliability in order to promote the civil aviation industry which atthe time of the Warsaw Convention was in its infancy.""I think the judge was eminently correct in his decision," said JamesM. Shaughnessy, a lawyer for Pan Am.He added that he is not worried about an appeal.Pan Am argues that it was prohibited by the U.S. government fromnotifying passengers of the bomb threat.The ruling in New York doesn't affect a case being brought againstPan Am in the Florida courts by families of British passengers andthe 11 persons who were killed on the ground when the jet crashed inLockerbie."This group specifically chose to pursue our cases through theFlorida courts since it was felt that there would be a better changeof establishing punitive damages through the Florida courts than inNew York," spokesman Peter Watson said in London.Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990TAIWAN GOVERNMENT HELD LIABLE IN JOURNALIST'S SLAYINGThe government of Taiwan can be held liable for its role in theCalifornia slaying of a journalist and critic of the regime, theNinth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals held Dec. 29.Henry Liu was shot and killed in Daly City, Calif., on orders of ViceAdm. Wong Hsi-ling, then director of Taiwan's Defense IntelligenceBureau. But Taiwan claimed Wong was acting outside his officialduties and had a personal grudge against Liu.Several of those involved in the scheme, including Wong, wereconvicted of murder in Taiwan, and one was convicted in California.Liu's wife, Helen, filed a wrongful death action against thegovernment of Taiwan.Overturning a lower court, the Ninth Circuit said she could proceed."Wong's act of ordering the assassination of Henry Liu was not whollypersonal but arose from his employment as director of the DIB," theappellate panel said."When an employee, such as Wong, uses governmental authority in amistaken attempt to benefit his employer by silencing an outspokencritic of the government, there is nothing inequitable aboutspreading the loss among all the beneficiaries of the government."Judge Robert Boochever also wrote that holding Taiwan accountablewouldn't interfere with formation of foreign policy by the executivebranch of the U.S. government.John Martel, an attorney for Taiwan, said he would review thedecision and consider an apepal.He said the government of Taiwan "was as appalled as anyone" by thekilling "and there is no proof that the government had anything to dowith it."Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990CALIFORNIA PUNITIVE DAMAGES UP SINCE 1987, TORT REFORMERS SAYThe average amount of punitive damages awarded by California jurieshas risen by 178 percent since 1987 alone, according to a study bythe Association for California Tort Reform.The average award for punitive damages in 1989 was$3.01 million, up from $1.69 million in 1987, the group reported.The study was based on a review of 1,846 jury verdicts reported byJury Verdicts Weekly.It found 48 punitive damage awards of $1 million or more and 19awards of $5 million or more.At the same time, the number of awards is down, from 15.2 percent in1987 to 9.3 percent in 1989.Tort reformers say that's because of a change in the law andincreased willingness of defendants to settle.Victor Schwartz of the Washington, D.C., law firm of Crowell &Moring, a specialist in torts, noted that in 1987 California raisedits standard of proof for punitive damages from preponderance of theevidence to clear and convincing evidence.In addition, he said, "many punitive damage cases are being channeledinto settlement" because punitive damages "are constantly being usedas a threat by plaintiffs' lawyers, and many defendants prefersettlement to the Russian roulette system of punitive damagelitigation."The study's findings were presented last month to the CaliforniaLegislature's Joint Committee on Tort Liability."This study indicates that the threat of punitive damages is a realand major concern for the business community of California," saidFrank Schubert, president of the Association for California TortReform."When one out of ten jury verdicts is likely to result in a punitivedamage award averaging more than $3 million, it is not difficult tounderstand why business leaders are leery of California's legalclimate."It is a major reason why California is slowly losing its competitiveedge to less litigious international competitors."Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990FLORIDA SUPREME COURT FINDS INSURANCE DOESN'T COVER SELF-DEFENSEThe Florida Supreme Court ruled Dec. 21 that a clause common tohomeowners' insurance policies bars coverage for policyholders whoinjure assailants in their homes in self-defense.State law authorizes individuals to use force in self-defense, thecourt acknowledged, and self-defense is a "worthy" motive for causinginjury.Self-defense is nevertheless an intentional act and thus excludedfrom coverage under a clause barring claims for intentional acts, thecourt held in a 5-2 decision.The case arose from an incident in which Edward Marshall shot his ex-wife's son after the younger man broke into the house. A jury saidMarshall acted negligently and awarded the son $575,000 incompensatory and punitive damages.State Farm Fire & Casualty Co., which wrote the policy, refused topay the claim.The court's unsigned majority opinion said clauses excluding coveragefor intentional acts are non-negotiable elements of most homeowners'liability policies.Allowing coverage of intenational acts, even in self-defense, wouldskew actuarial tables and encourage individuals to commit wrongfulacts, the court said."We will not rewrite a policy under these circumstances to providecoverage where the clear language of the policy does not; nor will weinvoke public policy to override this otherwise valid contract," themajority said.Justices Parker Lee McDonald and Rosemary Barkett dissented, sayingthey would side with courts in other states that ruled acts of self-defense are not the sort of intentional acts that would beconsciously undertaken by a homeowner because he or she is aware ofinsurance against liability."It would be ironic to exonerate an individual on the basis of self-defense but deny him insurance coverage of the costs of defense; yetallow insurance coverage to a person who negligently causes injury,"McDonald wrote.Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990FLORIDA COMMISSIONER CHARGES LAWYERS WITH INSURANCE FRAUDNine persons including two lawyers have been charged withracketeering in a scheme to defraud insurance companies with falsemedical claims, Florida Insurance Commission Tom Gallagher chargedDec. 22.Those charged included Mark Marks, 64, head of a law firm withoffices in Miami, North Miami, Pompano Beach and Fort Lauderdale, andhis son Gary, 32.Prosecutors charged that the pair arranged for medical tests from theCenter for Neurological Services in Fort Lauderdale and dictated bothwhat the test results and the bills for the service should be.They said employees of the law firm were told to alter or concealclients' medical records to provide false information to insurancecompanies.Those who cooperated allegedly shared up to thousands of dollars froma fee-sharing fund.Gallagher called the operation "an outrageous example of a criminalconspiracy" designed to "cheat insurance companies out of millions ofdollars.""The insurance companies were the biggest target, but the people arethe real victims," he said."Every lost dollar in insurance gets passed on to the public in theform of more expensive insurance premiums."Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990PENNSYLVANIA COURT HOLDS UNION ISN'T LIABLE FOR STRIKE VIOLENCEThe Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled Jan. 3 that the InternationalBrotherhood of Teamsters isn't liable for damages over violence in a1977 strike against Freeport Transport Co.The court said liability of Teamsters Local 538 was clear, but saidevidence didn't prove the international union was involved.The high court upheld the trial court's judgment of $51,753 incompensatory damages against the local and the international butstruck down an award of $250,000 in punitive damages against theinternational.Testimony showed that the international union said strike-relatedviolence would end if amnesty were provided one striker, JackRobison. Dissenting Justice John Flaherty said that was enough toprove union involvement but the majority disagreed.Robison was later convicted on criminal charges stemming from strikeviolence."The appearance of a representative of the international in an effortto end a strike does not mean that the IBT approved or encouraged theviolence during the strike," the court said.It said the Pennsylvania Labor Anti-Injunctrion Act requires "ahigher showing than the common law rules of agency to establish aunion's liability."Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990PENNSYLVANIA COURT BARS WRONGFUL DEATH SUIT OVER PREMATURE TRIPLETSA three-judge panel of Pennsylvania Superior Court has upheld a lowercourt's ruling that a wrongful-death suit cannot be filed in the caseof triplets who were born prematurely."In the absence of any expression of intent from the Legislature orany analysis by our Supreme Court, we cannot decide that fetuses bornprior to attaining viability should now be accorded the same rightsthat children who have attained viability have been accorded underthe Wrongful Death and Survival Acts," the court said.Michael and Ann Hudak conceded that their triplets weren't viableafter their premature birth. But they alleged that a group ofWilliamsport doctors was negligent in failing to provide propertreatment to stop premature labor.Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990UTAH SUPREME COURT HOLDS CITY, COUNTY & STATE LIABLE FOR FLOODINGThe Utah Supreme Court has ruled that the city and county of SaltLake and state of Utah can be sued over failure to maintain aculvert, resulting in flood damage to several stores in 1983.A district court judge had dismissed the case on grounds ofgovernment immunity. But the state's highest court unanimously heldthat the immunity applied to policy decisions, and failure to cleanthe culvert was an operational decision that didn't necessarilyfollow established policy.The Legislature passed legislation later in 1983 extending governmentimmunity to flood control, but the Supreme Court ruled that it wasn'tretroactive.Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990WASHINGTON SUPREME COURT RULES INSURERS MUST PAY FOR WASTE CLEANUPThe Washington State Supreme Court ruled Jan. 4 that insurers for theBoeing Co. and several other corporations must help theirpolicyholders pay for cleaning up hazardous waste.The decision was the latest in a string of court disputes overwhether cleanup costs are "damages" as the term is used in standardcomprehensive general liability coverage.In its 7-2 ruling, the Washington court said they were.The suit arose over cleanup of a land owned by Western Processing inKent, Wash. A major site for hazardous industrial waste for manyyears, it was put on the original Environmental Protection Agencylist for Superfund cleanup.On one side are Boeing, which said it's spent $40 million on thecleanup; Northwest Steel Rolling Mills, Inc.; RSR Corp.; John FlukeManufacturing Co., Inc., and Davis Walker Corp.They were notified in 1983 that, as generators of waste at the site,they were responsible for costs of cleaning it up. They agreed to doso in a consent decree entered in 1987.In turn, they sought indemnification from their insurers: AetnaCasualty & Surety Co., Fireman's Fund Insurance Co., Granite StateInsurance Co., American Centennial Insurance Co. and HartfordAccident & Indemnity Co.The suit was filed in federal court, which certified the question ofinsurance company liability under Washington law to the state SupremeCourt.Writing for the court, Justice Fred Dore gave short shrift toinsurers' arguments that cleanup costs ordered by government aren'tdamages."Response costs in response to actual releases of hazardous wastes"are damages within the meaning of the insurance policies at issue, hesaid."The reported decisions across the country, the lay dictionary, theinsurance dictionary, the failure of the insurance industry to writedown what it meant, each of these facts lay waste to insurers'argument," Dore said.But the majority said the term doesn't cover safety measures or otherpreventive costs taken in advance of any damage to property.Chief Justice Keith Callow wrote a dissent in which he said themajority ruling "upsets settled rules of insurance construction,violates controlling precedent, and contravenes public policy."Back to Headline List CopyrightLIABILITY WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1990LAWYER ATTACKS IDEA OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL TRUST FUNDLegal Times published an opinion article in its Dec. 18-25 issueattacking the proposal of Maurice Greenberg, president of AmericanInternational Group, for a National Environmental Trust Fund to payfor cleaning high-priority hazardous waste sites."Greenberg's proposal, if enacted into law, would allow the insuranceindustry to escape part or all of its massive contractual liablity toprivate- and public-sector policyholders for environ-mental cleanup,"Peter Kalis wrote in the legal news weekly published in Washington,D.C.Kalis is a partner in the Pittsburgh firm of Kirkpatrick & Lockartwho represents manufacturers in their disputes with insurers.Greenberg's proposed fund would be financed by a tax on allcommercial and industrial property/casualty insurance policies, aswell as equivalent fees paid by self-insured corporations.In suggesting it last March, he argued that most pollution of soiland ground water "did not result from deliberate, conscious acts" butis "the residue of progress." Because all U.S. society benefited, hesaid, we have a common interest in cleaning up.But Kalis argued that comprehensive general liability insurance "wasmarketed (and purchased) as a wholesale external-ization of risk, andone of the risks insured against was the possibility that the lgealsystem would change and casue policy-holders to incur new types ofliability for property damage and bodily injury..."One must wonder about the constitutional consequences ofcongressional nullification of the contractual entitlements ofthousands of policyholders in order to effect an anticipated bailoutof the insurance industry."Back to Headline List WT03-B40-34IA060-000326-B020-356http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt48.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021509 text/html 29516HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:13:21 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:50:01 GMTContent-length: 29327Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt48.html Sample Issue Copyright PRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES COURT REQUIRES LIST OWNER TO OFFER 'OPT-OUT' (356 words) VARNEY OF TRADE COMMISSION TO THE FOREFRONT (280 words) QUOTABLE (48 words) 'BOSTON GROUP' HOLDS UP MEDICAL PRIVACY BILL (630 words) AUTOMATED MEDICAL FILES NOW LESS SECURE? (73 words) INTERNET WIRETAP, A FIRST (136 words) JFK, NIXON, AND NOW - (191 words) SO MUCH FOR PRINCIPLES (311 words) BUSTING PARENTS: IT CAN HAPPEN HERE (277 words) DISCOUNT ON REFERENCE BOOKS FROM PRIVACY JOURNAL (206 words) BOOKS AND REPORTS JUST PUBLISHED PRESS TIPS (340 words) AGENDA OF UPCOMING MEETINGS COMPUTERS, FREEDOM AND PRIVACY 96 (561 words) READING PRIVACY JOURNAL'S MAIL MARYLAND MEDICAL DATA BASE; RECYCLED MEDICAL DATA (575 words) CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996COURT REQUIRES LIST OWNER TO OFFER 'OPT-OUT'Over the past decade, many large mailing houses have adopteda voluntary "opt-out" policy, permitting persons on amailing list to have their names deleted before the list isrented to other mailers.Now, for the first time, "opt-out" has been imposed on amailer as a matter of law.The order, from a federal bankruptcy judge in San Antonio,Tex., arose in unique circumstances.  One of the remainingassets of a company that filed for bankruptcy was itsmailing list.  The company, Shocking Gray Corp., published acatalog for gay consumers, many of whom expected that theirnames on the list would remain confidential.At a court-supervised auction to sell off the customer list,some vendors of sex-related products made bids.  Further,there was no assurance that whatever company purchased thelist would keep it discreet.One of the bidders at auction and the leading marketer ofgay products by mail, Sean Strub, told U.S. Bankruptcy JudgeRonald P. King that if the list fell into the wrong hands itwould deter many gay consumers from letting their namesbecome part of marketing lists.  He urged the court to orderthe buyer to give everyone on the list an opportunity to getoff of it.The lawyer for the bankrupt company argued that givingpersons on the list the opportunity to be removed woulddiminish its value.  "My job is to generate as much cash aspossible," he said.  But the judge ordered the company withthe winning bid at auction, Tzabaco in Northern California,to offer everybody on the list an opt-out option.  DavidDow, Tzabaco's president,  said that his company, whichsells clothing and furniture by catalog, would have donethis anyway, because it knows the sensitivity of its gayclientele.  About 15,000 of the 200,000 persons on the list(7.5 percent) exercised the option.Lawyers for Shocking Gray said afterwards that this orderexceeded the judge's authority.  But, bankruptcy courts havewide latitude in managing the disposition of a company'sassets, including attaching conditions to purchases.  95-52856-RPK (W.D. Tex., U.S. Bankruptcy Ct., Nov. 14).Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996VARNEY OF TRADE COMMISSION TO THE FOREFRONTLeadership on the privacy issue in Washington has beenhanded around over the past two decades depending on whichpersons in high places take an interest.The Office of Consumer Affairs and the NationalTelecommunications and Information Administration have had apiece of it.  Now it seems to be the Federal TradeCommission's turn, in the person of its commissioner,Christine A. Varney.Not only has the FTC stepped up its compliance activity inregulating credit bureaus and telemarketing, it has begun a"Privacy Initiative" involving other agencies of the federalgovernment and state consumer-protection offices "to beginto incorporate [privacy] principles in our consumerprotection mission," according to Varney.  After a series ofhearings last fall, the FTC plans a public workshop  thisspring (for information contact Martha Landesberg, e-mailmlandesberg(at)ftc.gov).The Bureau of Consumer Protection has been assigned togather comments from consumers, businesses, and privacyorganizations.  At the same time, the FTC established aWorld Wide Web on-line site (ftc.gov) "to facilitatethoughtful electronic debate about the rules that shouldapply in the use and dissemination of consumer informationon-line," according to Varney, who was chief counsel toPresident Clinton's 1992 campaign then cabinet secretarybefore being named an FTC commissioner in 1994.  "Animportant goal of the FTC's Privacy Initiative is to avoidcumbersome regulation by facilitating the development of aset of voluntary principles to govern the use of consumerinformation in on-line transactions," Varney told a privacyconference last fall.  This echoes the mantra of PresidentBush's Consumer Advisor, Bonnie Guiton, who proved that "thebully pulpit" of a federal office can prod businesses evenin the absence of laws.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996QUOTABLE"It combines casualness of speech with the permanence ofwriting.  It's got a lot of potential for embarrassing theother side," says Hartford, Conn., lawyer Allan B. Taylor,explaining why lawyers like to pour over electronic mail forevidence, quoted by CONNECTICUT LAW TRIBUNE, Dec. 18, 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996'BOSTON GROUP' HOLDS UP MEDICAL PRIVACY BILLA band of medical privacy critics in Boston has succeeded installing a Senate bill that they believe "undercuts the veryfabric of doctor-patient confidentiality."The bill introduced last November with bipartisan, liberaland conservative sponsors and the blessing of SenateMajority Leader Robert Dole seemed assured of quick passagein the Senate.  In fact, the main sponsor of S 1360, Sen.Bob Bennett, R-Utah, planned to rush it though the chamberbefore Christmas, after a cursory day of hearings Nov. 14.Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., had signed onon as a sponsor in expectation that the American CivilLiberties Union would endorse the bill.  Sen. Patrick Leahy,D-Vt., signed on assuming that the confidentiality bill wasendorsed by privacy advocates.Janlori Goldman, a former ACLU staff member who as deputydirector of the industry-funded Center for Democracy andTechnology aided in the drafting and the industry responseto the bill, led Senate staff to believe that thelegislation was supported by privacy and patientorganizations.But a tiny organization of patients and practitioners calledthe Coalition for Patient Rights spotted weaknesses in theproposal.  Its New England representative, Massachusettspsychiatrist Denise Nagel, persuaded the ACLU affiliate inMassachusetts to oppose the bill.  She activated a fewprivacy advocates in Washington, notably James Love of theRalph Nader-founded Consumers Project on Technology and MarcRotenberg of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, whooppose the current draft.The ACLU in Boston demanded a showdown with its nationalleadership and persuaded it to reverse its neutral orfavorable stance towards the bill.Perhaps in response, Goldman's organization and the AmericanHealth Information Management Association (a trade group ofhospital records administrators) organized weekly strategysessions in Washington beginning before Christmas andextending into late February.  Nagel, Rotenberg, and Lovehave been a part of these meetings.  At the same time, onthe first working day of the New Year in Boston, Nagelconvened an impressive coalition of medical confidentialityadvocates who are preparing an amended version of theBennett bill and a totally new substitute to offer Congressby next month.The attendees included Love, Rotenberg, PRIVACY JOURNALPublisher Robert Ellis Smith, and representatives of theHealth Law Institute in Boston, the national and local ACLU,the Council for Responsible Genetics, and the AmericanPsychiatric Association.In the meeting, CPR, CRG, and CPT were criticizing a billand strategy embraced by CDT.  One had to stay alert.(Smith has been quoted by COMPUTERWORLD as saying, "The billhas three or four weaknesses that, if cured, would make it anet plus for consumers.  Right now, it's a net minus, but itdoesn't miss by much.")The Boston group thinks that the bill accelerates thecomputerization and linkage of patient data and that itpermits wide access to law enforcement and insurancecompanies, as well as to employees within a medicalfacility.  The Center for Democracy and Technology says thatthe Bennett bill is the strongest medical privacy proposalever seriously considered by Congress.The dispute has accentuated a growing schism among privacygroups  in Washington and, in the process, has stalledconsideration of S 1360 and caused some Senate liberals toreconsider their endorsement of the current language.The bill creates a new nationwide right for patients toinspect their own files and a framework for patients toconsent to a wide variety of disclosures.  The billgenerally gives approval to current disclosures of medicaldata.  If medical providers comply with the new law theywould be immune from lawsuits by patients victimized bydisclosure of their medical information.  The bill wouldpre-empt stronger state laws in eight states, California,Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Massachusetts,  Minnesota,Rhode Island, and Wisconsin.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996AUTOMATED MEDICAL FILES NOW LESS SECURE?In 1994 52 percent of 355 hospital records managersresponding to a survey said that computerized records aremore secure than paper records.  In 1995, that percentageslipped to 43 percent, the same number who think that manualand automated records are about equally secure.  The SecondAnnual Computer-Based Patient Records Survey by the Chicagolaw firm of Gordon & Glickson, is available from Diana J.P.McKenzie, 312/372-7671, fax 312/321-9324, e-maildjpmckenzie(at)ggtech.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996INTERNET WIRETAP, A FIRSTFor the first time, federal prosecutors have used a wiretaporder from a federal court to intercept messages on theInternet.The investigation resulted in the arrests Dec. 29 of aGerman engineer living in Nevada, his estranged wife, and asalesman for the German man.  They were charged with aninternational conspiracy to sell illegal electronicsurveillance equipment.In the past, federal authorities have monitored Internetactivities with the consent of participants.  Federal agentsare also able to get identities of Internet users and storedmessages with a subpoena, but intercepting ongoing messagesrequires a court-approved warrant.  In this case, SecretService agents in New York City secured approval to tap theGerman's electronic-mail activity on CompuServe.  They posedas buyers, in six months of electronic communication withthe suspect, Bernhard Bowitz.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996JFK, NIXON, AND NOW -A writer for SPY magazine was assigned to get a job at thetabloid newspapers to learn whether the reports of tawdrygossip-gathering techniques were true.  In an articlepublished in the November/December issue, Stuart Goldmanreported that the practices were worse than he had imagined."The tabloids are, as I would experience first-hand, in thebusiness of smearing reputations and subverting the truth.If the blatant fabrication of stories - and the lying,backstabbing, bribery, blackmail, intimidation, mail theft,wiretapping, leaking of disinformation, and computer hackingused to get these stories - wasn't what I initiallyexpected, I quickly learned otherwise," Goldman wrote in ashocking expose, after stints working for THE NATIONALENQUIRER, THE STAR, THE GLOBE, and "A  Current Affair" inLos Angeles.Hollywood now has its long awaited opportunity for revengeagainst the gossip press.  A new company named PhoenixPictures has purchased the rights to Goldman's nine-pagestory and signed Oliver Stone, who directed "JFK" and"Nixon," to direct.  Goldman plans to recount more of hisexperiences in a forthcoming book, SNITCH: CONFESSIONS OF ATABLOID SPY,  COMPUTER HACKER AND ALL AROUND SCOUNDREL.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996SO MUCH FOR PRINCIPLESSince the 1980s, the principle of "secondary use" has beenthe crucial part of a code of fair information practicesendorsed by the federal government and by hundreds ofbusinesses.  The principle states that personal informationgathered for one purpose ought not be used for anincompatible purpose without the consent of the individual."The principle," says the Washington spokesman for thedirect-marketing business, Richard A. Barton, "was raised tothe status of Holy Writ."In the early 1990s, TRW Information Systems abandoned theprinciple in its revised code of practices (although itscompetitor, Equifax, continues to endorse the principle, ina code of standards revised in 1993).Now, Barton says that the principle probably doesn't applyto the direct marketing industry of the 1990s.  "TheInternet and other interactive services have differentprotocols and privacy expectations than traditional forms ofdirect marketing," he writes in an essay in DM News (Dec.25, 1995).  "We now enjoy a greater ability to collect,store, and organized data than was imaginable just 18 yearsago.  As well, security problems on the Internet haveincreased people's privacy concerns.  We must examineprivacy issues with a fresh perspective.  If we do not, wemay not have as great a success in molding the regulatoryenvironment as we have had in the past."This revisionism comes when the DMA's most influentialmember, Metromail, a direct-marketing firm, has beencriticized for violating the principle on secondary use, byselling information traditionally used for marketing to lawenforcement, private investigators, and skip tracers.Metromail has a call-in service whereby anyone, for $3 aminute, may learn the telephone numbers, names, and ages ofall residents at a known address [see PJ Dec 95].  Thecompany, a subsidiary of R.H. Donnelley & Sons, said that ithas discontinued including children's names in its service.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996BUSTING PARENTS: IT CAN HAPPEN HEREIn a story on the arrest of a famous TV anchor person inLondon for having apparently taken innocent nude photographsof her seven-year-old daughter [see PJ Dec 95], PRIVACYJOURNAL asked "Can it happen here?"On the very day that ITN newsreader Julia Somerville wasarrested in a drug store that developed the photos, a womanwas subjected to the same humiliation and fear in Cambridge,Mass.Both arrests occurred on Nov. 2.  The case of Toni MarieAngeli came to light only late in December, perhaps becauseshe is not famous.Angeli said that she took pictures of her four-year-old boyfor a class at Harvard, where she is a graduate student.The photos show the boy nude inside their apartment andoutdoors; in some shots he is urinating.A photo lab alerted Cambridge police to the photos, anddetectives showed up at the lab to confront the mother whenshe picked up the photos.  An argument and scuffle ensued,and she was arrested for assault and disorderly conduct.  Nocharge was issued concerning the photos because there was no"lascivious intent."Police said that they wanted to satisfy themselves that thephotos were taken by a parent, without coercion to thechild.Opinion seemed split in Boston whether the police hadoverreacted or whether they were right in checking out allsuspicions of child abuse.  "There is a moral panic afoot inthe U.S. that has been accelerating in recent years," saidthe Boston Coalition for Freedom of Expression.  "If thereis no direct evidence of sexual abuse in the pictures, thenthat should have been enough."Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996DISCOUNT ON REFERENCE BOOKS FROM PRIVACY JOURNALNEWSNET subscribers make take a 20 percent discount whenordering any of the following books and reports:(Write NEWSNET on your order.)COLLECTION AND USE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS, a report *($15)COMPILATION OF STATE AND FEDERAL PRIVACY LAWS * ($29)DIRECTORY OF PRIVACY PROFESSIONALS, with 200 key names andaddresses * ($14.50)OUR VANISHING PRIVACY, essays with consumer advice onprotecting privacy ($16.95)PRIVACY: HOW TO PROTECT WHAT'S LEFT OF IT, a 1980sbestseller now available in a spiral-bound, photocopyversion ($14)SEARCHES AND SURVEILLANCE IN THE WORKPLACE, a brief reporton current law ($8)THE LAW OF PRIVACY EXPLAINED ($14.50)WAR STORIES, 500 real-life accounts of privacy invasions *($17.50)WORKRIGHTS, a book on employees' rights ($9.95)Three-ring binder with PRIVACY JOURNAL logo ($9.50)    Three binders   ($25)PRIVACY JOURNAL custom coffee mug  ($7.50)PRIVACY JOURNAL custom pen    ($1)*  These publications include new update.)(Add $4 per order for shipping)                      TOTAL ENCLOSED __________NAME __________________________________ADDRESS ______________________________________________________________________ZIP CODE _________ COUNTRY ____________MASTERCARD OR VISA ACCOUNT NUMBER       ________________________________Send order and payment to PRIVACY JOURNAL, P.O. Box 28577,Providence, RI 02908.Or call 401/274-7861Or send electronic mail to 0005101719(at)mcimail.comBack to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996PRESS TIPSTips on current privacy standards for the press are includedin "The First Amendment Handbook" (80 pages, $4.75 fromReporters Committee, 1101 Wilson Blvd., Suite 1910,Arlington, Va. 22209, 703/807-2100, e-mail rcfp(at)cais.com,World Wide Web, rcfp.org).* The Naturist Society has issued "The Lawmaker's Guide toSkinny-Dipping Issues" with model statutory language forprotecting that private pursuit and court citations tosupport it (12 pages, $4 from TNS, 308 Constitution Ave.,N.E. Washington, D.C. 20002, 202/546-6681, fax 202/543-6870,e-mail pat.obrien(at)naturist.org).  This is an attempt toconfront religious right groups' issuance of kits forlobbying state and city legislatures to ban nudity.*  Because Quebec is the only North American jurisdictionwith privacy protection in the private and public sectors,Quebec businesses doing business in Europe will "enjoy animportant competitive advantage," says the Commissiond'acces a l'information du Quebec (418/528-7741, fax418/529-3102) in a two-page statement.  By 1997, theEuropean Directive on Data Protection will permit banningexport of information on European citizens to nationswithout "adequate" legal protection for personal data.* The 800 complaints received are reviewed in the 94-95report of the Privacy Commissioner of Australia (229 pages,from  GPO Box 5218, Sydney, NSW 2001, Australia, tel. 61 2284 9600, fax 61 2 284 9666).  Commissioner Kevin O'Connorreports that the Prime Minister last month committed thegovernment to extend the Privacy Act to private businesses.* The Proceedings of the 1994 Conference on Law andInformation Policy for Spatial Databases (like geographicinformation systems) is available from Harlan J. Onsrud,5711 Boardman Hall, Room 348, Orono, Me. 04469-5711 ($45) orover the World Wide Web, spatial.maine.edu/I-16/I-16_home.html.* THE UNDERGROUND GUIDE TO COMPUTER SECURITY, SLIGHTLY ASKEWADVICE ON PROTECTING YOUR PC AND WHAT'S ON IT by Datamationeditor Michael Alexander is accurately titled (239 pages,$19.95 from Addison-Wesley Publishing, World Wide Web,aw.com/devpress/).* THE ROAD AHEAD by Microsoft chief Bill Gates includes onlya few (misinformed) lines about the privacy implications ofthe information age (Penguin Books).Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996COMPUTERS, FREEDOM AND PRIVACY 96The major gathering of the year, the Sixth Conference onComputers, Freedom and Privacy, will take a multinationalview of new technologies, in the Hyatt Regency Hotelbordering the campus of Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology in Cambridge, Mass., Mar. 27-30.  Tutorials onthe first day will cover copyright, Constitutional rights,legal liability, cryptography, criminal law in cyberspace,as well as altering audio/visual evidence.  Simultaneouslythere will be an exhibit of new interactive technologies.The conference itself begins Thursday with a keynote addressby George Metakides, information technologist for theEuropean Union, followed by a Socratic panel on free-speechon the Internet led by Harvard Law School privacy expertArthur R. Miller.  There will also be a panel of sciencefiction writers, a panel on Canadian and Dutch perspectiveson the information infrastructure, a discussion of"electronic money," more on cryptography and on 'netcensorship, and a panel on the new technologies as sourcesof news.  There are discounts for registration prior to Feb.14 and a major discount for students.  Information fromCFP96, MIT Conference Services, MIT7-111, 77 MassachusettsAve., Cambridge, Mass. 02139-4307, fax 617/253-7002, e-mailcfp96info(at)mit.edu, World Wide Web, http://web.mit.edu/cfp96.* The OECD in Europe and the Attorney-General's Departmentin Australia are co-sponsoring a Conference on Security,Privacy and Intellectual Property in the Global InformationInfrastructure Feb. 7-8 in Canberra.  Speakers from aroundthe world including Dorothy E. Denning from GeorgetownUniversity and Deborah Hurley of OECD will discuss anonymouspayments, cryptography, security in business networks, andinformation technology in Asia.  Information from SteveOrlowski, Attorney-General's Department, 61 6 270 2577, fax61 6 270 2254, World Wide Web, nla.gov.au/gii/oecdconf.html.* The Association for Computing Machinery's Symposium onComputers and the Quality of Life will be aninterdisciplinary gathering covering diverse applications,Feb. 14-15 in Philadelphia.  Information from C. DianneMartin, George Washington University, e-maildiannem(at)seas.gwu.edu.* Providing Patient Education via the Internet, scheduledfor Feb. 12-14 in the Crown Plaza Hotel, Miami, includes twointeractive workshops.  Information from Institute forInternational Research, 800/999-3123, fax 800/959-9644, e-mail us002506(at)interramp.com.* A Conference on Privacy in Practice will discuss extendingprotections to the private sector, and the impact of privacyrequirements on new technology and on business practices,Feb. 19-20 in Sydney, Australia.  Information from thesponsor, IBC Conferences, tel. 61 2 319 3755, fax 61 2 6993901.*+  An institute on computer law and doing business on theInternet scheduled for New York City Mar. 4-5 will include asession on privacy and publicity litigation involving theInternet, presented by New York attorney David Boies.Information from the sponsor, Practising Law Institute, 810Seventh Ave., New York, N.Y. 10019, 800/260-4754, fax800/321-0093, World Wide Web, pli.edu.* Privacy will be on the agenda of Behavioral InformaticsTomorrow, a national conference on computers in mental-health care, in New Orleans Mar. 7-10.  Information fromCentraLink, 4370 Alpine Rd., Suite 108, Portola Valley, Cal.94028, 415/851-8411, fax 415/851-0406, World Wide Web,ispot.com/centralink.* The British publication PRIVACY LAWS AND BUSINESS presentsits 9th annual conference on European data protection issuesJul. 1-3 in St. John's College, Cambridge, with emphasis onimplementation of the new Europe-wide directive on dataprotection.  Information from Ms Gill Ehrlich, Roxeth House,Shaftesbury Ave., Harrow, Middlesex HA2 OPZ, U.K., tel. (44)81 423 1300, fax (44) 181 423 4536.Back to Headline List CopyrightPRIVACY JOURNAL via NewsNetJanuary 1996MARYLAND MEDICAL DATA BASE; RECYCLED MEDICAL DATAFROM MIRIAM L. AZRAEL, ATTORNEY, BALTIMORE, MD.:  Thank youfor including in last month's issue information aboutMaryland's medical records data base.  The day after Ireceived my issue in the mail I received a call from aBethesda, Md., subscriber who somehow tracked me down formore information.  The more Marylanders who get involved inthe process, the more accountable the state will be toconsumers who have legitimate concerns about their medicalrecords privacy.FROM SAN DIEGO, CAL.:  Our organization received a complaintfrom a person who received a letter from a hospital sayingthat "an employee retrieved some computer generated medicalsheets from a recycling box to use as scratch paper at home. . . . A friend of our employee inappropriately used severalof these sheets as stationery.  You have been identified asone who received correspondence from that person on the backof these medical records and are, therefore, in possessionof this health care information."  The hospital thencautioned the recipient not to violate California's medicalconfidentiality law by disclosing the information andinsisted that the "stationery" be returned to the hospitalimmediately.[In addition to the breach] we are concerned that thehospital now has in its possession the personalcorrespondence list of the [non-employee] individual whoused recycled paper as stationery.FROM TRUMANSBURG, N.Y.:  I wrote to MIB Inc. and asked for acopy of my file.  They sent me the form, I filled it out(they didn't ask for a SSN, amazingly), and they wrote backand said that they had no file on me at all.  I don'tbelieve them - I had [individual health] insurance in effectabout three years earlier and the insurance company hadadded stuff to my application which they presumably got fromMIB.  Do I have any recourse?RESPONSE: At present you have to take a consumer reportingagency's word when it says it has no file on you.  But ifyou discover in the future that it did have information onyou, you can take action, based on a violation of the FairCredit Reporting Act.It is not surprising that MIB does not have a file on you.It has records on only about five percent of the U.S.population, mainly for life insurance underwriting.  MIB,located in Boston (617/426-3660), keeps computerizedsummaries taken from prior insurance applications and thenprovides them to another insurance company to which youapply for coverage.  It is an example of a huge data basethat does not use Social Security numbers in its files.FROM MT. HOPE, ARK.:  What kind of background checks onpatients do doctors and dentists do?  How can I get accessto this data base?RESPONSE:  There are a few data bases that will tell adoctor whether a person has filed a malpractice lawsuit inthe past.  These entities are subject to the Fair CreditReporting Act, which requires them to disclose to you whatinformation they have stored on you and requires the doctorto identify the data base if you are turned down as apatient because of information in them.  (There  is also afederal data base listing doctors accused of malpractice andother misconduct, although it is not available to thegeneral public.  There are a few private data bases thatsell similar information to the public.  They are notsubject to the FCRA.)Back to Headline List WT03-B40-35IA060-000326-B020-422http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/gt08.html 205.156.212.5 19970115021559 text/html 138568HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 02:13:47 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:52 GMTContent-length: 138378Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/gt08.html Sample Issue Copyright SET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNet APRIL 24, 1995 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES House Small Business Panel Finishes SBA Review (409 words) Clinton Defends Preferences, Hopes to Diffuse Anger President May Look at Helping Non-Minorities (466 words) Washington Insider (857 words) What's on your mind? (459 words) Congress Agrees to Paperwork Reduction Bill (256 words) GSA May Contract Out More, Less (275 words) Audit Says Defense Unit Awarded Too Much to 8(a)s (381 words) SBIR Sails Through Congressional Hearing (462 words) DOE Awards Contract to Run Rocky Flats Small Business to Get 15% of Contract's Value (303 words) **CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES (12091 words) 8(a) CONTRACTS AWARDED (3078 words) In Washington, D.C. (860 words) Company News... (53 words) African American-owned Luster Construction (31 words) ...Business Connections... (180 words) CALENDAR (217 words) CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995House Small Business Panel Finishes SBA Review     With the House Small Business Committee'sinitial review of all SBA programs complete, stafferssay the committee is starting to form its ownproposals to cut the agency.     Everything is on the table and undecided,committee sources say, but they are hoping to releasetheir proposal by mid-May. Other key players willbe the Budget Committee, which sets theauthorization for the agency, and the AppropriationsSubcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State, andJudiciary, which divvies up the funds. The HouseSmall Business Committee proposal will most likelybe the starting point for legislation.     SBA recently made its own proposal, whichwould eliminate the government's subsidy for thesmall business loan programs, the agency's costliestprogram, and consolidate local SBA offices andcenters. These changes would reduce the agency'sfiscal year 1996 budget by almost a third, providingnearly double what the House committee proposed.     But it is unlikely the House Small BusinessCommittee will stop there. Chair Jan Meyers, R-Kan., has repeatedly said she believes the 8(a)program is "duplicative" with the new SDB andprice preference program created as part of last year'sfederal acquisition bill. The Small BusinessInvestment Program has also been pointed to as aprogram that could be cut, possibly privatized.     House aides indicated the committee is concernedabout SBA's proposal to reduce the government'ssubsidy loan cost to zero through increases in fees tobanks and borrowers. Several members haveworried additional loan fees would put SBA loansout of reach of smaller businesses.     Members, including Meyers, also voicedconcerns about an SBA plan to close local SBAoffices, which might affect their districts. Theproposal would consolidate regional offices withtheir district counterpart and eliminate many localoffices, leaving most states with just one SBA office.Due to their concerns, committee members areworking closely with SBA officials on this matter.     If Meyers' committee rejects or pares down thesetwo proposals, as it seems they might, it could meancuts may need to be found in other SBA programs,though no one program will yield as much savingsas the loan program.     SBA hopes it will have a champion in freshmanRep. Michael Forbes, R-N.Y. and a member of theHouse Appropriations Subcommittee, which hasjurisdiction over SBA funding. Forbes is a formerdirector of congressional affairs for SBA andregional administrator for the Northeast Region.Staff aides say he is a strong advocate of the agencyas a whole.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995Clinton Defends Preferences, Hopes to Diffuse AngerPresident May Look at Helping Non-Minorities     Republicans and Democrats may be looking forways to help broaden the base of programs for thedisadvantaged, but for very different purposes.     Republicans hope to promote economicdisadvantage over race as a better way to help lift uppoor Americans than affirmative action. The Clintonadministration appears to be hoping to deflect angeraway from affirmative action, by looking for ways tohelp non-minorities.     In a speech to the California Democratic Party,Clinton said Democrats should not retreat on thoseaffirmative action programs that work, but, rather,should look to what we can do for those hurt bydownsizing and other structural changes in theeconomy.     It was the President's first indication he may takethe initiative on affirmative action. But other reportshave implied the administration's review may call foradditional review and the creation of a bipartisancommittee to study the matter further.     If the administration lets conservatives take thelead, it could result in the substitution of economicfor racial preferences. Clint Bolick of the Institute forJustice, one of the think tanks behind the GOP attackon affirmative action, has suggested the use ofeconomic disadvantage-based programs andspecifically targeted aid to help expand opportunitiesfor those in poor areas.     For instance, he suggested the Small BusinessAdministration should narrow its focus to target onlythose areas of the nation, namely inner cities, wherethe barriers to small business success are highest.     But a large-scale attempt to help the poor isunlikely when the federal government faces amassive deficit. At a panel discussion sponsored bythe conservative Center for Equal Opportunity,Randall Kennedy of the Harvard Law School warnedthat a move to replace economic for socialdisadvantage would require more money andpossibly end up unfunded.     Michael Dyson of the University of NorthCarolina said that to truly help the poor masseswould require raising taxes on the rich and increasingthe minimum wage.     He contended that affirmative action programsactually cost very little and their elimination wouldonly help the poor if funds for affirmative actionwere being diverted from anti-poverty programs.     Affirmative action opponents' suggestion toredirect these programs to target the poor specificallyseems particularly inconsistent when Congress is inthe process of cutting anti-poverty programs,Kennedy said.     Kennedy and Dyson were not completelyopposed to changes in affirmative action, particularlywhen it came to the subject of whichgroups shouldreceive such preferences. Asked whether somedistinctions should be made between new immigrantgroups and those groups, such as African Americansand Native Americans, who suffered historically atthe hands of this nation, Dyson said he was not asinterested in preserving programs in their currentstate.     But, he added, affirmative action should not bethrown out just because "some of the beneficiariesare suspect."Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995Washington Insider     Federal officials, at first seemingly caught off-guard by attacks on affirmative action, are nowstrongly promoting it as a sign of good businesssense. At a recent conference, Postmaster GeneralMarvin Runyon, head of the U.S. Postal Service,said that supplier diversity "is good for the nationbecause it gives small, developing businesses a fairchance. Organizations with strong minority supplierprograms say these small businesses are often ableto respond better and faster to their specific needs.Encouraging supplier diversity encourages the bestfrom our country."***     But attacks on affirmative action programs on thestate level continue. According to The Los AngelesTimes, California Governor Pete Wilson is expectedto announce the elimination of all state affirmativeaction programs not mandated by state law.Although this will not affect California's majoraffirmative action programs in education, hiring, andcontracting, it will mean abolishing several stateadvisory boards and councils charged withmonitoring state compliance with those laws.     Wilson, who also backs a ballot initiativerepealing all state and local affirmative actionprograms, rejected diversity initiatives in his hiringand judicial appointments. According to the LosAngeles Times, his overall percentage of hires andappointments of minorities have hovered around17%, not coming near the percentage of minoritiescomprising the state's labor force (39%) or itspopulation (43%).***     Some interesting facts regarding minority set-asides and the 8(a) program...According to a recentstudy done by the SBA Office of Advocacy, the sixlargest federal prime contractors receive moregovernment contracts than do all small, minority-,and women-owned federal contractors. And criticssay the 8(a) program is concentrated among a fewfirms...Also SBA Administrator Phil Lader and hisDeputy Cassandra Pulley, at a recent hearing, citedthe fact that only 3% of the SBA's budget and 10%of its personnel are devoted to running the 8(a)program.**     For a hearing on a relatively obscure program, arecent House government programs subcommitteehearing on the Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR) program was unusually well-attended, notedsubcommittee chairman Rep. Peter Torkildsen, R-Mass. The surge in spectators was explained by thepresence of a dozen SBIR program managers,wanting to see what subcommittee members weregoing to do to their program.***     The Energy Dept. last month named PercyMcCraney as deputy director of the Office ofEconomic Impact and Diversity in charge of theOffice of Small and Disadvantaged BusinessUtilization (OSDBU). McCraney is an attorney andformer college business instructor originally fromLouisiana.***     Where was Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., at therecent Senate Small Business Committee hearing onthe 8(a) program? Kerry, who was the main sponsorof the Senate 8(a) reform bill last year, did not evenmake a quick appearance. The hearing set up at therequest of Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole wasexpected to question the whole existence of theprogram, but Chairman Christopher Bond, R-Mo.,seemed more bent on reform.***     The U.S. Agency for International Development(AID) will host three one-day BusinessOpportunities Conferences for small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses, historicallyblack colleges and universities, and private voluntaryorganizations (PVOs) controlled by minorities andwomen. The conferences will be May 3 in Miami,Fla., and sometime in June in Indianapolis, Ind., andDenver, Colo. The conferences will featureworkshops, counseling sessions, procurement andsubcontracting opportunities, and marketing tips ondoing business abroad. For registration information,contact Gus Palmer, Thorpe International Inc., 202-857-7835.***     NASA and Boeing Co., prime contractor for theInternational Space Station, will host a smallbusiness symposium May 18 at the Capitol HillHyatt in Washington, D.C. Speakers give anoverview of the space station to date and discussnear-term opportunities in mechanical/electricalmanufacturing, electrical/power/avionics,mechanical/structural/thermal engineering, andmiscellaneous services. Pre-registration is required.Contact Kevin Howard, NASA Small BusinessManager for International Space Station Alpha, 713-280-7409.***     Although most congressional Republicans seemto support continuing the Small BusinessAdministration's loan programs, Rep. Dick Chrysler,R-Mich. and a member of the House Small BusinessCommittee, has characterized the program as"corporate welfare". Others agree with him. TheCompetitive Enterprise Institute has recently issued astatement advocating the elimination of SBA and itsloan programs. The groups seems to reject the ideathat financial institutions are turning away smallbusinesses, particularly minorities and women,because these loans don't offer the same returns asbigger loans. Instead, they say that most of the smallbusinesses receiving SBA guarantees have a "poorcredit history." The group also believes SBA acceptsinadequate collateral, allowing borrowers to value thecollateral with no outside verification.***     The SBA Region VI Office in Kansas City has anew phone number: 816-374-6380. So does theRegion III Office in King of Prussia, Pa.: 610-962-3700.***     Senate Small Business Committee ChairmanChristopher Bond, R-Mo., has named Paul Cooksey,a former SBA deputy administrator during the Bushadministration, as the committee's deputy chiefcounsel. He has also served as a deputy assistantsecretary for administration at the Dept. of Treasury.***     Terminology watch... The Defense Dept. has apolite way of saying that it disagrees. It uses theword "nonconcur."Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995What's on your mind?Q: My company is an SDB. Can you give me anyadvice on winning subcontracts from primes?***A: As part of last year's Federal AcquisitionStreamlining Act, the federal government set a 5%SDB contracting goal for all federal agencies, withagencies negotiating subcontracting goals withprimes that can be either above or below this 5%threshold.     Subcontracting with primes, however, is actuallyno different than contracting directly with agovernment agency, except that primes may be moremotivated to work with you. Many primes areworried about fulfilling their subcontracting goalsand, in fact, some even have problems locatingcapable minority-owned firms in their particularsubcontracting niche. In some cases, primes caneven lose their contract if they cannot meetsubcontracting goals. So many primes may be quiteinterested. But, just like with the federal agencies,you will still need to provide a capabilities statementand make a competitive bid. And, of course, not allprimes have problems finding SDBs.     In any case, there are ways to improve yourchances for subcontracting with primes. As with allgovernment contracting, relationships are vital. Onceyou have identified those primes that do work inyour field, call the main switchboard and ask for thename of the person to contact. Most large primeshave a department or a person designated to helpthem locate qualified small and minority businesses.Look for the small business liaison officer or asimilar title. If they have a subcontractors list, requestto be added to it. But remember this is just a firststep.     Because some contracts require primes tospecifically name the minority firm they will using, itis important to make them aware of your firm early.Try and schedule a meeting with the contact personto give them a brief presentation of your firm's skills,pertinent prior experience, and key personnel.     The liaison officer will be able to give youvaluable information, such as what companylocations may need your service or product. Theycan also help put you in touch with the prime's buyerif they think you are qualified.     Once you have successfully worked for a prime,it will be much easier to get additional subcontractsfrom the prime. So it is worth all the hard work toget that first subcontract, even if it isn't very big.***Q: When will I be able to take advantage of the 10%price preference for small disadvantaged businessescontained in the Federal Acquisition StreamliningAct?***A: The regulations, which tell government agencieshow to administer the new rules, must be in place byOctober 1995. So you must wait until final rules arein place--which could be earlier than the Octoberdeadline, but don't count on it.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995Congress Agrees to Paperwork Reduction Bill     Before adjoining for their Easter/Passover recess,the Senate and House approved the PaperworkReduction Act, clearing the measure for PresidentClinton, who is expected to sign the bill.     The bill was heavily supported by small businesslobbies, including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce,National Federation of Independent Businesses, andNational Small Business United. It is estimated thatsmall businesses spend one billion hours annuallyfilling out government paperwork at a cost of nearly$100 billion.     The legislation, which is part of the GOP Contractwith America and aims particularly to lessen thepaperwork burden on small business, will:     * require a 10% reduction in governmentpaperwork for two years and 5% for four years afterthat;     * allow individuals and small businesses toignore paperwork requirements if the issuing agencydid not obtain public input in developing them; and     * reauthorize for six years the Office ofManagement and Budget's (OMB) Office ofInformation and Regulatory Affairs, which is theprimary review arm for reducing governmentpaperwork.     The second and most controversial provision ofthe bill would excuse the public from filling outgovernment forms that do not have OMB-issuedcontrol numbers. The lack of such a number meansthe federal agency issuing the form did not receiveOMB approval for the information request. If this isthe case, the public is legally excused from any finesor repercussions as a result of not complying,including the denial of government benefits.     The bill is scheduled to take effect Oct. 1, once thepresident signs it.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995GSA May Contract Out More, Less     The reorganization of the General ServicesAdministration (GSA) may result in morecontracting out for some services but less for others.     GSA has divided its operations into 16 "businesslines" and over the next year will study each of themfor ways to save money and increase efficiency.     The first two up for review are internal computeroperations and brokerage services.     Computer operations include 22 data processingcenters, which are staffed largely by contractoremployees. The review found the centers to be two-and-a-half times less efficient at data processingcompared to private industry.     GSA spends about $65 million a year in salaries,contracts, and equipment and facilities rent to run itsinternal computer operations.     To save money, data processing will beconsolidated into two large centers, which GSAbelieves will operate more efficiently.     Older computer equipment will be phased outrapidly and two large computer services contractswill be allowed to lapse in 1996 and 1997. Then,GSA will consider if it can bring service in-houseusing commercial software.     GSA employs about 850 people in brokerageservices to manage the 7,700 buildings which theagency owns or rents space in for federal workers.     The agency spends about $94 million a year tomanage $2.4 billion in property leases. About 70%of leases are considered "small leases" for 10,000square feet or less.     GSA takes 200-400 days to complete a leasetransaction, and has begun a pilot program in threeregional offices to cut 100 days from that process.     In the review, GSA will look at whether it wouldbe cheaper to contract out for commercial brokerageservices or to keep performing it in-house.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995Audit Says Defense Unit Awarded Too Much to8(a)s     The Defense Construction Supply Center(DCSC) awarded a "disproportionate share" of itsconstruction contracts to 8(a) firms, according to aDefense Dept. Inspector General's audit.     The audit looked at DCSC contract awards madefrom Oct. 1, 1990 to June 30, 1994, when the centerawarded 95 construction contracts worth $27.1million. DCSC's procurement budget for the sameperiod was about $2.4 billion.     An Ohio contractor's complaint that DCSC paid"substantially" more than fair market value for theinstallation of a sprinkler system by awarding acontract to an 8(a) firm without competition and gavethe 8(a) "preferential treatment" sparked the audit.     Auditors determined that the contract wasawarded properly, but said DCSC concentrated its8(a) awards in the construction industry (defined aswork under SIC Codes 15, 16, and 17) at theexpense of other firms.     DCSC awarded 97% of the value of itsconstruction contracts to 8(a) firms. All but four ofthe contracts awarded to 8(a)s were awarded as sole-source contracts, which, the audit said, cost morethan contracts awarded competitively.     For all other industries, DCSC awarded 2% of thevalue of contracts to 8(a)s, the audit reported.     Congress set the Defense Dept. a goal ofawarding a minimum of 5% of the value of contractsto small disadvantaged businesses. DCSC, accordingto the audit, established an unwritten policy ofrelying on awards to 8(a)s in construction to helpachieve its 5% goal. DCSC officials told auditorsthey believed it was easier to locate qualified 8(a)firms in construction than in other industries.     Auditors recommended that DCSC monitor itscontract awards more closely, so 8(a) awards are notconcentrated in just a few industries.     The Defense Logistics Agency (DLA), of whichDCSC is a part, said it would begin publishing aquarterly report listing SDB awards by SIC Code.     DLA disagreed with the audit's findings, howeverDCSC has never met the 5% SDB goal andtherefore, could be argued, that DCSC shouldincrease its 8(a) awards to meet the goal.     DLA also said all of DCSC's sole-source awardsfollowed long-established government rules. It addedthat auditors did not count millions of dollars inconstruction contracts the U.S. Army Corps ofEngineers awarded for DCSC requirements which,if included, would lower the share of contracts goingto 8(a)s.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995SBIR Sails Through Congressional Hearing     Except for a few minor recommendations, theSmall Business Innovation Research (SBIR)program emerged from a congressional hearingshowered with laurels.     The hearing, held by the House Small Businessgovernment programs subcommittee, was the last ina two-month series that examined programsadministered by the SBA.     SBIR was lauded for creating jobs and generatingtax revenue while adding little or no extraadministrative cost. Congress created the program in1982 and requires federal agencies with annualresearch and development (R&D) budgets of morethan $100 million to devote a percentage to fundingproposals for new and innovative technologies theysolicit from small businesses. The goal of theprogram is to develop a product for the commercialmarketplace.     Subcommittee Chairman Peter Torkildsen, R-Mass., said  he would consider just a few changes tothe SBIR program.     Suggestions offered included:     * reducing paperwork and developing standardprocedures for submitting and evaluating proposals;     * reining in solicitation topics that one businessowner described as too "far out" for people topropose a commercially viable product in SBIR'slimited time frame; and      * designing a computer system to verify SBIRparticipation and prevent duplicate awarding ofgrants.     Few cases of multiple awards for the sameproposal have been proven, but SBIR funding wasincreased beginning in fiscal year 1993 and theGeneral Accounting Office (GAO) raised concernsthat more companies could try to take advantage ofthe system.      SBA officials said a computer system to verifySBIR participation much quicker than the systemnow in use should be available in the next three tofour months.     SBIR is promoted as a program that helps smallbusinesses develop new and useful technologies withlittle government investment. It's a three-phaseprocess: In Phase I, companies receive up to$100,000 over six months to see if their proposal isviable. In Phase II, companies get up to $750,000over two years to refine a product or service. Nogovernment money is offered in Phase III,commercialization.     All grants are awarded competitively.     Other suggestions touched on the types ofassistance agencies can offer to SBIR grantrecipients. The legislation allows agencies to providetechnical assistance, but program officials saidrecipients appear to need more help in marketingtheir products commercially. The Energy Dept.created a business assistance program, funded withnon-SBIR money, to do that.     Dr. Samuel J. Barish, the Energy Dept. SBIRprogram manager, recommended that a smallpercentage of SBIR money, possibly 1%, bepermitted for business development assistance. Thiswould require an amendment to SBIR legislation.     Rep. Cleo Fields, D-La., asked about minorityparticipation in SBIR programs. No recent studieshave been done, but SBA officials said they believeminorities are underrepresented as a whole, receivingabout 10% of SBIR awards. GAO backed up SBA'sestimate.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995DOE Awards Contract to Run Rocky Flats     Small Business to Get 15% of Contract's Value     Small and minority-owned businesses will winmore than a half-billion dollars from a major newEnergy Dept. contract.     DOE earlier this month awarded a $3.5-billion,five-year contract to Kaiser-Hill Co. for cleanup of aformer nuclear weapons plant at Rocky Flats, inGolden, Col.     Kaiser-Hill, a joint venture between ICF Kaiserand CH2M Hill, two leading environmentalmanagement companies, will take over the RockyFlats contract July 1, 1995. The incumbent contractoris EG&G Rocky Flats Inc.     In its proposal, Kaiser-Hill set a goal of awarding15% of the contract's total value, $525 million, tosmall businesses. The company said it intends toaward at least $262 million in professional andtechnical services contracts to small firms and morethan $130 million to small disadvantaged businesses.     Kaiser-Hill's proposal beat out one submitted byParsons Rocky Flats Corp. and promises to save$1.2 billion over the life of the contract. The RockyFlats contract was the second  awarded competitivelyunder DOE's Contract Reform Initiative announcedlast year, which calls for contracts to beperformance-based as opposed to fixed-fee.     Work at Rocky Flats will include cleaning up andremoving all high-risk "hot spot" contamination,stabilizing plutonium and plutonium residues,consolidating plutonium supplies into a singlebuilding, shipping highly enriched uranium off-site,rehabilitating 4,100 acres of land for public use, andremediating five hazardous sites. Kaiser-Hill said itwill complete these tasks three to four years ahead ofestablished targets.     For information, contact Ron Shatrow of CH2MHill, 303-771-0900, ext. 2110. To get on the bidder'slist, firms can mail a capabilities statement andcorporate brochures to Kaiser-Hill, 6060 S. WillowDr., Englewood, Col. 80111. No contracts orsubcontracts will be available until after July 1. OnceKaiser-Hill takes over, it will contract with a smallbusiness to run the Rocky Flats small businessoffice.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995**CONTRACT OPPORTUNITIESSCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL SUPPORT(1) The Contraceptive Development Branch and theContraceptive and Reproductive Branch of the Centerfor Population Research of the National Institute ofChild Health and Human Development is seeking anorganization to support a network of clinical sitesconducting contraceptive clinical trials necessary forFDA approval of new contraceptive drugs anddevices and for further evaluation of existing drugsand devices. This clinical coordinating center willprovide the statistical, protocol development, clinicalmonitoring, data management, and data analysissupport for the coordination of this multicenterclinical trials network. NICHD anticipates evaluationof up to seven spermicides, four male condoms,three female devices, and two other contraceptivedrugs between 1995 and 1999. The RFP should bereleased on or about April 27, 1995, and proposalswill be in about 60 days. The SIC code for thisproject is 7379, and the size standard is $18 million.This is a 100% small business set-aside. ContactLarlene Ruddy 301/496-4611, fax 301/402-3676.Contracts Management Branch, NICHD, NationalInstitute of Health, PHS, Executive Building, Suite7A-07, 6100 Executive Blvd., MSC 7510, Bethesda,MD 20892-7510. SOL RFP-NICHD-CD-95-03.(2) The Navy needs a company to provide supportfor the development, enhancement, training,operation, documentation, and hardware maintenancefor Tactical Support Systems (TSS). The TSSconsists of several local area networks, windows,oracles and powerbuilder applications, and anautomated publishing system. This has been set-aside for small business, and the due date is June 14,1995. Contact Pamela Collins at 301/394-3780.Code 3324, Naval Surface Warfare Center,Carderock Division, White Oak Site, 10901 NewHampshire Ave., Silver Spring, MD 20903-5640.SOL N00167-95-R-0081.(3) Fort Eustis in Virginia ia looking for a contractorto provide maintenance services for ADP equipmentfor the Aviation Applied Technology Directorate.This has been set-aside for small business. Thecontract period begins October 1995 and runsthrough September 1996. The SIC code is 7378, andthe size standard is $18 million. Contact Paula Gwinat 804/878-5025. Directorate of PeninsulaContracting, Attn: ATZF-DPC-C, Building 2746,Fort Eustis, VA 23604-5292. SOL DABT57-95-B-0040.     (4) The National Institute of EnvironmentalHealth Sciences is seeking a contractor to provideliterature search and summary support for theenvironmental toxicology program. The majorobjective of this program is to develop data onchemicals and classes of chemicals nominated to theNational Toxicological  Program (NTP) for varioustypes of toxicological testing, and on chemicals andtheir structural analogs at the conclusion of testing bythe NTP. It is estimated that there will be a total of5,432 hours for the contract. This includesprofessional, clerical, technical, and computersupport people hours. This has been set-aside forsmall disadvantaged businesses, and the due date isMay 30, 1995. Contact Katherine Hughes at919/541-0420. National Institute of EnvironmentalHealth Services, Contracts and ProcurementManagement Branch, OM, 79 TW Alexander Drive,4401 Building, PO Box 12874, Research TrianglePark, NC 27709. SOL NIH-ES-95-27.     (5) The Office of the Secretary of the Departmentof Health and Human Services is in need ofnetwork/personal computer support services. TheseADP support services will include central networkmanagement (LAN/WAN), technical support, PChardware maintenance, maintenance of Banyonsoftware licenses, and maintenance of licensingagreements for network-wide applications. This is aone-year base contract with two option periods. Thishas been set-aside 100% for small business, and theRFP is scheduled for issuance the first of May. TheSIC code is 7379. Contact Arthur Storey at 202/690-5547. DHHS, Office of the Secretary, Division ofContract Operations, Room 443H, *** Bldg., 200Independence Ave. SW, Washington, DC 20201.RFP-33-95-HHS-OS.     (6) The Army has a requirement to providesystems engineering and technical support(engineering support function requirementsdefinition and design, quality assurance, andprogram management) to the automation life cyclemanagement mission of the Headquarters,Department of the Army (HQDA), Office of theDeputy Chief of Staff (ODCSINT), IntelligenceInformation Management Directorate (DAMI-IM).This will be a task order effort, and will includesupport and services to and for U&S commandssupported by DAMI, Army major commands(MACOMs), Army Department of DefenseIntelligence Information System (DoDIIS) systems,and projects and related systems support by HQDAand the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). Thiswill be a one-year contract with four option periods.All contractor personnel must have current,adjudicated Top Secret clearances prior to contractaward. This has been set-aside for small business,and the due date is May 15, 1995. Send all requestsfor solicitations in writing to : Commander,USAINCOM SPT BN (PROV), Attn: IAISB-DCO,8825 Beulah Street, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5246.SOL RFP DAHC90-95-R-0017.     PROFESSIONAL SERVICES ANDMANAGEMENT SUPPORT     (7) The Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment is seeking a company to provide realestate asset management services for HUD-ownedcondominiums. These properties are located inMinnesota. This is a one-year contract with twooption periods, and the due date is May 25, 1995.This has been designated as a small business set-aside. Contact Pat Leseman at 612/370-3100. USDepartment of Housing and Urban Development,Property Disposition, 220 S. Second St.,Minneapolis, MN 55401. SOL 004-95-092.     (8) The Forest Service is looking for a contractorto conduct an ecosystem survey on the burrows ofgopher tortoises, an endangered species. The surveycovers about 5,674 acres on the Black Creek RangerDistrict in Mississippi. This has been set-aside forsmall business/labor surplus area concerns, and thedue date is May 24, 1995. Contact Julia Cain at601/965-5474. USDA, Forest Service, 100 WestCapitol St., Suite 1141, Federal Building, Jackson,MS 39269. SOL R8-7-95.     (9) The Sepulvada VA Medical Center is lookingfor a firm to provide medical transcription services.They must have equipment compatible with theVA's Lanier Voicewriter System and must be able totransmit into its computer system via telephone lines.This is a one-year contract with two option periods.This has been set-aside for labor surplus areaconcerns, and the due date is June 1, 1995. ContactJudith Trigger at 818/895-9352. Sepulveda VAMedical Center 665/90C, Attn: Judith Trigger, 16111Plummer St., Sepulvada, CA 91343. SOL IFB 665-13-95.     (10) The Bureau of Land Management is lookingfor a company to do real estate appraisals in Arizona.This is a one-year contract with the possibility ofoption periods. It has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is June 9, 1995. The SICcode is 0721, and the size standard is $3.5 million.Contact Marty Coffee at 303/969-6514. Bureau ofLand Management, SC-651B, Denver FederalCenter, PO Box 25047, Denver, CO 80225-0047.SOL N651-RFP5-3040.     (11) The Department of Energy is seekingcontractors for training development and support forthe office of Environmental Management (EM). Theobjectives of this effort will include training supportto EM in various areas, training needs assessments,development and implementation of trainingprograms, training program evaluations, assistancein the administration of existing DOE trainingprograms, development of presentation materials forissue-specific EM seminars and workshops, anddevelopment and implementation of EM medialibrary services. This has been set-aside 100% forsmall business, and the due date is June 19, 1995.The SIC code is 8741, and the size standard is $5million. Contact John Wells at 202/634-4471.Department of Energy, Attn: Document ControlSpecialist, PO Box 2500, 1000 Independence Ave.SW, Washington, DC 20013-2500. SOL DE-RP01-95EW11602.     (12) The Federal Aviation Administration isseeking a company to provide aviation weatherobservation services at Watertown, South Dakota.The bidder/contractor must furnish an adequatenumber of weather observers certified by theNational Weather Service to maintain constantvigilance of local weather conditions. The contractconsists of an interim period of July 10, 1995,through September 30, 1995, and a base year and anoption period are expected to follow. The value ofthis project including all these time periods should bebetween $250,000 and $500,000. This is a 100%small business set-aside, and the due date is July 10,1995. Contact Felicia Bauer at 708/294-7232.Federal Aviation Administration, 2300 East DevonAve., Des Plaines, IL. SOL DTFA14-95-R-33709.     (13) The Naval Air Warfare Center is seeking acontractor for  modification management supportservices. These services will be required atNAWCAD at the Patuxent River in Maryland, andthe Central Kitting Activity in Orange Park, Florida,both on-site and off-site at the discretion of thegovernment. This is a competitive 8(a) set-aside. TheSIC code is 8711, and the National Buy Number is7700-95-6026. Contact Brenda Pickett at 301/826-1828. Contracts Competency Division, Attn: BrendaPickett, Code 2.6.2.2BP, MS32, Naval Air WarfareCenter, Aircraft Division, Patuxent River, MD20670-5304. SOL N00421-94-R-0132.     BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ANDGENERAL CONTRACTING     (14) Kelly Air Force Base in Texas is seeking acontractor to install leak detection equipment. Thework includes analysis, removal, and disposal oftrench sediment, and providing and installing a leakdetection system. The value of this contract isbetween $100,000 and $250,000, and it has been set-aside for small business. The due date is May 25,1995. Contact J. Mitchell at 210/925-7337. Faxrequests for a copy of the specifications to 210/925-3241. Directorate of Contracting, Sa-Alc/Pkoc, 1288Growdon Road Building 1598, Kelly AFB, TX78241-5318. SOL F41650-95-3241.     (15) The Veterans Affairs Medical Center inSheridan, Wyoming, is seeking a contractor for aconstruction project. The work includes demolition,mechanical, electrical, and architectural replacementsfor the top floor and portions of the first two floorsof building 9. For a copy of the specifications, send anon-refundable check for $25 to: Plan OneArchitects, Box KK, Jackson, WY 83001. Make thecheck payable to VAMC, Sheridan, WY. The valueof this contract is between $250,000 and $500,000.This has been set-aside for small business, and thedue date is June 5, 1995. The SIC code is 1542.Contact Kurt Mayer for technical information at307/672-1671. The contract officer is Linda Luegge,307/672-1671. Veterans Affairs Medical Center,Acquisition & Materiel Management Service, 1898Fort Rd., Sheridan, WY 82801. SOL 666-091.     (16) Fort Shafter in Hawaii needs a contractor toreplace various kinds of flooring and carpeting forfamily housing and miscellaneous buildings on theIsland of Oahu. This has been set-aside for smalldisadvantaged business, and the due date is May 30,1995. The SIC code is 1752, and the size standard is$7 million . This project is valued between $500,000and $1 million. Requests for solicitations must beaccompanied by a non-refundable check for $9 madepayable to the Defense Accounting Office. Send thisto the Directorate of Contracting, Attn: APVG-GKC,Fort Shafter, HI 96858-5025. Contact Tina Johnstonat 808/438-6543. SOL DAHC77-95-B-0040.     The Redstone Arsenal in Alabama has aconstruction project to replace a roof on building3221. This contract is valued between $100,000 and$250,000. It has been set-aside for smalldisadvantaged business, and the due date is May 22,1995. Contact Gina Daniel at 205/876-8392.Commander, US Army Missile Command,Acquisition Center, Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5280. SOL DAAH03-95-B-0012.     (17) The Navy is seeking a contractor to replacesubstation S-9 at the Naval Training Center in GreatLakes, Illinois. The work includes installing aprimary unit substation consisting of 34.5 KV circuitbreaker switchgear, one 7500/9375 KVA34.5 KV-12.47 transformer, 15 KV circuit breaker switchgear,substation foundations and grading, and relatedwork. The SIC code is 1731, and the size standard is$7 million. This has been set-aside for smalldisadvantaged business, and the due date is May 26,1995. The value of this contract is between $1 and $5million. Contact Jennifer Armstrong at 708/688-2600 ext. 103. Engineering Field Activity, Midwest,Naval Facilities Engineering Command, Building 1-A, Great Lakes, IL 60088-5600. SOL N62467-94-B-8015.     (18) Fort Carson in Colorado needs a contractorto replace overhead doors systems. This will bee arequirements type contract for a one-year base, andtwo option periods. This is estimated to be worthbetween $500,000 and $1 million. It has been set-aside for small business, and the due date is June 15,1995. Contact Nancy Mills at 719/526-6618.Directorate of Contracting, Construction Division,Building 6222, Fort Carson, CO 80913-5022. SOLDAKF06-95-B-0010.     (19) The Army Corps of Engineers is seeking acontractor for a construction project at Kelly AirForce Base in San Antonio, Texas. They plan tobuild one 3,975 square-foot facility and one 8,000square-foot small aircraft hangar, as well as makealterations to two nose docks of 13,100 square feeteach. The estimated cost range is between $1 and $5million. Bid sets are available for $38 for half size,and $78 for full size. This is a small disadvantagedbusiness set-aside, and the due date is May 24, 1995.The SIC code is 1542, and the size standard is $17million. Contact Sharon Hair at 817/334-3194. USArmy Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District, POBox 17300, 819 Taylor Street, Attn: CESWF-CT,Fort Worth, TX 76102-0300. SOL DACA63-95-B-0074.     Kingsley Field Air National Guard base inKlamath Falls, Oregon, is looking for a contractor tobuild a petroleum operations facility. The estimatedcost of this construction is between $250,000 and$500,000. The project should take about 180 days.This has been set-aside for small disadvantagedbusiness, and the due date is May 25, 1995. Plansand specifications can be purchased from FordGraphics in Portland, Oregon, under IFB No.DAHA 35-95-B-0006. Contact Scott Michaels at503/945-3929. USPFO for Oregon, PO Box 14840,Salem, OR 97309-5008.     (20) Tinker Air Force Base in Oklahoma needs acontractor to replace natural gas-fired furnaces inmilitary family housing units. The contract is valuedbetween $250,000 and $500,000, and the completiontime is about 90 days. This has been set-aside forsmall disadvantaged business, and the due date isMay 30, 1995. Contact Robert Freeman at 405/739-4182. Oc-Alc/Dir of Contracting, 7858 5th St., Suite1, Tinker AFB, OK 73145-9106. SOL F34650-95-B-0014.     (21) Langley Air Force Base in Virginia needs acompany to repair, inspect, and maintain elevators.This is a one-year contract with three option periods.This is a 100% small business set-aside, and the duedate is July 27, 1995. Contact Susan A.Montgomery at 804/764-7382. 1st ContractingSquadron, 74 Nealy Ave., PO Box 65775, LangleyAFB, VA 23665-0775.  F444600-95-B0019.     (22) The USDA has a construction project. Theyneed a contractor to fabricate and install visitorinformation/nature center exhibits. The componentswill include a reception desk, a sales area, and a newlighting system for a Visitor Information/NatureCenter in Richwood, West Virginia. The exhibitfabrication is to be of museum quality. A $20 checkmade payable to the Treasury Department with theIFB number on the remittals must accompanywritten request for solicitation. The SIC code is8999, and the size standard is $5 million. This hasbeen designated as a small business set-aside, andthe due date is May 31, 1995. Contact VernalThompson at 202/720-2134. USDA, Office ofOperations Division, Room 1525 South Building,14th and Independence Ave. SW, Washington, DC20250. SOL IFB-00-95-B-30.     (23) The National Institute of Standards andTechnology is planning a multi-year project toreplace the fire, security, and mechanical-electricalalarm systems with a combined site alarm system.The project site encompasses about 560 acres andhas 35 buildings. Most of the buildings areconnected by a manhole-ductbank system and thealarm system connections between the buildings willbe fiber optic cable run in the ductbank system. Thejob is valued between $5 and $10 million, and it hasbeen set-aside for small business. A solicitationshould be released soon. For additional informationcall Joan Smith at 301/975-6458. National Instituteof Standards and Technology, Acquisition andAssistance Division, Building 301, Room B117,Gaithersburg, MD 20899.     (24) The Naval Research Laboratory inWashington, DC, is in need of a contractor to repairand replace the air handling units in one of itsbuildings. This has been set-aside for smalldisadvantaged business. The bid opening has beenscheduled for June 6, 1995. Contact Linda Ford atfax number 202/685-8236. Navy Public WorksCenter, Washington Navy Yard, Building 175, Code221. For a copy of the specifications, request by fax202/685-8288, attention: Bob Roth. SOL N68925-94-B-A588.     (25) The Bureau of Indian Affairs is seeking acontractor to build an addition to the Ft. Yates FireStation in South Dakota. They want a 10' by 80', pre-engineered metal building addition including all site,structural and electrical work required. This is valuedbetween $25,000 and $100,000, and has been set-aside for small business. Labor surplus areaapplicable. Bidding materials may be had by makinga written/faxed request accompanied by a $25 checkmade out to the Bureau of Indian Affairs. ContactPat Simmons at 605/226-7371. Bureau of IndianAffairs, Aberdeen Area Office, 115 4th Ave. SE,Aberdeen, SC 57401. SOL FMA00-1137.     (26) The Barnes Air National Guard Base inWestfield, Massachusetts, needs to find a contractorto replace taxiway lighting. This includes site work,demolition of the old control system and installationof the new control system. The approximate lengthof the taxiway is 720 linear feet. The value of theproject is between $100,000 and $250,000.  This hasbeen set-aside 100% for small disadvantagedbusiness, and the due date is June 6, 1995. The SICcode is 1731. Bids received must contain propercertification of SDB status. Contact Judy Rypysc at508/651-5706. US Property & Fiscal Office forMassachusetts, Contracting Branch, 143 SpeenStreet, Natick, MA 01760. SOL DAHA19-95-B-0007.     (27) The Department of Energy is seeking acontractor to install six 161-kv switches (one withground blades) and seven 69-kV switches at Brown,Tupelo, and Weleeta, Oklahoma; and Jonesboro andParagould, Arkansas, Southwestern PowerAdministration Substations. The value of this projectis estimated to be between $100,000 and $250,000.The SIC code is 1731/electrical work, and the sizestandard is $7 million. This has been set-aside forsmall business, and the due date is June 7, 1995.Contact Paula Cheney at 918/581-7537. USDepartment of Energy, Southwestern PowerAdministration (Southwestern), One West ThirdStreet, Williams Center Tower I, Tulsa, OK 74103.SOL DE-FB75-95SW387302.     (28) The Army has a project for buildingdemolition and removal of PCB ballasts andasbestos material. The work consists of demolishingfive buildings and removing the debris. If enoughqualified SDB firms respond prior to the issue date,the government reserves the right to set this projectaside for SDBs. The estimated worth of this contractis between $1 million and $5 million. The due date isJune 7, 1995. Contact Lucille Smith at 409/766-3845. Department of the Army, Galveston District,CE, PO Box 1229, Galveston, TX 77553-1229.SOL DACA64-95-B-0016.     (29) The Bureau of Prisons is looking for acontractor to build and improve various roadwaysand parking lots at the Federal CorrectionalInstitution, La Tuna, in Anthony, Texas. This projectis worth between $25,000 and $100,000. This is a100% small business set-aside, and the due date isJune 8, 1995. Contact Mark Zschoche at 214/767-5017. Bureau of Prisons, South Central RegionalOffice, 4211 Cedar Springs Road, Suite 300, Dallas,TX 75219. SOL 146-6192.     (30) The Navy is looking for a contractor to closesix, 20,000- gallon underground oil storage tanks,close and replace two additional 20,000-gallon tanks,and close and replace a 1000-gallon tank, plusincidental work. This has been set-aside for smalldisadvantaged business, and the due date is June 2,1995. The work is to take place at the NavalEducation and Training Center in Newport, RhodeIsland. Contact Ms. East at ROICC, NAVFACContracts, NETC, Building 1, Simonpietri Drive,Newport, RI 02841-1717. SOL N62472-95-B-2215.     BUILDINGS AND GROUNDSMAINTENANCE AND JANITORIALSERVICES     (31) The Willamette National Forest is seeking acontractor to cut and dispose of roadside brush andvegetation on about 691 miles of roadside on threeranger districts in Lane County, Oregon. This hasbeen set-aside for small business and labor surplusarea concerns. The due date is May 25, 1995.Contact 503/465-6506. Willamette National Forest,211 E. 7th, Eugene, Oregon 97401. SOL R6-18-95-112.     (32) The General Services Administration is inneed of mechanical maintenance services at a federalbuilding in Bangor, Maine. This is a thirty-six-monthcontract with two same-length options. It has beenset-aside for small business, and the due date is June1, 1995. Contact Melissa Mitrano at 617/565-8933.General Services Administration, PropertyManagement Division (1PM), 10 Causeway St., 9thFloor, Boston, MA 02222-1077. SOL GS-01P-95-BWC-0033.     (33) Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland is inneed of a contractor to provide maintenance andrepair of the Bunting Nurse Call and televisionsystems. This is a 100% small business set-aside,and the due date is June 1, 1995. Contact StacyMacKay at 301/981-2308. 89 CONS/LGCV, 1419Menoher Drive, Andrews AFB, MD 20331-6500.SOL FA4416-95-B0001.     (34) Hill Air Force Base in Utah is seeking acompany to collect and dispose of the refusegenerated by the government and its tenants on base.Do not request this solicitation until it has beenreleased, which will be on or about April 25. This isa 100% small business set-aside, and the due date isMay 25, 1995. The size standard is $6 million.Contact Evelyn Stoltz for a copy, fax 801/777-6528.For additional information, call Paulette Crowell at801/777-9506. Directorate of Contracting/Oo-AlcPko, 6038 Aspen Ave., Bldg. 1289 NE, Hill AirForce Base, UT 84056-5000. SOL F42650-95-R-A252.     (35) The US Naval Hospital in Beaufort, SouthCarolina, is in need of a contractor to provide groundmaintenance services. The area is about 89 acres, andthe work includes grass cutting, edging, fertilizing,raking, grassing and other related services. This hasbeen set-aside for small business, and the due date isMay 30, 1995. The SIC code is 0782, and the sizestandard is $5 million. Contact Joseph Coward at803/525-2880. Officer in Charge, NAVFACContracts, Building 864, PO Box 5035, MarineCorps Recruit Depot, Parris Island, SC 29905. SOLN62467-95-B-5100.     (36) The General Services Administration has ajanitorial services opportunity set-aside for smallbusiness/labor surplus area concerns. The project islocated at the new border station in Skagway,Alaska. This is a one-year contract, and the due dateis May 26, 1995. Contact Susan Wolfe-Haas at206/931-7309. General Services Administration,GSA Center (10PPB), 400 15th St. SW, Auburn,WA 98001-6599. SOL GS-10P-95-LSC-0055.     (37) The Army is in need of a company toperform maintenance and repair of bituminous roadsat Fort A.P. Hill in Virginia. The work includespaving/bituminous concrete overlay, bituminous tackcoat, excavation, embankment and preparation ofsubgrade for roadways, bituminous surfacetreatment, pavement marking, and painting. This is a100% small business set-aside, and the due date isJuly 11, 1995. The SIC code is 1611, and the sizestandard is $17 million. Contact Gladys Miner orLibby Brown at 703/806-4482 or 4481. USAGarrison Fort Belvoir, District Contracting, 9410Jackson Loop, Suite 101, Ft. Belvoir, VA 22060-5134. SOL DAHC35-95-B-0017.     (38) The Stanislaus National Forest is in need of acompany to ground herbicide release on 500 acres orhand release on 70 acres on the Groveland RangerDistrict. Either one or the other of these contractswill be awarded. This has been designated as a smallbusiness/labor surplus area concern set-aside. Thebids are due to be opened May 24, 1995. ContactDoris Borge-Dorffi at 209/532-3671. StanislausNational Forest, 19777 Greenlet Road, Sonora, CA95370. SOL IFB R5-16-95-38.     (39) The Idaho Panhandle National Forests have aproject for hand tree thinning on the Wallace RangerDistrict. This has been set-aside for smallbusiness/labor surplus area concerns, and the duedate is May 30, 1995. The contract time is 125 days,which starts July 1, 1995. Contact Donna Dodson at208/476-8360. Idaho Panhandle National Forests,3815 Schreiber Way, Couer d'Alene, ID 83814-8363. SOL IFBR1-04-95-34.     (40) The Forest Service is in need of a companyto do trail brushing on approximately 43.5 miles onthe Bitterroot National Forest in Montana. This hasbeen set-aside for small business/labor surplus areaconcerns, and the due date is May 30, 1995. ContactAudrey Boller at 406/329-3764. USDA, ForestService, Lolo National Forest, Attn: Contracting,Building 24, Fort Missoula, Missoula, MT 59801.SOL R1-16-95-606.     (41) The Sierra National Forest is looking for acontractor to do hand releasing on a coniferplantation of about 276 acres. The site is in FresnoCounty, California. This is a 100% smallbusiness/labor surplus area concern set-aside. Thedue date is June 1, 1995. Contact Viviano Rodriguezat 209/297-0706. Sierra National Forest, 1600Tollhouse Road, Clovis, CA 93612. SOL R5-15-95-09.     (42) The USDA Forest Service has anopportunity for precommercial tree thinning of about707 acres on the Parks Ranger District in Colorado.This is a small business set-aside, and the due date isJune 1, 1995. Contact Barbara Hayden at 303/275-5273. USDA Forest Service, PO Box 25127,Lakewood, CO 80225. SOL IFB R2-95-20.     (43) Hickham Air Force Base in Hawaii isseeking a company to remove mangrove trees andother vegetation from the Manuwai Canal on base.This has been set-aside for small business, and thedue date is June 2, 1995. Contact TSgt. Ron Godsyat 808/449-6860 ext. 209. 15th ContractingSquadron, 90 G Street, Hickham AFB, HI 96853-5230. SOL F41622-95-B0005.     (44) The Deschutes National Forest is seeking acontractor to perform slash treatment on about 222acres on the Bend Ranger District. The workincludes mulching, chopping, and chewing existingand created slash and brush. This has beendesignated as a 100% small business set-aside, andthe due date is June 2, 1995. Contact contract clerk at503/383-5543. Deschutes National Forest, 1645Highway 20 East, Bend, OR 97701. SOL R6-1-95-105.     MISCELLANEOUS     (45) The VA Medical Center in Houston, Texas,needs a company to provide testing and inspectionservices for a gravesite expansion project at itscemetery. This has been set-aside for small business,and the due date is May 24, 1995. Contact CathyEdwards at 713/794-7423. VA Medical Center,2002 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030-4298.SOL RFP 580-66-95.     (46) Kelly Air Force in Texas is looking for acompany to install an infrared drying oven in abuilding on base. This has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is May 25, 1995. ContactH. Morgan at 210/925-8845. Sa-Alc/Power SystemsBranch, 500 Perrin, Suite #3, Kelly AFB, TX78241-6449. SOL F41608-95-R-0415.     (47) The Defense Commissary Agency isseeking a contractor to provide day shelf stockingand custodial services for the commissary store atDugway Proving Ground in Utah. This is a one-yearcontract with four option years, and it has been set-aside for small business. The SIC code is 7389, andthe size standard is $5 million. The bid due date isaround the first of June. Contact Juanita Baker at804/734-8606. For a copy of the solicitation, addressyour request to: Defense Commissary Agency,ESC-AMS, Bldg P-11200, Attn: Juanita Baker, 38th& E Ave., Fort Lee, VA 23801-6300. SOLDECA01-95-R-0049.     (48) The Army Corps of Engineers is looking fora company to operate and maintain a sewagetreatment plant and appurtenant equipment andfacilities at Berlin Lake, Berlin Center, Ohio. This isa 100% small business set-aside, and the due date isJune 1, 1995. Contact Sherri Cristillo at 412/644-4423. US Army Corps of Engineers, PittsburghDistrict, William Moorhead Federal Building, 1000Liberty Ave., Room 727, Pittsburgh, PA 15222-4186.     (49) The Navy is seeking a company to provide alifeguard crew and a water safety instructor for theCoastal Systems Station, Dahlgren Division inPanama City, Florida. The services includeswimming lessons and water safety instructions inaccordance with the Navy aquatic programs andfacilities. This is a small business set-aside, and thedue date is May 26, 1995. Contact Jesse Johnson at904/234-4539, fax 904/234-4251. Coastal SystemsStation, Dahlgren Division, NSWC, Panama City,FL 32407-7001.     (50) The Fort Myer Military Community isseeking a company to provide moving services.These services cover 10 phases of a three-monthmove from Cameron Station in Alexandria, Virginia,to Ft. Myer, also in Virginia. This is a small businessset-aside, and the due date is May 25, 1995. ContactSandra Tillman at 703/274-6683. Ft. Myer MilitaryCommunity, DOC, Building 15, Cameron Station,Alexandria, VA 22304-5050, fax number 703/274-6131. SOL DAH30-95-B-0012.     (51) The Forest Service is looking for a contractorto conduct timber stand examinations forcompartment inventory on the Pierce RangerDistrict, Clearwater National Forest in Idaho. Thereare about 1,206 plots to be completed between June1, 1995, and September 30, 1995. This has been set-aside for small business, and the due date is May 24,1995. Contact Donna Dodson at 208/476-8360.USDA, Forest Service, Clearwater National Forest,12730 Highway 12, Orofino, ID 83544. SOL R1-5-95-28.     (52) The Army is looking for a contractor toprovide laundry and dry cleaning services for thegovernment-owned and operated laundry at Fort Dixin New Jersey. This is a one-year contract, and thedue date is around the first of June. It has been set-aside for small business, and the SIC code is 7211.The size standard is $10.5 million. Contact PamelaLutz at 609/562-6962. Department of the Army,Commander Fort Dix, Attn: AFZT-DOC (Bldg.5418), Fort Dix, NJ 08640-6150. SOL DAKF29-95-B-0030.     (53) The Navy is seeking a company to providefor the collection and delivery of mail for the CraneDivision, Naval Surface Warfare Center in Crane,Indiana. The SIC code is 4215, and the size standardis $18.5 million. This has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is May 24, 1995. ContactKathy Wallace at 812/854-5341. Officer in Chargeof NAVFAC Contracts, Crane Division, NavalSurface Warfare Center, Crane, IN 47522-5082.SOL N68950-95-B-7880.     (54) Fort Bragg in North Carolina needs acompany to repair and/or overhaul electric motors atthe following locations in North Carolina: FortBragg, Camp Mackall, and Pope Air Force Base.This is a one-year contract with three option periods.This has been set-aside for small business, and thedue date is about mid-June. To be placed on thebidder's list, potential contractors must supplybusiness size. The size standard for this project is $5million, and the SIC code is 7694. The FSC/servicecode is 7694. Contact Rebecca McGlothlin at910/396-4362, fax 910/396-5603. Directorate ofContracting, Drawer 70120, Fort Bragg, NC 28307-0120. SOL DAKF40-95-B-0055.     (55) Brooks Air Force Base in Texas is seeking acontractor to provide laundry and dry cleaningservices. This is a one-year contract with four optionperiods. A portion of the contract will require asepticconditions. This has been set-aside 100% for smallbusiness, and the due date is June 1, 1995. ContactJohn Blanchard at 210/536-6221. OperationalContracting, HSC/PKOV, Building 626, BrooksAFB, TX 78235-5353. SOL F41622-95-B0005.     (56) The General Accounting Office is seekinglaborer services for its main office and audit sites inthe Washington, DC, metropolitan area. This is aone-year contract with four option periods. A fixedrate, indefinite quantity labor hour contract isanticipated. This has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is May 31, 1995. ContactPearline Danner at 202/512-3552. US GeneralAccounting Office (GAO), Office of AcquisitionManagement, 441 G Street NW, Room 6852,Washington, DC 20548. SOL OAM-95-A-0002.     (57) The Pine Bluff Arsenal has a project tocollect and dispose of litter on its premises, inaccordance with specification SMCPB-1994-04 anddrawing GL-4. This has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is June 1, 1995. ContactVirginia House at 501/540-4091. Commander, PineBluff Arsenal, 10020 Kabrich Circle (SMCPB-PO)(Bldg. 17-120) Pine Bluff, AR 71602-9500. SOLDAA03-95-B-0007.     (58) Fort Knox is looking for a contractor toprovide moving and transportation services to movegovernment-owned property from one group ofbuildings on base to another group of buildings. Theestimated weight of the property and equipment is75,000 pounds. Contact Lorna Sharp at 502/624-4947. Directorate of Contracting, Building 4022, Ft.Knox, KY 40121-5000. SOL DABT23-95-0059.     CONTRACTS UP FOR RECOMPETE     (59) The US Secret Service has a contract foruniforms with a final contract year of 1996.  This hasbeen set-aside for small business, and the identifiernumber is TSS910028.  The contract is valuedaround $500,000, and the present contractor isMorgans Inc.  The applicable SIC code is 2399.Contact David Waddell at 202/435-6940.     (60) The General Services Adminstration has acontract for voice mail systems for the Washington,DC, metropolitan area. This contract was awarded inOctober 1994 as a one-year contract with 2 optionperiods.  It should be up for recompete in October of1995.  The value of this contract is worth $900,000per year.  This was an 8(a) set-aside.  Contact RobertClark, WKCA, 7th & D Sts. SW, Washington, DC20407, 202/708-6424.     (61) The US Customs Service has a contract forinterceptor vessels with a final contract year of 1998.This has been set-aside for small business, and theidentifier number is Tc-94-015.  The contract isvalued at $500,000, and the present contractor isFountain Powerboats Inc.  The applicable SIC codeis 3732.  Contact Pansy Bradley-Cooper at 202/927-0073.     (62) The Internal Revenue Service has a contractfor trash removal and recycling in its Mid-AtlanticRegion with a final contract year of 1996.  This hasbeen set-aside for small business, and the identifiernumber is TIR93MA11.  This contract is valued ataround $25,000, and the present contractor isNewman & Company.  The applicable SIC code is4953.  Contact Robert Tomczak at 215/969-2208.     (63) The Federal Law Enforcement TrainingCenter has a contract for grounds maintenance at itsfacility in Glynco, Georgia, with a final contract yearof 1997.  This has been set-aside for small business,and the identifier number is TFTC 94-1.  Thecontract is estimated to be worth $200,000, and thepresent contractor is United Management of AmericaInc.  The applicable SIC code is 8999.  ContactLaurie Jones at 912/267-2243.     (64) The Financial Management Service has acontract for microfiche services with a final contractyear of 1997.  This has been set-aside for 8(a)businesses, and the identifier number is TFMS93-03.  The contract is valued at $1 million, and thepresent contractor is Washington Data.  Theapplicable SIC code is 7374.  Contact AnthonyRowell at 202/874-6979.     (65) The Internal Revenue Service has a contractfor converting IRS documents to Braille with a finalcontract year of 1997.  This has been set-aside for8(a) businesses, and the identifier number is TIR94-0013.  The contract is valued at $1 million, and thepresent contractor is LHB Enterprises Inc.  Theapplicable SIC code is 2741.  Contact John Bennettat 202/283-1116.     (66) The General Services Administration has anequipment maintenance, repair and rebuildingcontract in Gainsville, Florida. This contract wasawarded in October 1994 to Servop Inc., andMcLain Services Inc. It was a one-year contract withfour option periods.  It should be up for recompete inOctober 1995.  The value of the contract wasbetween $100,000 and $200,000.  This was a smallbusiness set-aside.  Contact Norman Washington,4PY, 7771 W. Oakland Park Blvd., Sunrise, FL33351, 305/356-7688.     (67) The US Mint has a contract for carbidecollars with a final contract year of 1996.  This hasbeen set-aside for small business, and the identifiernumber is TM 93-1001.  The contract is estimated tobe worth around $200,000, and the presentcontractor is Precision Tool Sales Machining.  Theapplicable SIC code is 3545.  Contact Darlene Hainerat 202/874-6243.     (68) The Bureau of the Public Debt has contractfor guard services with a final contract year of 1997.This has been set-aside for small business, and theidentifier number is TPD93C0008.  The contract isestimated to be worth approximately $1 million, andthe present contractor is SC Security.  The applicableSIC code is 7381.  Contact Beverly Ryan at 304/480-6529.     (69) The General Services Administration has autilities and housekeeping services contract forwarehouse material handling that was awarded inNovember 1994 to RAI.  It was a one-year contractwith two option periods, and it should be up forrecompete in November 1995.  The value of thecontract was around $600,000.  It was a smallbusiness set-aside.  Contact Catherine Maloney,3FBG-W, 490 L'Enfant Plaza, Washington, DC20407, 202/755-0310.     (70) The General Services Administration has autilities and housekeeping services contract for solidwaste handling in St. Louis, Missouri.  This contractwas initially awarded in October 1994 to MidwestWaste Inc.  It should be up for recompete in October1995.  The value of the contract was between$50,000 and $100,000.  This contract was a laborsurplus area set-aside.  Contact Kathy Miles, BSCB,PBS, 6PPB, 1500 E. Bannister Rd., Kansas City,MO 64131-3088, 816/926-7078.     SUPPLIES     (71) Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in Arizonaplans to purchase a 130-ton chiller.  This contract hasbeen set-aside for small business, and the due date isMay 26, 1995. For information, contact LawrenceRiley at 602/750-4458 or J.L. Dantzler at 602/750-3598.  Requests for copies of this solicitation mustbe faxed to 602/750-4928 or sent to 355CONS/LGCS, 3180 S. Craycroft Rd., Davis-Monthan AFB, AZ 85707-3522.  SOL FO2601-95-B0007.     (72) The Navy Ships Parts Control Center has arequirement for missile drivers, NSN 7H-5963-01-022-4589, SPEC NR TDP VER 001.  This contracthas been set-aside for small business, and the duedate is May 26, 1995.  Contact Debora Paules at717/790-2719, fax 717/790-2284.  Navy Ships PartsControl Center, Code 026, PO Box 2020,Mechanicsburg, PA 17055-0788.  SOLN0010495RJL48.     (73) The Fleet and Industrial Supply Center seeksa contractor to provide a lighting system for asoftball field.  The Naval Air Station in Key West,Florida, needs a 300-foot radius, 6 pole lightingsystem for recreational softball play.  Thisprocurement is 100% set-aside for small business,and the due date is June 1, 1995.  For information,contract C. Howard at 912/673-2560.  Requests forthis solicitation must be in writing, and may be faxedto 912/673-2454 or mailed to Fleet and IndustrialSupply Center Norfolk, Kings Bay Detachment, 930USS Hunley Ave., Room 211, Naval SubmarineBase, Kings Bay, GA 31574-2617.  SOL N46450-95-R-0051.     (74) MacDill Air Force Base in Florida has arequirement for spare parts for deploymentpackages.  They need spare parts in support of theMark V Special Operations Craft.  These parts arepredominantly non-development, commercial off-the-shelf.  This has been set-aside for small business,and the due date is May 22, 1995.  For information,contact Sandra Smith at 813/840-5463 or ChrisPaddock at 813/840-5448.  All requests must bemade in writing by faxing to 813/840-5481 ormailing to United States Special OperationsCommand, Directorate of Procurment, 2408 FloridaKeys Ave., MacDill AFB, FL 33621-5323.  SOLMDA91195B0008.     (75) The US Army Missile Command has arequirement for torque calibration kits.  This contractis set-aside for small business, and the due date isMay 12, 1995.  Contact Eileen Broady at 205/876-3570 or Shirley Hill at 205/842-7436.  Commander,US Army Missile Command, Acquisition Center,Redstone Arsenal, AL 35898-5280.  SOLDAAH01-95-R-0146.     (76) The Norfolk Naval Shipyard has arequirement for shipping and storage drums ofvarious sizes and quantities.  This procurement hasbeen set-aside for small business.  For information,contact Kiera Rustay or Mary Ward at 804/396-8376.  Telephone or fax requests for this solicitationwill not be honored.  Mail solicitation requests to:Purchase Division, Attn: K. Rustay, Code 531.5A,Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Bldg. 1500, 2nd Floor,Portsmouth, VA 23709-5000.  SOL N00181-95-R-0064.     (77) Fort Hood in Texas plans to purchasevarious flavored potato chips.  Flavors required arenatural, jalapeno, barbeque, cajun, salt & vinegar andsteak & onion.  This contract has been set-aside forsmall business and is expected to be issued on May16, 1995, with a due date of June 15, 1995.  Theapplicable SIC code is 2096.  For information,contact Roberta M. Alicea at 817/287-3504.Requests for copies of this solicitation shouldinclude: company name, company address, phonenumber, fax number, solicitation number, and nameof person requesting the solicitation.  Fax and phonerequests will not be accepted.  Mail requests toDirectorate of Contracting, Bldg. 1001, HeadquartersAve., Ft. Hood, TX 76544-5059.  SOL DAKF48-95-B-0026.     (78) The Defense Personnel Support Center has arequirement for black tea in individual bags.Destinations include Norfolk, Mechanicsburg, Tracyand Memphis.  This contract has been set-aside forsmall business, and the due date is May 26, 1995.Contact Peter Krok at 215/737-2184 or Eric Mooreat 215/737-2915.  Defense Personnel SupportCenter, 2800 S. 20th St., Philadephia, PA 19145-5099.  SOL SP0300-95-R-9017.     (79) Kelly Air Force Base in Texas has arequirement for maintenance platforms, NSN 1730-00-491-0607, P/N 50D6851.  This contract has beenset-aside for small business, and the due date is May26, 1995.  For information, contact K. Zapata at210/925-4741.  Only written or faxed requests areacceptable; fax to LDKS at 210/925-1073 or mail toSa-Alc/Support Equipment Branch, 303 Wilson Rd.,Ste. #2, Kelly AFB, TX 78241-5442.  SOL F41608-95-R-20230.     (80) The 934 Logistics Group in Minneapolis/St.Paul plans to purchase a telephone/radiocommunications console.  They need a newcommand post console with three controllerpositions and associated equipment.  Equipmentinstallation and on-site operation training is required.This procurement has been 100% set-aside for smallbusiness, and is expected to be issued on May 1,1995, with a due date of June 1, 1995.  For moreinformation, contact Connie Herberg or MarilynScott at 612/725-5415.  No telephone requests forsolicitations will be accepted.  Fax requests to612/725-5379 or mail to 934 Logistics Group,Operational Contracting Office, 760 MilitaryHighway, Minneapolis, MN 55450-2000.  SOLF21611-95-B0003.     (81) Fort Dix in New Jersey is looking for acompany to provide aluminum sulfate (liquidaluminum) for potable water purification purposes.This procurement has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is May 25, 1995.  Forinformation, contact Raymond Blauvelt or EdnaHarris-Smith at 609/562-3456.  Telephone requestsfor solicitations will not be accepted.  Requestsshould include business name, address, telephonenumber, point of contact and business size.  Faxrequests to 609/562-6933 or mail them toDepartment of the Army, Commander Fort Dix,Attn: AFZT-DOC (Bldg. 5418), Fort Dix, NJ08640-6150.  SOL DAKF29-95-B-0028.     (82) The Army Corps of Engineers is looking fora company to supply culvert valves.  Thisprocurement has been set-aside for small business,and the due date is May 30, 1995.  The size standardhas been set at 500 employees.  Contact JeanBeausang at 314/331-8510 or Joan Schick at314/331-8505.  Department of the Army, St. LouisDistrict, Corps of Engineers, 1222 Spruce St., St.Louis, MO 63103-2833.  SOL DACW43-95-B-0263.     (83) Fort Dix in New Jersey has a requirementfor approximately 10,500 bags of hydrated lime.This procurement has been 100% set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is May 25, 1995.  Forinformation, contact Raymond Blauvelt or EdnaHarris-Smith at 609/562-3456.  Telephone requestsfor solicitations will not be accepted.  Requestsshould include business name, address, telephonenumber, point of contact and business size.  Faxrequests to 609/562-6933 or mail them toDepartment of the Army, Commander Fort Dix,Attn: AFZT-DOC (Bldg. 5418), Fort Dix, NJ08640-6150.  SOL DAKF29-95-B-0029.     (84) The US Coast Guard Civil Engineering Unitin Miami plans to purchase structural steel templates,ladders, platforms and lantern stands.  Delivery willbe to Mayport, St. Petersburg, and Miami Beach,Florida, as well as Charleston, South Carolina, andSan Juan, Puerto Rico.  This procurement has beenset-aside for small business, and the due date is May15, 1995.  Applicable SIC code is 3441.  Forinformation, contact Elizabeth Phillips at 305/536-4254.  No telephone requests for solicitations will beaccepted; fax to 305/536-7403 or mail to ContractingOfficer, USCG Civil Engineering Unit Miami, 909SE First Ave., Miami, FL 33131-3050.  SOLDTCG82-95-B-3WCA09.     (85) The Army Corps of Engineers is looking fora company to fabricate 28 trash rack sections.  Thisprocurement has been 100% set-aside for smallbusiness, and the solicitation is expected to be issuedon May 3, 1995, with a due date of June 2, 1995.For technical questions, contact Khanida Pradaxay at501/324-5718; telefax 324-5196.  For plans andspecifications, contact Teresa White at 501/324-6844.  Solicitation documents will be made availableupon written request, to include a check or moneyorder for $5.00 made payable to FAO, US Army,LRD, and mailed to the Contracting Division, LittleRock District, Corps of Engineers, PO Box 867, 700W. Capitol Ave., Little Rock, AR 72203-0867.  SOLDACW03-95-B-0072.     (86) The Navy Aviation Supply Office plans topurchase valve assemblies, NSN 7R-1720-01-303-8394-EY, SPEC NR TDP VER 001, Ref Nr514515-1.  This procurement has been set-aside forsmall business, and the due date is May 18, 1995.Contact Helen Rogers at 215/697-4072, fax 215/697-3161, or Brian Byrnes at 215/697-6534.  NavyAviation Supply Office, 700 Robbins Ave.,Philadelphia, PA 19111-5098.  SOLN0038395RP448.     (87) The Army Aberdeen Proving Ground inMaryland has a requirement for a truck tractor.  Thisvehicle should have 10-speed transmission, a Catengine 3406E 435 HP or equal, a 100-gallon fueltank, and an adjustable fifth wheel, among otherrequirements.  This contract has been set-aside forsmall business, and the due date is May 22, 1995.For information, contact John Robb at 410/278-2024.  Requests for copies of this solicitation will beaccepted by fax, 410/278-7447, or by mail,Directorate of Contracting, USAAPGSA, RyanBuilding, APG, MD 21005-5001.  SOL DAAD05-95-R-0819.     (88) The US Army Tank-Automotive andArmaments Command is seeking a company tosupply hydraulic parts kits, NSN 2530011182872.This procurement has been set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is June 7, 1995.  Forinformation, contact Mary Hernandez at 810/574-8185.  For a copy of this solicitation, contact810/574-6802 or 6807.  US Army Tank-Automotiveand Armaments Command, Acquisition Center(AMSTA-AQ-DS), Warren, MI 48397-5000.  SOLDAAE0795RA283.     (89) The Defense Industrial Supply Center isplanning to purchase Allied Signal turbine rotors,NSN 2835-01-114-8612, PR-NOYPI95083001167.  These rotors are for delivery tosites in California and Utah.  The due date is May 25,1995, and all offers will be evaluated with a 10%preference for small disadvantaged businessconcerns.  Contact Diane Hale or Teri Ferrante forinformation.  For a copy of this solicitation, contactDISC-PODA at 215/697-3398.  Defense IndustrialSupply Center, 700 Robbins Ave., Philadelphia, PA19111-5096.  SOL SP0500-95-Q-0183.     (90) The US Customs Service has a requirementfor a remote video surveillance system.  This systemshould include a base unit (receiver) and sixtransportable remote video units (transmitters),should be in color with high resolution, and shouldbe capable of being transmitted over telephone lines.Point of delivery is Chicago, Illinois.  Thisprocurement is a small business set-aside, and thedue date is May 31, 1995.  Contact Carol Faddis at317/298-1130 or Lee Sullivan at 317/298-1119.Department of the Treasury, US Customs Service,Regional Procurement Center, 6026 Lakeside Blvd.,Indianapolis, IN 46278.  SOL CS-I-95-034.     (91) Camp Pendleton in California plans topurchase a number of area rugs.  These rugs shouldbe cut and bound, with an area of 9 ft. x 12 ft., jutebacking, and an antimicrobial front and back.  Thisprocurement has been 100% set-aside for smallbusiness, and the due date is June 12, 1995.  ContactJoAnne Saccomanno at 619/725-8451, fax 619/725-4346.  Contracting Office, PO Box 1609, Oceanside,CA 92051-1609.  SOL M00681-95-B-0018.     (92) The Defense Personnel Support Center islooking for a company to provide blue tarps.  Thesetarps should have a size of 100 ft. x 16 ft.  Thisprocurement is a total small business set-aside, andthe due date is May 22, 1995.  For information,contact R. Greenberg at 215/737-8492.  Requests forcopies of this solicitation should be faxed to215/737-5694.  Defense Personnel Support Center,2800 S. 20th St., Philadelphia, PA 19101-8419.SOL SP0100-95-B-0177.     (93) The Defense Personnel Support Center has arequirement for men's blue trousers.  This is a firmfixed price contract for 10,110 pairs, with an optionquanitity for 10,110 pairs.  Basic material will beprovided by the government.  This procurement is atotal small business set-aside, and the due date isMay 21, 1995.  Contact Marilyn Hamer at 215/737-5630.  Defense Personnel Support Center, 2800 S.20th St., Philadelphia, PA 19101-8419.  SOLSPO100-95-R-0164.     (94) The Defense Industrial Supply Center islooking for a company to provide SunstrandAviation speed sensors, NSN 2835-01-054-1331,PR-NO YPI95089000636.  The due date for thisprocurement is May 26, 1995, and offers will beevaluated with a 10% preference for smalldisadvantaged business concerns.  Contact TeriFerrante or Lisa Kimelheim for more information.For a copy of this solicitation, contact DISC-PODAat 215/697-3398.  Defense Industrial Supply Center,700 Robbins Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19111-5096.SOL SP0500-95-Q-0190.     (95) The Defense Industrial Supply Center plansto purchase John Crane Marine backing springassemblies, NSN 5340-01-145-0563, PR-NOYPI94345000944.  Site of delivery is Tracy,California.  The due date is June 5, 1995, and offerswill be evaluated with a 10% preference for smalldisadvantaged business concerns.  Contact BrianDudek or Kevin Dean for more information.  For acopy of this solicitation, contact DISC-PODA at215/697-3398.  Defense Industrial Supply Center,700 Robbins Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19111-5096.SOL SP0500-95-R-0201.     (96) Fort Irwin in California is looking forcompany to supply and deliver gravel, rock, stonesand aggregate bases.  It is the intention to award afirm fixed price, requirements type contract resultingfrom this solicitation.  This contract has been set-aside for small business, and the due date is June 8,1995.  For information, contact Laura Haverlock at619/380-5013 or Gail Adams at 619/380-5007.Only written requests for this solicitation will behonored; fax them to 619/380-4933 or mail toContracting Division, DOC, NTC, PO Box 10039,Fort Irwin, CA 92310-5000.  SOL DAKF04-95-B-0013.     (97) Grand Forks Air Force Base in NorthDakota has a requirement for a custom-designedfifth-wheel trailer.  This trailer should be 44' long, tobe used for command center for hazardous materialsrecovery.  This acquisition is a 100% small businessset-aside, and the due date is May 11, 1995.  Formore information, contact Thomas Loy at 701/747-5280 or Robert Jones at 701/747-5273.  Responsesmay be faxed to 701/747-4215.  CONS/LGCS, 5756th Sve., Bldg. 418, Grand Forks AFB, ND 58205-6436.  SOL F3260595B0029.     (98) The Naval Surface Warfare Center is lookingfor a company from which to purchase electrical andelectronic equipment components, namely 65Satcom Diplexers.  This procurement has been100% set-aside for small business, and the due dateis May 31, 1995.  For information, contact AnitaNocton at 215/897-7388.  Requests for copies of thissolicitation must be made in writing; they may befaxed to 215/897-7902 or mailed to Naval SurfaceWarfare Center, Carderock Division, PhiladelphiaPurchase Branch, Code 335, Bldg. 77L, US NavalBase, Philadelphia, PA 19112-5083.  SOL N65540-95-R-0018.     (99) The General Services Administration has arequirement for sharpening stones, with a total of 12NSN's.  Points of delivery are various GSAwholesale distribution centers.  The due date is June1, 1995, and a portion of this acquisition has beenset-aside for small or small disadvantagedbusinesses.  For information, contact Alan Searsy at817/334-3517.  The government will be distributingthis solicitation on a 3 1/2" disk in Word forWindows 6.0.  A paper copy will be provided onlyupon written request.  General ServicesAdministration Business Service Center (7ADB),819 Taylor St., Rm. 11A09, Fort Worth, TX 76102-6195.  SOL 7FXI-T6-95-5327-S.     (100) Patrick Air Force Base in Florida is lookingfor a company to provide indoor lightweightheadsets.  These headsets will consist of twoearphones with closed cell foam cushions, anadjustable microphone boom, and a noise-cancellingmicrophone.  There are more specifications for otherparts, such as the wiring and the yoke pendant.  Theapplicable SIC code is 3661, and the due date is May31, 1995.  The small business size standard is 1000employees.  For technical information, contact JohnStringer or J.M. Hammerling at 407/494-7091.Requests for solicitations must include telephonenumber, zip code, and information as to whetheryour business is a large, small, or smalldisadvantaged business.  Requests for solicitationsmust be received in writing; they may be faxed to407/494-5560 or mailed to 45CONS/PKOA, 1201Minuteman St., Patrick AFB, FL 32925-3237.  SOLF08650-95-R-A118.     **SUBCONTRACT OPPORTUNITIES(101) Allied Signal Aerospace is seeking a smallbusiness subcontractor to upgrade life safetyfeatures.  This project has been designated as a smallbusiness set-aside and is scheduled for the fourthquarter of fiscal year 1995.  This procurement isestimated to be worth about $1.5 million.  Theapplicable SIC code is 1541, and the small businesssize standard is $17 million.  Contact TerryRichardson at 816/997-4700.  Allied SignalAerospace, Kansas City Division, PO Box 419519,Kansas City, MO 64141-6159.     (102) Bechtel Petroleum Operations, Inc., islooking for a subcontractor to perform mud loggingservices.  This project is scheduled to be issued in thefourth quarter of fiscal year 1995, and has beendesignated a small business set-aside.  Thissubcontract is estimated to be worth between$500,000 and $600,000.  The applicable SIC code is1389, and the small business size standard is $5million.  Contact Louie Alves at 805/763-6446.Bechtel Petroleum Operations, Inc., PO Box 127,Tupman, CA 93276.     (103) DynMcDermott Petroleum OperationsCompany plans to issue a solicitation for asubcontractor in the fourth quarter of fiscal year1995.  They need a company to replace a crudeinjection pump.  This procurement has beendesignated as a small disadvantaged business set-aside.  The applicable SIC code is 1623, and the sizestandard is $17 million.  This opportunity isestimated to be worth between $250,000 and$500,000.  Contact Michael Vermeulen at 504/734-4625.  DynMcDermott Petroleum OperationsCompany, 850 S. Clearview Parkway, New Orleans,LA 70124.     (104) Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory is lookingfor a subcontractor to construct a cleanroom.  Thisproject has been designated as a small business set-aside, and it is scheduled to be issued in the fourthquarter of fiscal year 1995.  The applicable SIC codeis 1541, and the small business size standard is $17million.  This project is estimated to be worthbetween $1.5 and $2 million.  Contact Tom Patock at510/486-4576.  Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory,University of California, One Cyclotron Road,Berkeley, CA 94720.     (105) Westinghouse Savannah River Companyhas a project scheduled for issue in the fourth quarterof fiscal year 1995.  They are looking for asubcontractor to perform analytical services ongroundwater.  This project has been set-aside forsmall disadvantaged business.  The applicable SICcode is 8734, and the size standard is $5 million.This project is estimated to be worth between$100,000 and $12 million.  Contact Alan Hayes at803/644-1333.  Westinghouse Savannah RiverCompany, PO Box 616, Aiken, SC 29802.     (106) The MK-Ferguson of Oak Ridge Companyis looking for a subcontractor for a storage tankcapacity increase project.  This project includes theinstallation of a reinforced concrete vault facilityhousing six 100,000-gallon stainless steel storagetanks, associated piping, ventilation and control.  Theapplicable SIC code is 1541, and this project isestimated to be worth between $5 and $10 million.This project is not a set-aside, but small and smalldisadvantaged businesses are encouraged toparticipate.  In order to be eligible to receive asolicitation package, potential bidders must submitthe following pre-qualification information: 1) asynopsis of your firm's three largest constructionprojects which demonstrate experience with similarfacilities, including each client's project manager,point of contact and telephone number(s); 2) a copyof your firm's environmental, safety and healthprogram, including a letter from your insurercertifying your firm's Experience Modification Rateover the past three years, and a composite summaryof your firm's OSHA 200 Logs calculated averageannual lost-time and recordable injury rate over thelast three years; 3) proof of financial responsibility toperform a subcontract of this size, including bondingcapacities and audited financial statements or annualreports.  This information should be submitted nolater than May 7, 1995, to Richard A. Ray,Subcontract Administrator, MK-Ferguson of OakRidge Company, Procurement Department, PO Box2011, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-2011.  Cost forsubsequent solicitation packages will be $250 each.SOL 888.     **LONG-RANGE OPPORTUNITIES(107) NEW: McClellan Air Force Base will beprocuring supplies, services, installation, andmaintenance for static uninterruptible power supply(SUPS) systems, from 0.5 to 100 kVA. Theapplicable SIC Code is 3699. This project will be set-aside for small business and is worth an estimated$50 million to $70 million. Teaming will berequired. The lead member of the team will have tobe a small business, and at least 51% of the totaleffort will have to be done by small businesses. Aconference is tentatively planned for June to explainhow small business participation will be measured.An RFP is planned for release in early 1996, with anaward about six months later. McClellan AFB iscompiling a mailing list of interested firms; about200 are on the list, but not all will be going for thisproject. Send a brief letter asking to be placed on themailing list to Lt. Col. Gravely, SM-ALC/LIET, byfax at 916-643-0904.     (108) SEEKING SOURCES: The MissouriDept. of Natural Resources is requesting capabilitiesstatements from firms specializing in engineeringand technical services for activities at hazardouswaste sites in Missouri. A list of contractors is beingdrawn up for projects that will be issued in fiscalyear 1996. Individual firms and joint ventures shouldsubmit five (5) copies of SF-255 and one copy ofSF-254 to: Dan Walker, director, General ServicesProgram, Missouri Dept. of Natural Resources, POBox 176, 205 Jefferson St., Jefferson City, Mo.65102. Phone: 314-751-2480. Forms must bereceived by May 8, 1995, and firms will be notifiedof their prequalification status by June 30.     (109) SOLICITATIONS RELEASED: TheNaval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) justreleased two solicitations as competitive 8(a) set-asides. Copies were sent to firms already on thebidder's list. One project is support services for theTomahawk All Up Round program office,consisting of manufacturing and maintenancesupport and logistics management. Solicitations forthis project, Ref. N00019-95-R-0008, were sentApril 10. POC is Paul Young. The second project issupport services for the Unmanned Aerial VehiclesJoint Program Office. Work will include technical,engineering, logistics, international, andadministrative/financial support services.Solicitations for this project, Ref. N00019-95-R-0009, were sent April 13. POC is WilliamMelanson. The applicable SIC Code for both projectsis 8711, and contracts are estimated to start aboutOctober 1, 1995. For more information, contact theappropriate POC at the Naval Air SystemsCommand, Attn: AIR-21723L, 1421 JeffersonDavis Highway, Arlington, Va. 22243-5120. Fax:703-604-1236.     (110) RFP EXPECTED TOWARDS THEEND OF APRIL: The Air Force at Brooks AFB isexpected to issue an RFP for the aircraft battledamage assessment and repair (ABDAR)demonstration system about the end of April. Thisproject is set aside for small disadvantaged business.Applicable SIC Code is 8731, 500-person sizestandard. Brooks AFB has already offered asupplemental package containing a statement ofwork. The goal of the project is to provide fast andaccurate battle damage and repair information for on-equipment maintenance. ABDAR will be awardedunder Research and Development StreamlinedContracting Procedures. Other interested SDBs mayrequest in writing the supplemental package. Atechnical document center (TDC) in support ofABDAR is open during limited hours at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio. Firms must register forpermission to use the TDC. Contact Lt. J.C.Bradford, 513-255-2606, fax: 513-255-4250. Forinformation, contact Carol Franco, contact point,210-536-5774, or Jim Day, 210-536-5770.HSC/PKRH, 7909 Lindbergh Drive, Brooks AFB,Texas 78235-5353. The Brooks small businessspecialist is Lynette Ward, 210-536-6305.     (111) WATCH FOR RFP: The Department ofEnergy intends to issue RFPs in May for twomanagement and operations contracts to run theGrand Junction Projects Office, Grand Junction,Colo., now run by Rust Geotech. RFPs shouldaddress questions raised at a pre-solicitationconference in March. A pre-proposal conference willfollow a couple weeks after the RFPs are released.Both contracts are being offered as small businessset-asides and have a combined value of up to $70million. One contract will be for technical assistanceand remediation support services and the other willbe for facilities and operations support services.Applicable SIC Code for both contracts is 8744,500-employee size standard. Work will includemanagement and operations of the projects officeand the cleanup of about 200 sites contaminated bymill tailings. Groundwater supplies contaminated byuranium also must be cleaned. The facilities supportcontract includes managing several on-site labs.Awards are planned for the third quarter of fiscalyear 1996. Draft copies of the RFPs are available forcomment until early June 1995. Because of theheavy volume of phone calls, the contracting officersuggests submitting questions, comments, andrequests to be placed on the mailing list in writing.Send to: Cheryl A. Thompson, contracting officer,U.S. Department of Energy, SEB Office, Bldg. I-6,P.O. Box 5400, Albuquerque, N.M. 87185-5400.Phone: 303-248-6043. Refer to AL Control No. 95-05.     (112) RELEASE DATE UNCLEAR: Theprojected release date for a solicitation for a bureau-wide, full-scale telecommunications network for theTreasury Department, Financial ManagementService, is unclear, but we're told it will be duringfiscal year 1995. This will be a competitive 8(a)award. Applicable SIC Code is 7373, $18-millionsize standard. For information, contact Tonya Kreps,contract specialist, Department of the Treasury,Financial Management Service, 401 14th St., Room114B, SW, Washington, DC 20227. Fax: 202-874-7275. Refer to SOL RFP-FMS-95-0001. No phonecalls.     (113) GETTING CLOSE: The Navy intends toissue two contracts, both set-aside for smallbusiness, for logistics and support services for theFleet and Industrial Supply Center Intra-Fleet SupplySupport Operations Program (ISSOP). Solicitationsaren't out yet, but we're told the issue date isapproaching. Both contracts are recompetes.Applicable SIC Code is 4225. Work will includeinventory, warehousing, material offload,requisitioning, material processing, location audits,barcoding, and transportation of some materials. Forthe East Coast contract, contact contract specialistJanice Brindley, 804/444-3047, SOL NO0189-94-R-0304. For the West Coast contract, talk to contractspecialist Kay Hood, 804-444-7353, SOL NO0189-94-R-0315. Plans are to offer the new contracts on afixed-price and a time-and-materials basis beginningOctober 1, 1995 for one year, with two one-yearoptions. For a solicitation, write to the Commander,Fleet and Industrial Supply Center, RegionalContracting Department, Attn: Code 201, Bid Clerk,1968 Gilbert St., Suite 600, Norfolk, Va. 23511-3392. Fax: 804-445-1761.     (114) ABOUT MAY 1: The release of asolicitation from the Department of Energy, NevadaOperations Office, for military and aerospaceequipment and military weapons, technical supportto environmental safety and health, quality assurance,and emergency management, has been postponed,probably until late April or early May. The applicableSIC Code is 8711. A contract will be awardedthrough a national 8(a) competition and will run fiveyears. It has an estimated value of $14 million to $16million. The existing contract has been extended toJuly 31, 1995. For information, contact MarleneKolicius, U.S. Department of Energy/Nevada, P.O.Box 98518, Las Vegas, Nev. 89193-8518, and referto RFP No. DE-RP08-94NV11537. Phone: 702-295-1080.     (115) SLOW GOING: Contracting officers at theGeneral Services Administration (GSA) are workingto persuade supervisors to set aside for 8(a) firms afacilities management contract to run the KennedyCenter for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.and would begin in October 1995. The KennedyCenter has been run under multiple contracts; thiscontract would consolidate everything under one. If itis set aside, it will be awarded competitively. Asolicitation is expected to be issued in May or June.For information, contact Charles Knight, chief,construction division, GSA, at 202-708-5064.     (116) ADP WORK: A pending contract from theTreasury Department, Financial ManagementService (FMS), for automatic data processing hasbeen reassigned. A solicitation has not yet beenreleased. This is a competitive 8(a) procurement.Primary SIC Code is 5045, and secondary SIC Codeis 7378. Requirements include providing computerhardware and maintenance services. The contract isIDIQ and is worth more than $5 million. It will lastfive years, with one base year and four one-yearoptions. FMS is planning to release the solicitationelectronically as well. For information, contact AnnPavelek, contract specialist, Department of theTreasury (DY), Financial Management Service, 40114th St. SW, Washington, D.C. 20227. Phone: 202-874-6963. SOL RFP-FMS-94-0004.     (117) 8(a) AND SMALL BUSINESS A&ECONTRACTS: The Air Force, 88th Air Base Wingand Aeronautical Systems Center (ASC) Offices ofEnvironmental Management at Wright PattersonAFB, intends to issue up to four contracts forarchitect and engineering services and environmentaland engineering services. One contract will beawarded as a small business set-aside, another as an8(a) set-aside and the final two through full and opencompetition. Applicable SIC Code for all contracts is8744, 500-employee size standard. Work will coverall aspects of environmental compliance, pollutionprevention, environment and land-use planning, andenvironmental engineering. The total value of thefour contracts will be no more than $38.5 million.Individual contracts will be no more than $10million. For information, contact Mr. M. Cramer,PKWOEB, ASC/PKWO, Attn: Building 260, 1940Allbrook Drive, Suite 3, Wright-Patterson AFB,Ohio 45433-5309. Phone: 513-257-6572. Fax: 513-257-3926. SOL F33601-95-R-0058.     (118) LOCAL BUY FOR REGION V: TheDepartment of Energy, Chicago Operations Office,has delayed the release of a major ADP supportservices contract, but we're assured the project is stillon track. The contract, valued at $12 million to $15million, will be awarded competitively andcompetition will be limited to 8(a) firms certified inRegion V. Applicable SIC Code 7379. An RFP isexpected to be issued by July 1. Work will beginJan. 1, 1996, a postponement of four months. Forinformation, contact Larry Thompson, smallbusiness specialist, Chicago Field Office,Department of Energy, 9800 S. Cass Ave.,Argonne, Ill. 60439. No phone calls. Interestedcontractors may also submit a Freedom ofInformation request for a copy of the existingcontract.     (119) GET ON LIST OF QUALIFIED FIRMS:The Veterans Affairs Medical Center in LosAngeles, Calif., has several construction projectsdesignated as 8(a) set-asides. One, with an estimatedvalue of $1 million to $5 million, is to replace a roof.A second, valued at $500,000 to $1 million, is forrenovations, and a third, also valued at $500,000 to$1 million, is for curb and sidewalk repairs. Projectsare intended to be released in the third and fourthquarters of fiscal year 1995 (spring and summer).For information, contact the procurement desk, VAMedical Center, 11301 Wilshire Blvd., Los Angeles,Calif. 90073. Phone: 310-824-3140. The VA relieson the SBA district office to provide a list ofqualified firms for any of its 8(a) projects. Contactthe Glendale District Office at 818-552-3210.     (120) SIC CODE ASSIGNED: The Air ForceMaterials Command Center (AFMCC), at Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio, is now in charge of a plannedsolicitation for the installation and maintenance ofseismic arrays. Applicable SIC Code is 3829, andthe size standard is 500 employees. A decisionregarding set-aside status hasn't been made, but thesolicitation will be competitive. The project is toconsist of planning and installing 24 arrays in 13countries, establishing communications, training hostcountry personnel in the operation and maintenanceof the seismic arrays, and maintenance, configurationcontrol, and logistics support for the arrays duringthe initial period of operation. The contractor musthave "secret" clearance prior to award of the contract.A target date to award a contract is May or June1995, but that's questionable. For information,contact Debbie Pavlov, ASC/REKB, 2640 W. LoopRoad, Wright-Patterson AFB, Ohio 45433-7106.Capabilities statements from companies thatresponded to the initial notice from Patrick AFBhave been forwarded.     (121) FOR SMALL BUSINESS: Fort McClellanintends to issue a contract for the operations andmaintenance of the Directorate of Logistics. Thiscontract is intended as a small business set-aside.Applicable SIC Code is 8744, $20-million sizestandard. The contractor will provide all services,supervision, labor, and equipment to provide storage,warehousing, supply, vehicle, and equipmentmaintenance and transportation. Base contract periodis April 1 to Sept. 30, 1996. Total contract period,including options, is five years. A solicitation isexpected to be issued in April, with a projected duedate of June 16, 1995. For information, contact inwriting Cathy G. Pitts, point of contact, or WandaLee-Causey, contracting  officer, Directorate ofContracting, Building 241C, Fort McClellan, Ala.35205-5000. SOL DABT02-95-R-0001.     (122) ANTICIPATED FOR 8(a) IN FALL: TheBallistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO) isanticipating that it will issue a solicitation forinformation systems support in November 1995. An8(a) competition is expected. Work is expected toinclude computer facilities operation andmanagement, operating systems software support,and BMDO Information Center support. Purchasesof commercial off-the-shelf software and hardwaremay also be included. Don't call or send a capabilitiesstatement yet because BMDO is developingrequirements for this project. There's no statement ofwork and no RFP. Award is projected for February1996. POC is Lt. Jeffrey S. Miller, BMDO contractsdivision, 703-693-1544.     (123) SEEKING SOURCES: TheEnvironmental Protection Agency is seekingqualified firms to provide emergency and remedialresponse and cleanup services of hazardous wastesand oil in Regions 6, 7, 8, and 9. Applicable SICCode is 8744. Firms should identify themselves as asmall business, small disadvantaged business,woman-owned business, or 8(a)-certified. Submit anexpression of interest, business size classification,and regional preference to Ronald R. Wiley,contracting officer, U.S. EPA, 401 M St. SW,Mailcode 3805F, Washington, D.C. 20460-0001.Phone: 202-260-7637.     (124) SEEKING SOURCES: The U.S. Propertyand Fiscal Office for New York is seeking smalldisadvantaged businesses capable of providingoperations and maintenance services for an airfield atGriffiss Air Force Base, Rome, N.Y. Firms shouldbe located within the vicinity of Oneida County,N.Y. Necessary services are likely to include weatherobserving operations, ATCAS/weather maintenanceservices, transient aircraft services, airfieldoperations, airfield real property maintenance andrepair, aviation fuel storage and distribution, security,air traffic control, and environmental management.Applicable SIC Code is 8744, $13.5-million sizestandard. Submit letters of interest to Major RussellCatalano, contracting officer, USP&FO-NY, 330Old Niskayuna Road, Latham, N.Y. 12110-2224.Phone: 518-786-4740.     (125) CONTRACTS SUSPENDED: We'vegotten formal word that two contracts NASALangley Research Center had designated as smallbusiness set-asides have been suspended due toprojected reductions in the NASA workforce. Theexisting contracts have been extended for sixmonths. New contracts are still projected as smallbusiness set-asides. One contract is for logistics,administrative, and security support services(referred to as "CLASSIC"). Applicable SIC Code is8744, $20-million size standard. POC is Kelann L.Bielick, 804-864-2926. SOL 1-120-GC.1260. Theother is for business and administrative managementinformation services (BAMIS), a small business set-aside with an 8% goal for small disadvantagedbusiness. Applicable SIC Code is 7376, $18-millionsize standard. SOL 1-39-GMG-1051. Forinformation on either contract, keep in touch with theNASA Langley Industry Assistance Office, MailStop 144, Hampton, Va. 23681-0001. Phone: 804-864-2461. Companies already on the mailing list forthese projects will be notified when solicitations areissued.     (126) DETAILS EXPECTED IN SUMMER:The NASA Marshall Space Flight Center intends toaward a contract for security mission services duringthe second quarter of fiscal year 1996. This contracthas been designated as a full set-aside and will beawarded through competition. It is valued at morethan $5 million. Work will include personnelidentification, area patrolling, protective services,escorts, couriers, traffic control, investigations,national resource protection, and system securityengineering. Preliminary information should beavailable in late summer or fall 1995. Forinformation, contact David Brock, small businessspecialist, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center,Huntsville, Ala. 35812.     (127) RESEARCH OPPORTUNITY: TheArmstrong Laboratory Environics Directorate,Tyndall Air Force Base, is seeking innovativeresearch proposals for environmental complianceand site remediation. A resulting contract may be set-aside for small business, based on response to thesolicitation. Proposals should consider solid andliquid hazardous waste, air, and ground pollutantsand various methods of disposal and treatmenttechnologies. Applicable SIC Code is 8731, 500-employee size standard. Proposals will be accepteduntil Sept. 30, 1995. For a detailed solicitation andother information, contact 325 CONS/COP, Attn:Norma Myers, contract specialist, 501 Illinois Ave.,Suite 5, Tyndall AFB, Fla. 32403-5526. Refer toBAA TYN 95-001. Phone: 904-283-2086.     (128) RESEARCH OPPORTUNITY: The U.S.Army Intelligence Center has issued a broad agencyannouncement (BAA) for research proposals toreduce the supply and demand of illegal drugs.Resulting projects from this BAA will be totally set-aside for historically black colleges and universities(HBCUs). Multiple contracts may result, and somewill be for several years. For a detailed copy of theBAA, contact the Directorate of Contracting, P.O.Box 748, Fort Huachuca, Ariz. 85613. Fax: 520-533-5157. Refer to BAA 94-3. Cutoff dates areabout May 31, 1995 and Aug. 31, 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 19958(a) CONTRACTS AWARDEDALASKAChugach Development Corporation, 560 E. 34thAve., Ste. 200, Anchorage, AK 99503, has won aTransportation contract for remediation services (SIC8744) worth $5,000.Del Norte Surveying, Inc., PO Box 110553,Anchorage, AK 99511, has received an Agriculturecontract for surveying services (SIC 8713) for$21,825.Johnson Construction and Supply, Inc., PO Box795, Wrangell, AK 99929, has won threeAgriculture contracts for building materials (SIC5211), one valued at $10,564, one worth $121,000,and one for $14,656.Nugget Construction, Inc., 8726 Corbin Dr.,Anchorage, AK 99507, won a contract from theNavy for environmental cleanup (SIC 8744) for$46,785.Nuna Contractors, Inc., 6108 Mackay St., Ste. 200,Anchorage, AK 99518, was awarded an Interiorcontract for residence rehabilitation work (SIC 1521)worth $36,356.Paul Bunyan Contracting, Inc., PO Box 771705,Eagle River, AK 99577, has been given aTransportation contract to install electrical metering(SIC 1731) for $141,835.Piquniq Management Corporation, 6613 BraytonDr., Anchorage, AK 99507, won an HHS contract tofurnish & install a phone system (SIC 4813) for$51,988.The Andrews Group Co., Inc., PO Box 201947,Anchorage, AK 99520, has received an Armycontract for laundry & dry-cleaning services (SIC7218) valued at $1,161,958.ARKANSASArkansas Sunshine, 301 Whispering Hill, HotSprings, AR 71901, won an Agriculture contract forvegetation management (SIC 0851) worth $112,620.Doyne Construction Co., PO Box 5820, N. LittleRock, AR 72119, has been awarded a VA contractfor telephone site preparation (SIC 1542) for$692,000.Ebbco, PO Box 166, Lonoke, AR 72086, was givena VA contract to correct cardiac deficiencies (SIC1796) for $766,809.Lambert Construction Co., Inc., 1207 John BarrowRd., Little Rock, AR 72204, received a contract fromthe Army for channel improvements (SIC 1629) for$189,090.Potter Forestry Contractor, HC 68, Box 1177,Plainview, AR 72857, won an Agriculture contractfor vegetation management (SIC 0851) valued at$110,900.Rankin Construction Corporation, PO Box 6300, N.Little Rock, AR 72116, won a contract from the AirForce for a munitions storage facility (SIC 1541)worth $2,457,145.CALIFORNIAAzteca Construction, 3871 Security Park Drive,Rancho Cordova, CA 95742, won a GSA contract toexcavate a federal building (SIC 1794) for$2,955,414.Cal, Inc., PO Box 6327, Vacaville, CA 95696, wona Transportation contract for environmentalassessments (SIC 8711) worth $7,000.Coast Grading Co., Inc., PO Box 1152, Ramona,CA 92065, has received a VA contract for highway& street construction (SIC 1611) for $147,388.Environmental Construction, 1516 Sherwood Ave.,Sacramento, CA 95822, has won two VA contracts,one to install an irrigation system (SIC 1623) for$599,997, and one to repair sewer lines (SIC 1623)for $12,214.F. Oliviera Construction, 470 Los Viboras Rd.,Hollister, CA 95023, received an Agriculturecontract for general contracting (SIC 1542) for$141,242.High Technology Solutions, Inc., 4858 Mercury St.,Ste. #106, San Diego, CA 92111, won a Navycontract for business consulting services (SIC 8748),$100000.Redding Tree Growers Corporation, 779 West Fir,Lindsay, CA 93247, was awarded two Agriculturecontracts for forestry services (SIC 0851), one for$40,895 and one for $51,079.Reza, Inc., 14545 Valley View, Ste. J, Santa FeSpring, CA 90620, won a VA contract to repair andfabricate window screens (SIC 1799).COLORADOAdvance Services Group, PO Box 20185, Lafayette,CO 80308, has received an Army contract forelectronic computers (SIC 3571) for $113,429.Associated Environmental Systems of Midamerica,82 N. James, Kansas City, KS 66118, won a Justicecontract for an asbestos survey (SIC 8999) valued at$489,345.Blackinton and Decker, Inc., 424 Lipan St., Denver,CO 80204, won an Interior contract for generalconstruction (SIC 1541) worth $148,355, and twoArmy contract for general construction (SIC 1542),one for $4,350 and one for $17,406.Gonzales Construction Co., Inc., 29996 Highway184, Dolores, CO 81323, was awarded an Armycontract for heavy construction (SIC 1629) valued at$1,596,087.Leroy's Decorating, Inc., 2150 South Bryant St.,Denver, CO 80219, won an Army contract forpainting (SIC 1721) for $3,381 and an Air Forcecontract for painting & paper hanging (SIC 1721).Productive Data Systems (PDS), 1850 WoodmoorDr., Monument, CO 80123, received an Agriculturecontract for computer programming services (SIC7371).Southwest Construction Supply & Sales, 2827 West9th Ave., Denver, CO 80204, was given a GSAcontract for security repair and renovation (SIC1799) valued at $22,335.CONNECTICUTCiencia, Inc., 111 Roberts St., Ste. K, East Hartford,CT 06108, was awarded a VA contract for industrialhygenist services (SIC 8711) for $65,000.J & W Co., Inc., 100 Erdman Way, Leominster,MA 01453, has won a VA contract to renovate adining room (SIC 1542) valued at $45,000.DISTRICT OF COLUMBIAAdvanced Information Network Systems, Inc.,11820 Parklawn Dr., Ste. 530, Rockville, MD20852, won a CPSC contract to perform a systemanalysis design (SIC 7373) for $24,947.AJ Engineering, 9728 Days Farm Drive, Vienna,VA 22182, won a Justice contract for architecturaland engineering services (SIC 8712).Cervantes & Associates, PC, 10400 Eaton Place,#210, Fairfax, VA 22030, was awarded an HHScontract for architectural and engineering services(SIC 8712).Columbia Services Group, Inc., 901 N. Stuarts St.,#800, Arlington, VA 22203, was given an SBAcontract for comprehensive LAN support (SIC7373).Computer Systems Development Corp., 14500Avion Parkway, Ste. 125, Chantilly, VA 22021,won three Navy contracts for engineering andtechnical services (SIC 8711), one for $94,081, onefor $90,016 and one for $94,904.Computer Systems International, 1025 ExecutiveBlvd., Ste. 111, Chesapeake, VA 23230, received aNavy contract for computer maintenance & repair(SIC 7378).Corporate Systems Resources, 7339 HanoverParkway, Greenbelt, MD 20770, won a contractfrom the Navy for graphing calculators (SIC 5044)valued at $64,988.Crocker Associates, Inc., 824 East Willow PointPlace, Newport News, VA 23602, has been awardeda Transportation contract for management consultingservices (SIC 8742) for $60,000.D&M General Contracting, Inc., 601 Dover Rd.,No. 19-20, Rockville, MD 20850, has an HHScontract to replace an underground storage tank (SIC1542) valued at $1,040,138.Data Procurement Corp., Inc./Inex Co., 15954Derwood Rd., Rockville, MD 20855, has won threeNSA contracts (SIC 5045), one for mainframesystems for $54,887, one for digital equipmentworth $86,946, and one for mainframe peripheralboards valued at $36,168.Diez Software Service, Inc., 2235-A Tacketts MillDr., Lakeridge, VA 22192, received an Armycontract for prepackaged software (SIC 7372) worth$285,839.Digital Systems Research, Inc., 4301 N. Fairfax Dr.,Ste. 725, Arlington, VA 22201, won an Energycontract for technical and management support (SIC8711) for $1,417,275, as well as two Navy contractsfor engineering and technical support (SIC 8711).Dynamic Computer Concepts, Inc., 8201 CorporateDr., Ste. 610Q, Landover, MD 20785, has won twoTransportation contracts, one for managementinformation (SIC 7379) worth $145,131 and one fortechnical support services (SIC 7379).Dynamix Corporation, 1400 Mercantile Lane, #170,Landover, MD 20785, won an HHS contract torelocate a data center (SIC 7379).Hago Co., Inc., 1814 Opalocka Drive, McLean, VA22101, received an Air Force contract for foodservices (SIC 5812).Harrison Maldonado Associates, Inc., 1000 16th St.NW, Ste. 40, Washington, DC 20036, was given anHHS contract to develop & distribute TV and radiopublicity (SIC 7311) worth $562,092.Hydrogeologic, Inc., 1165 Herndon Prkwy., Ste.900, Herndon, VA 22070, won an Army contractfor architectural services (SIC 8712) valued at$800,000.Information Management Consultants, Inc., 7915Westpark Drive, McLean, VA 22102, was given aTreasury contract for an integrated procurementsystem (SIC 7373).Integrated Management Services, Inc., 12531Clipper Drive, Ste. 202, Woodbridge, VA 22192,was awarded a HUD contract for computer services(SIC 7379) worth $135,081.International Business Systems, Inc., 3900University Drive #215D, Fairfax, VA 22033, won aVA contract for electrical work (SIC 1731) valued at$2,225,087.J & E Associates, Inc., 900 Second St. NE, #212,Washington, DC 20002, was awarded a Navycontract for personal services (SIC 8322).FLORIDAAE Handy & Associates, Inc., 4531 36th St.,Orlando, FL 32811, won two Navy contracts, onefor support services (SIC 8711) worth $132,708 andone for hardware maintenance services (SIC 7373)for $71,640.Alpha Data Corp., 102 Buck Dr. NE, Ste. B, FortWalton Beach, FL 32548, was given an Air Forcecontract to install software and hardware (SIC 7373)for $264,253.Arkitex 2, Inc., 4923 West Cypress St., Tampa, FL33607, was awarded two VA contracts (SIC 8711),one to replace roofs for $63,226 and one to installgrab rails and toilets for $31,033.BKM Architects, Inc., 9440 Phillips Highway, Ste.6, Jacksonville, FL 32256, has won a Navy contractfor mechanical/electrical design (SIC 8711) worth$50,000.Jason Associates Corporation, 12625 High BluffDr., Ste. 102, San Diego, CA 92130, was awarded aNavy contract for electrical machinery equipment(SIC 3699) worth $1,273,418.Manufacturing Technology, Inc., 70 Ready Ave.NW, Fort Walton Beach, FL 32548, was given anAir Force contract for a Bradley fighting vehicle(SIC 3669) valued at $3,199,685.Northwest Florida Facilities Mgmt., Inc., 207 FerryRd. SE, Fort Walton Beach, FL 32548, has receivedan Army contract for a childcare development center(SIC 7349) for $79,855, and an Air Force contractfor custodial services (SIC 7349) for $520,719.Omega Environmental Services, Inc., 4661Hammermill, Ste. B, Tucker, GA 30084, wasawarded a DLA contract for ground maintenance(SIC 4953) for $1,364,495.Rodriguez Khuly Quiroga Architects, 4440 Ponce deLeon Blvd., Coral Gables, FL 33146, received aGSA contract to design and modify a federalbuilding (SIC 8711) for $132,856.RWB Construction, Inc., 929 Peninsular Place, Ste.10, Jacksonville, FL 32204, won a Navy contract toreplace a concrete apron (SIC 1771) for $76,526.Shah Construction Co., Inc., 7236 Merrill Rd.,Jacksonville, FL 32211, won two Army contracts(SIC 1542), one to maintain an underside hangarroof for $373,684 and one to repair alert shelters for$340,000.GEORGIAAztech Contracting, Inc., 849 Pickins Industrial Dr.,Marietta, GA 30062, was given an Air Forcecontract to maintain, repair, and alter a dining hall(SIC 1542) for $633,688.Conference Management Associates, 3 CorporateSquare, Ste. 103, Atlanta, GA 30329, was awardedan HHS contract for conference support services(SIC 8742) for $325,344.Dynamic Solutions of Atlanta, Inc., 6075 RoswellRd., Ste. 422, Atlanta, GA 30328, has won a VAcontract for on-site help supply services (SIC 7363)valued at $252,195.Gibson Maintenance Co., Inc., PO Box 745, Metter,GA 30439, won a contract from the Air Force toreplace interior light fixtures (SIC 1731) for$2,000,000.Lafae, Inc., 207 Harwell Rd. NW, Atlanta, GA30331, received an Interior contract to rehabilitate anational park (SIC 1521) for $97,968.Paramount Contracting Co., 7314 SouthlakeParkway, Morrow, GA 30260, was awarded anArmy contract to replace underground fuel tanks(SIC 1629) for $239,500.Visions USA, Inc., 3485 N. Desert Dr., Bldg. 2, Ste.102, Atlanta, GA 30344, was the recipient of anHHS contract for conference management & peerreview (SIC 8742) for $1,095,398.IDAHOC & R Forestry, 5503 Brookwood, #4, Missoula,MT 59802, has won an Agriculture contract for treeplanting (SIC 0851) for $199,100.Ecostat, Inc., 2181 Laurelwood Dr., Thousand Aaks,CA 91361, won an Energy contract to conduct asystem analysis (SIC 8742) for $8,540.Encinas Contractors, Inc., HC 77, Box 2772, GardenValley, ID 83622, won an Interior contract forbitterbrush planting (SIC  0851) worth $12,500 andan Agriculture contract for reforestation for$265,158.J & L Independent Supply, PO Box 1296, Caldwell,ID 83605, received an Air Force contract for woodenboxes (SIC 2441) for $4,505.Quijas Reforestation, Inc., PO Box 256, HorseshoeBend, ID 83269, was given an Agriculture contractfor tree planting (SIC 0851) for $180,836.LOUISIANABiagas Enterprise, 1694 N. Claiborne, PO Box8681, New Orleans, LA 70116, was awarded aTransportation contract for entrance & perimeterimprovements (SIC 1799) for $199,996.Enplanar, Inc., 4232 Williams Blvd., Ste. 101,Kenner, LA 70065, won a contract from the Armyfor barracks (SIC 8712) worth $189,962.Materials Management Group, Inc., 3520 Gen.DeGaulle Dr.,  #3010, New Orleans, LA 70114, hasbeen awarded a contract by the Army forenvironmental assessment (SIC 8734) for $208,420.V.C. Nora Jr. Building & Remodeling, Inc., 308Jackson St., Natchitoches, LA 71457, has won anInterior contract to replace HVAC and retrofitrestrooms (SIC 1711) for $78,510.MAINEHandford General Contractors, Inc., 261 Oak GroveAve., Springfield, MA 01109, was given aTransportation contract to construct a traffic tower(SIC 1542) for $2,750,000.MARYLANDAmdyne Corp., 1121 Benfield Blvd., Millersville,MD 21108, received a Navy contract for technicalsupport services (SIC 8711) worth $500,000.American Technology Corp., 2330 N. Howard St.,Baltimore, MD 21218, won a contract from theNavy for engineering services (SIC 8711).Automated Cable Services, Inc., PO Box 607,Waldorf, MD 20604, was given an Agriculturecontract for FIP support services (SIC 7379) worth$50,960.BD Systems, Inc., 385 Van Ness Ave., Ste. 200,Torrance, CA 90501, won a NASA contract for afeasibility study (SIC 8711) valued at $204,969.Charles M. Mathis Associates, Inc., 45 SouthBroadway, Yonkers, NY 10701, has received anHHS contract for health services (SIC 8741) valuedat $24,00,842.Compro Systems Inc., 6400 Baltimore Nat'l Pike,Baltimore, MD 21228, won two Defense contractfor hardware and software (SIC 7378), one worth$231,484 and one for $144,863, as well as a Navycontract to provide a computer hardware main (SIC7378) for $48,110.Cosmopolitan, Inc., 9385-H8 Gerwig Lane,Columbia, MD 21046, has received a StateDepartment contract for upgrade work (SIC 1542)worth $1,700,000.Creline General Contractor, Inc., 258 S. PershingAve., York, PA 17403, has received an Interiorcontract to construct a ramp (SIC 1771) for $70,000.MASSACHUSETTSA. Rodriguez Construction Co., Inc., 17Westminster St., Worcester, MA 01605, won aTransportation contract to replace roofs (SIC 1761)for $94,905.Handford General Contractors, Inc., 261 Oak GroveAve., Springfield, MA 01109, was awarded a VAcontract to construct handicapped access (SIC 1542)valued at $99,104.J & W Co., Inc., 100 Erdman Way, Leominster,MA 01453, has been given Justice contract tomanage hazardous materials (SIC 1799) for$520,000.Wilson 5 Service Co., Inc., 33 Remicks Lane, POBox 810, Kittery, ME 03904, won a contract fromthe Navy for mess attendant services (SIC 5812) for$233,424.MICHIGANC & R Forestry, 5503 Brookwood, #4, Missoula,MT 59802, was awarded an Agriculture contract fortree planting (SIC 0851) worth $19,129.Capital Computer Solutions, Inc., 47912 West Rd.,Wixom, MI 48393, was the recipient of an Armycontract to manufacture computers (SIC 3571) for$73,188.MISSOURIKansas City Mo. Construction Serv., Inc., 17445Mission Rd., Stillwell, KS 66085, was awarded aGSA contract for an egress corridor (SIC 1542)worth $696,000.Transport Administrative Services, Inc., 127AWeldon Parkway, St. Louis, MO 63043, won acontract from the Air Force to purchase Suncomputer equipment (SIC 5045) for $53,996.NEWLY CERTIFIED 8(a)sAnimas ComputerServices180 South 300 WestSalt Lake City, UT 84101801/596-3327Sam N. TrujilloComputer ServicesAtlantic Industrial Supply, Inc.2030 Chamberlayne Ave.Richmond, VA 23222804/329-5614Karen R. MotleyIndustrial SuppliesC & C Technology, Inc.1209 Botetourt GardensNorfolk, VA 23517703/622-3838Li C. ChuResearch & DevelopmentCarpenter Contracting, Inc.3074 Tanana Loop, Ext. Rd.Delta Junction, AK 99737907/895-4071Wayne M. CarpenterGeneral Building ConstructionChannell Construction Co.1524 Chandler Rd., Ste. 1Omaha, NE 68147402/731-3920Michael D. ChannellConstruction WorkCharles Lee Heating & Air-Conditioning6625 Tennis St.Pittsburgh, PA 15206412/441-0799Charles T. LeeHeating & Air-ConditioningColeman & Associates Enterprises, Inc.9150 Rumsey Rd., Ste. A-6Columbia, MD 21045410/730-7592Ronald K. ColemanComputer Systems IntegrationCompuCure Computer Services, Inc.5518 Rising Sun Ave.Philadelphia, PA 19120215/925-3900Naveed U. QureshiComputer ServicesComputer Hardware Maintenance of Virginia,BEAC464 Investor's Place, Ste. 106Virginia Beach, VA 23452804/456-0520James S. ChengComputer ServicesDDC Advertising & Public Relations, Inc.7711 Carondelet Ave., Ste. 10St. Louis, MO 63105314/721-2288Clarence E. JacksonAdvertising & Public Relations ServicesDeans' Archer & Co., CPAs265 E. Merrick Rd.Valley Stream, NY 11580516/872-6922Accounting and BookkeepingElias Management Group510 S. MarengoPasadena, CA 91101213/887-4265Raul EliasBusiness ServicesEquity Construction4150 W. Michigan Ave.Glendale, AZ 85308602/540-4659Ernest D. WillisConstruction WorkGemini Associates, Inc.27126-A Paseo Espada, Ste. 1605San Juan Capist, CA 92675714/240-9200Robert L. MancietComputer Integrated SystemsGenus Portable Cleaning Service4511 Jefferson Ave.Newport News, VA 23607804/380-5888James H. GenusSpecial Trade ContractingGlobal Integrated Systems, Inc.500 N. Central, Ste. 283Plano, TX 75074214/422-2131Duke HamiltonRadio Telephone CommunicationsH G Welding167-17 130th Ave.Jamaica, NY 11434718/527-3416Harry GurleyWelding ServicesHelm Construction Co.5616 N. 63rd St.Omaha, NE 68104Construction WorkHi-Mark Construction Group, Inc.3589 Commerce Dr.Franklin, OH 45005513/423-4272Yudell HightowerConstruction WorkInfinite Computer Technologies730 Louis Dr.Warminster, PA 18974215/672-2966Henry WaplesSystem Development & IntegrationIrving TruckingHCR 65, Box 1130Huger, SC 29450803/336-3861Trucking ServicesKDG Development3600 Wilshire Blvd.Los Angeles, CA 90010213/381-8181Sammi L. ReevesManagement ConsultingLeemen Computer Services, Inc.7320 SW Trinity PlaceCornelius, OR 97113800/235-5554Ike MendiolaComputer ServicesLoviel Computer Corp.5599 W. 78th St.Minneapolis, MN 55439612/828-6880Lloyd LeeComputer ServicesM.J. Computer Services3977 Research Park Dr.Ann Arbor, MI 48108313/665-7462Fred JacobsComputer ServicesMetro Electric & Maintenance510 Eraste Landry Rd.Lafayette, LA 70506318/232-3539Charlie R. RiserElectric and Maintenance ServicesSMALL BUSINESS WEEK 1995     SBA is the sponsor of the annual Small BusinessWeek celebration. The national event begins May 1in Washington, D.C. and runs for four jam-packeddays. This year, three federal agencies are hostingsmall and minority-owned business procurementfairs during which business owners can meet withprocurement officials.     Many SBA district offices and local chambers ofcommerce are holding receptions and awardsceremonies from late April to mid-May. As of presstime, the events listed below had been provided toSet-Aside Alert. Contact the phone number providedfor more information, or call your local SBA districtoffice. Ask about other events too.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995In Washington, D.C.May 1-4 -- Small Business Week, sponsored bySBA. Highlights include a kickoff luncheon May 1,a breakfast honoring minority-owned businesses anda luncheon recognizing small business advocatewinners May 2, presentation of the Small BusinessPerson of the Year award at a White HouseCeremony May 3, and a prime contractors' trade fairMay 4. 202-205-6460.May 2 -- Justice Dept. Small Business Fair. Pre-registration required. 202-616-0521.May 2 -- Interior Dept. Small Business ProcurementFair. 202-208-7437.May 2-3 -- Treasury Dept. Partnerships '95, a look atthe future of federal procurement. On-the-spot smallpurchases will be available. Pre-registration required.301-206-2940 or 800-878-2940.May 3 -- Rep. Eleanor Holmes Norton, D-D.C.,sponsors a small, minority-, and women-ownedbusiness procurement fair. Pre-registration required.202-783-5210.Region IApril 27 -- Concord, N.H. SBA District SmallBusiness Awards Dinner. 603-225-1400.May 1-12 -- The New Hampshire SBA Office willgo "on the road," hosting two meetings per day ineach of the state's 10 counties. 603-225-1400.May 8 -- Hartford, Conn. SBA District SmallBusiness Breakfast. 203-240-4700.Also, The Maine SBA District Office will hostadvocate awards ceremonies and workshops duringMay. 207-622-8378.Region IIMay 2 -- Syracuse, N.Y. SBA District SmallBusiness Week Awards Ceremony. 315-448-0417.May 3 -- Buffalo, N.Y. SBA District SmallBusiness Week Awards Luncheon. 716-846-4301.May 4 -- New Jersey Small Business Week AwardsLuncheon, held in Princeton. Chamber of Commerceof the Princeton Area, 609-520-1776.May 5-6 -- Kenmore-Tonawanda, N.Y. AnnualTrade and Business Show. 716-874-1202.May 8 -- Melville, N.Y. SBA District SmallBusiness Awards Breakfast. 516-454-0764.Region IIIMay 10 -- Delaware Small Business WeekBreakfast. Wilmington, Del. SBA District Office,302-573-6295.May 11 -- Eastern Pennsylvania Small BusinessWeek Awards Breakfast. King of Prussia, Pa. SBADistrict Office, 610-962-3815.May 18 -- Washington, D.C. Small BusinessAwards Luncheon. Washington SBA DistrictOffice, 202-606-4000, ext. 275.May 19 -- Maryland Small Business AwardsBreakfast.  Baltimore SBA District Office, 410-962-4393, ext. 310.Region IVMay 1-11 -- The Charlotte, N.C. SBA District Officelists awards ceremonies and trade fairs in 22counties. 704-344-6587.May 4 -- North Florida Small Business WeekLuncheon, honoring the Florida Small BusinessPerson of the Year and other award winners.University of North Florida Small BusinessDevelopment Center, 904-646-2476.May 5 -- Birmingham, Ala. Small Business WeekAwards Breakfast, including recognition of AlabamaExporter of the Year and Women in BusinessAdvocate. Birmingham, Ala. SBA District Office,205-731-1338. Ask about other events in Alabamatoo.May 10-11 -- Lexington, Ky. Chamber ofCommerce Small Business Trade Show and SmallBusiness of the Year Dinner. 606-254-4447.Region VApril 26-27 -- Illinois Small Business Week AwardsLuncheon, part of the Chicagoland Small BusinessExpo. The Illinois Small Business Person of theYear and other award recipients will be honored.Chicago SBA District Office, 312-886-0705.April 28 -- Minnesota Small Business WeekAwards Breakfast, honoring Minnesota's SmallBusiness Persons of the Year and other awardrecipients. Held in Bloomington, Minn. MinneapolisSBA District Office, 612-370-2322.May 3 -- Ohio Small Business Person of the Yearawards reception, held in Akron. Cleveland SBADistrict Office, 216-522-4180.May 10 -- Michigan Small Business Day 1995,honoring the Michigan Small Business Person of theYear and other award winners. Workshops too.Detroit SBA District Office, 313-226-6075.Region VIMay 1 -- Arkansas Small Business Week AwardsLuncheon. Little Rock SBA District Office, 501-324-5871.May 3 -- Reception and press conference atHarlingen, Texas, SBA District Office. 210-427-8533.May 4 -- Procurement Conference, El Paso, Texas.915-540-5676.May 5 -- New Mexico Small Business WeekAwards Luncheon. Albuquerque SBA DistrictOffice, 505-766-1870.May 9 -- Lubbock, Texas, Minority and SmallBusiness Breakfast. 806-743-7462.May 10 -- Small Business Day at the LouisianaLegislature. New Orleans SBA District Office, 504-589-6685.May 12 -- The Chamber New Orleans and the RiverRegion's Small Business Champions Luncheon.New Orleans SBA District Office, 504-589-6685.May 12 -- Texas Small Business Week Luncheon.SBA Administrator Phil Lader is scheduled as thekeynote speaker.Houston SBA District Office, 713-773-6500.May 15 -- Oklahoma Small Business Week AwardsLuncheon. 405-231-5521.May 23 -- El Paso Small Business Week Luncheon.915-540-5676.Region VIIMay 8 -- National Association of Women BusinessOwners Luncheon honoring Jan Franck, IowaWomen in Business Advocate. Des Moines SBADistrict Office, 515-284-4522.Region IXMay 2 -- Arizona 1995 Small Business Conference,held in Phoenix. 602-238-9601.May 3 -- "Thanks Pardners" Arizona SmallBusiness Advocates Luncheon, held in Phoenix.Phoenix SBA District Office, 602-640-2303.May 4 -- New Business Opportunities for Womenand Minority-Owned Companies, Flagstaff, Ariz.602-774-4505.May 5 -- Glendale, Calif. SBA District and LosAngeles Area Chamber of Commerce 14th AnnualSmall Business Luncheon, honoring district awardwinners. SBA, 818-552-3210, or the chamber, 213-580-7585.May 8 -- California Small Business Person of theYear reception. Other awards receptions held ondifferent dates. San Francisco SBA District Office,415-744-6820.May 9 -- Northern Nevada Small BusinessLuncheon. Reno SBA District Office, 702-784-5268.May 11 -- Southern Nevada Small Business WeekAwards Luncheon. Las Vegas SBA District Office,702-388-6611.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995Company News...The Annual Chicago Business Opportunity Fair,sponsored by the Chicago Minority BusinessDevelopment Council, recently honored Vernon R.Louks, chairman and CEO of Baxter Internationalwith its Success Award. This company is a leadingproducer, developer, and distributer of medicalproducts and technologies. In 1994 they spent $85million with minority-owned companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995African American-owned Luster ConstructionManagement and Asian-owned GKO & Associateshave been named along with O'Brien-Kreitzberg andAssociates Inc. coordinating construction managersof projects in the $2 billion expansion of SanFrancisco International Airport.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995 ...BusinessConnections...IBM is seeking small or minority-owned businesssuppliers to establish business partnerships. It islooking for companies with a reputation for qualityand customer service that will complement itsstrengths. This is part of IBM's Minority BusinessProgram. Qualified suppliers please call 1-800/IBM-3333.Exxon has a proven track record of utilizing qualifiedMBE companies. In the last decade, we and ouraffiliates have more than doubled our spending withminority-owned suppliers. For information aboutour Minority Supplier Development Program contactSupplier Development Coordinator, Exxon Co.,USA, PO Box 4692, Houston, Texas 77210-4692.Champion Business Services specializes in trainingpeople in clerical office skills, providing jobplacement for its trainees, and staffing for clericalpositions both temporary and permanent. We can fillone position at a time or provide an entire clericaldivision on a subcontracting or temporary basis. Weare an 8(a)-certified firm. Our SIC codes include7338 and 7368. We are located in Denver, Colorado.For additional information call 303/751-6607.Champion Business Services Inc., 1200 East Iliff,#102, Aurora, Colo. 80014-1251.Back to Headline List CopyrightSET-ASIDE ALERT via NewsNetAPRIL 24, 1995CALENDARAPRIL27     Thinking Out of the Box: Growth Strategiesfor Entrepreneurial Companies, sponsored by theDingman Center of Entrepreneurship at theUniversity of Maryland.  Stouffer Harborplace,Baltimore, MD.  Contact the Dingman Center at301/405-2151.27-28     Advanced Minority Purchasing Seminar:Taking Your Program to the Next Level, sponsoredby TRY US Resources, Inc.  Radisson Hotel,Charlotte, NC.  Contact TRY US at 612/781-6819.29     The Balancing Act: A One-Day Seminar toPromote Physical and Fiscal Fitness, sponsored bythe American Woman's Economic DevelopmentCorporation.  Washington, DC.  Contact AWED at202/857-0091.29-30     Los Angeles Black Business Expo andConference, sponsored by United Health Plan.  LosAngeles Convention Center, Los Angeles, CA.Contact Barbara Lindsey at 310/572-7555.MAY2     Kansas City Business Investment Exposition,sponsored by the Kansas City Minority SupplierDevelopment Council.  Westin Crown Center Hotel,Kansas City, MO.  Contact the KCMSDC at816/472-6464.10-11     Procurement Fair, sponsored by theCalifornia Industry Council for Small BusinessDevelopment.  Santa Clara Convention Center, SantaClara, CA.  Contact Bill Curry at 415/591-8411 ext.2300 or Annamarie Scalzo at 408/925-2511.10-12     Successful Managerial Skills for BlackManagers, sponsored by the American ManagementAssociation.  Atlanta, GA.  Contact the AMA at 1-800/262-9699.15-19     14th Annual Michigan MinorityProcurement Conference, sponsored by theMichigan Minority Business Development Council.Detroit, MI.  Contact the MMBDC at 313/873-3200.Back to Headline List