WT01-B02-1IA057-000942-B022-358http://www.learnathome.com:80/specrpts3.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215654 text/html 1779HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:51:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html Official Learn At Home Web Site:  National Center for Home Education:  Special Report #3 Page Status of S. Res. 133 (Helms/Lott U.N. Resolution) as of 4/25/96 Abraham (R-MI) Ashcroft (R-MO) Burns (R-MT) Coats (R-IN) Cochran (R-MS) Coverdell (R-GA) Craig (R-ID) D'Amato (R-NY) Dewine (R-OH) Dole (R-KS) Faircloth (R-NC) Frist (R-TN) Gramm (R-TX) Grams (R-MN) Hatch (R-UT) Helms (R-NC) Hutchison (R-TX) Inhofe (R-OK) Kassebaum (R-KS) Kempthorne (R-ID) Kyl (R-AZ) Lott (R-MS) Lugar (R-IN) Mack (R-FL) McCain (R-AZ) McConnell (R-KY) Murkowski (R-AK) Nickles (R-OK) Pressler (R-SD) Reid (D-NV) Roth (R-DE) Santorum (R-PA) Shelby (R-AL) Smith (R-NH) Thomas (R-WY) Thurmond (R-SC) Warner (R-VA) Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-2IA057-000942-B022-374http://www.learnathome.com:80/specrpts4.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215710 text/html 26998HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:52:01 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html Official Learn At Home Web Site:  National Center for Home Education:  Special Report #4 Page An Analysis of the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child's Concluding Observations on Thirteen Countries Introduction The U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child is being pushed for ratification in the United States. Since Article VI, Section 2 of the U.S. Constitution states that treaties are the supreme law of the land, the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child would be binding on all American families. Home schoolers, concerned parents, and many pro-family organizations are opposing the U.N. Convention because it will severely undermine the rights of parents to control the education, upbringing, and religious training of their children. In accordance with Section 44 of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, each country which ratifies the Convention must report to the U.N. "Committee of Ten" on measures they are taking to comply with the Treaty. This committee consists of ten representatives appointed by the U.N. who are responsible for monitoring compliance of all signatory countries. After reviewing these reports, the Committee of Ten informs each country of any violations of the Convention which exist in its current laws and lists recommendations for changing their laws to better implement the Convention. This report analyzes the U.N.'s response to thirteen countries which submitted reports to the Committee of Ten: Canada, Great Britain, Poland, Spain, France, Norway, Denmark, Romania, Belgium, Philippines, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Chile. The report documents the specific areas in which the U.N. critiques the laws of these signatory nations, making clear the potential challenges to American laws if the United States also ratifies this Treaty. The Committee is opposed to the corporal punishment of children across the board. Every report has some reference to corporal punishment, variously referred to as "spanking," "child abuse," and "lack of respect for the child's physical integrity." In some reports, the Committee uses language such as, "The Committee recommends that awareness-raising and educational measures be undertaken to prevent child abuse and the physical punishment of children" (e.g. Summary of France). In other reports, the Committee is more explicit: "The Committee recommends that the physical punishment of children in the home be prohibited" (e.g. Summary of the United Kingdom). More-developed nations are encouraged to adopt educational programs to "sensitize" the population to the principles of the Convention (e.g. Summary of Canada). Throughout the reports, the Committee appears to have a double standard approach, coming down harder on the more-developed nations than their "third world" counterparts. Less-developed countries are encouraged to develop "monitoring mechanisms" to oversee the implementation of the Convention (e.g. Summary of the Philippines). In some reports, the Committee is critical of a country's budget because they feel that it does not appropriate enough money to "social sectors" such as health care and education (e.g. Summary of Indonesia). The Committee's recommendations for more-developed countries are much more broad and detailed. The Committee would like to see these countries incorporate the principles and provisions of the Convention within the training programs of all professional groups that are involved with children. Lawyers, judges, social workers, and teachers are some of these groups mentioned directly (e.g. Summary of Belgium). The Committee wants schools to change their curricula to incorporate the principles of the Convention. It is worth noting that there is no distinction made between government or private schools in regard to this recommendation (e.g. Norway). The Committee also recommends that teaching methods be changed in order to reflect the "spirit and philosophy of the Convention" (e.g. Summary of the United Kingdom). The Committee singles out Great Britain for allowing parents to remove their children from certain sex education classes, alleging that it violates the child's "right of expression." The Committee criticizes Britain for allowing parents to "exclude their children from school"-a thinly-veiled reference to home schooling. To summarize the Committee's comments from all the reports, the Committee wants: Corporal punishment abolished in every institution-including the family; Monitoring mechanisms specifically designed to oversee the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child; Curriculum changes in all schools to conform to the Convention; Teaching methods that reflect the "spirit and philosophy of the Convention;" "Sensitization" programs for all professional groups that deal with children; "Sensitizing" of the population as a whole to the principles of the Convention; Children to have freedom of expression and the right to make decisions affecting their education. The common "violations" the Committee commonly found in other nations could easily be found in the U.S. In order to satisfy the Committee's demands, many rights traditionally enjoyed by parents in the U.S. would have to be taken away. More than simply superfluous, the Convention is at odds with the very foundations of American family law, which is rooted in Constitutional, Common Law, and Biblical traditions. Moreover, a fundamental premise of a free society is that citizens have a right to live under laws passed by duly elected representatives, not unaccountable, supranational bureaucrats. The U.N. Convention and the Committee of Ten would be clear threats to the sovereignty and autonomy of the United States as a free republic. A more detailed summary on the Committee's reports on each of the thirteen countries follows. Relevant excerpts from each country's report are attached in the appendix. A Summary of the U.N. Report on Canada The Committee Considered the Canadian Report on May 24-26, 1995. Canada played an important role in drafting the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child and also participated in the World Summit for Children in 1990 (Consideration of Reports: Canada, page 2). Although Canada is recognized by the Committee to have strengthened their protection of human rights, the Committee "is concerned that sufficient attention has not been paid to the establishment of a permanent monitoring mechanism that will enable an effective system of implementation of the Convention in all parts of the country" (page 2). The Committee is concerned that Canada made reservations to Articles 21 and 37 of the Convention. Article 21 regulates all adoption services; Article 37 gives children the right to take their parents to court and also gives the State the power to take a child from his family (Section 10). The Canadian government took exception to these articles, attempting to alter them as far as application. Section 14 of the Committee Report states, "Further measures seem to be needed to effectively prevent and combat all forms of corporal punishment and ill-treatment of children in schools or in institutions where children may be placed." The Committee goes on to recommend in Section 25, that "the physical punishment of children in families be prohibited." In order to stop "violence" in families, the Committee suggests that "the State party consider the possibility of introducing new legislation and follow-up mechanisms" be "launched with a view of changing attitudes in society on the use of physical punishment in the family and fostering the acceptance of its legal prohibition" (Section 25). In Section 19 of the report, the Committee wants a nation-wide education campaign to be launched for the purpose of "sensitizing" the population to the principles and provisions of the Convention. The Committee suggests that the Convention be incorporated in school curricula and in the training curricula of professional groups that deal with children, such as judges, lawyers, immigration officers, peace keepers, and teachers. The Committee also recommends that "emphasis be placed on federal monitoring mechanisms" in order to establish a "comprehensive network for the collection of data covering all areas of the Convention and taking into account all groups of children within Canadian jurisdiction...." A Summary of the U.N. Report on the United Kingdom The Committee considered the United Kingdom Report on January 24-25, 1995. The U.N. Committee expressed concern that the United Kingdom does not have a specific "mechanism" designed to oversee the implementation of the Convention (Concluding Observation: United Kingdom, Section 8). The Committee also believes that "insufficient expenditure is allocated to the social sector both within the State party and within the context of international development aid" (Section 9). The United Kingdom is criticized by the Committee because the "health status" of the children of ethnic minorities and socio-economic groups is apparently not the same as those of other ethnic groups of citizens (Section 13). The Committee is "concerned" that children are denied their freedom of expression because their parents have the right to prohibit them from attending sex education classes in school. The Committee went on to say that "In this, as in other decisions, including exclusion from school, the child is not systematically invited to express his/her opinion and those opinions may not be given due weight, as required under article 12 of the Convention" (Section 14). This section is particularly dangerous for home schoolers. The phrase "exclusion from school" could be used against home schoolers if their "schools" are not recognized by the Committee. The Committee is "disturbed" with Great Britain's laws that allow for reasonable chastisement within the home. The Committee is worried that many parents will interpret what is "reasonable" in an arbitrary fashion. Thus, this legislation is deemed incompatible with the provisions and principles of the Convention (Section 16). The Committee also expresses concern that private schools are still permitted to administer corporal punishment. Legislation to prohibit this practice is wanted by the Committee (Section 26). The Committee would like to see the U.N. Convention included in the training curriculum of professionals who work with children (Section 26). It also recommends that teachers modify their teaching methods to conform with the "spirit and philosophy of the Convention, and that the Convention be incorporated within the school curriculum" (Section 32). The Committee recommends that measures be taken to train parents in their responsibilities towards the rights of their children (Section 30) and that the physical punishment of children in the home be prohibited in light of the articles in the Convention which protect the child's "physical integrity" (Section 31). A Summary of the U.N. Report on France The Committee considered the French Report on April 11-12, 1994. The Committee is basically pleased with the actions of the French government in complying with the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, there are a few "concerns" that the Committee addresses. The Committee would like France to consider more ways in which children can actively participate in the decision-making processes affecting their lives, "in particular within school and the local community." (Consideration of Reports: France, Section 23). The Committee suggests that "awareness-raising and educational measures be undertaken to prevent child abuse and the physical punishment of children" (Section 24). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Norway The Committee Considered the Norway Report on April 18-19, 1994. The country of Norway has been cooperative in implementing the general principles of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child and in complying with the requirements of Article 44 (by filing requested reports and submitting requested materials). Norway was the first country in the world to establish an "ombudsman" to work with the government, municipalities, and non-governmental agencies to protect the human and civil rights of the children in Norway. The Convention is also pleased with the efforts being made to end discrimination and "xenophobia." (Consideration of Reports: Norway, Section B) The Committee is concerned that insufficient attention has been paid to implementing Articles 2 and 37 of the Convention. Article 2 bans all forms of discrimination against children and protects them against "punishment on the basis of the status, activities, expressed opinions, or beliefs" (Section 2). Article 37 states, "every child that is deprived of liberty shall be separated from adults" (Section C). The Committee also requests that Norway implement training programs for government officials, teachers, social workers, etc. on the principles and provisions of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child (Consideration of Reports: Norway, Section (D) 19). The Committee wants Norway to improve its education system by incorporating the Convention into the curricula for school children. They also request that religious education policy be changed so it does not discriminate against the child or violate his right to privacy (Section (D) 23). The Committee insinuates that the reason for Norway's high suicide rate among young people is because the Convention is not being enforced to its fullest (Section (D) 17). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Belgium The Committee considered the Belgium Report on May 31-June 1, 1995. The Committee wants Belgium to reform its current legislation with the view of "ensuring the prohibition of corporal punishment within the family" (Consideration of Reports: Belgium, Section 15). The Committee would also like to see views of children given due weight in the "decision making processes affecting their lives, in particular in family life" (Section 16). Regarding education, the Committee would like the Convention to be incorporated within school curricula (Section 17). The Committee encourages teachers to use teaching methods that "reflect the spirit and philosophy of the Convention" (Section 17) Professional groups (teachers, social and health workers, law enforcement officials, etc.) are asked to incorporate the provisions and principles of the Convention into their training programs (Section 18). The Committee wants Belgium to form a permanent, national mechanism for the purpose of coordinating the implementation of the Convention established by Belgium (Section 8). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Denmark The Committee considered the Denmark Report on January 18-19, 1995. The U.N. Committee expressed concern that Articles 3, 12, 13, and 15 "have not been adequately reflected in national legislation and policy making." (Consideration of Reports: Denmark). Article 3 of the Convention gives the State the authority to insure that families and other institutions responsible for the care of children comply with the regulations of the "competent authorities." Articles 12 and 13 give the child the right to the freedom of expression and the right to secure any information or ideas "regardless of frontiers." Article 15 gives children the freedom of assembly and protest. The Committee believes that "[m]onitoring mechanisms are essential...to ensure parity in all localities as regards the provision of services to children." The Committee would also like to see "the development and use of social and other indicators to monitor the implementation of all the rights provided for in the Convention" (Section 21). The Committee believes that "education about the principles and provisions of the Convention be systematically incorporated into retraining programmes (sic) and training curricula for various professional groups working with and for children such as teachers, social workers, law enforcement personnel and judges" (Section 23). The Committee believes that the Convention should be incorporated within schools and that all teaching methods should reflect the "spirit and philosophy of the Convention" (Section 29). It is recommended by the Committee that "further consideration be given to establishing mechanisms to ensure that children may express their views and have them taken into account in decision-making processes affecting them, including at school and within the community" (Section 26). Further measures are suggested by the Committee to "put an end to violence against children, including in the home" (Section 28). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Spain The Committee considered the Spain Report on October 6-7, 1994. The Committee expresses "concern" that Article 154 of the Spanish Civil Code provides that parents "may administer punishment to their children reasonably and in moderation." The Committee fears that this could be interpreted to include the practice of corporal punishment (Consideration of Reports: Spain, Section 10). The Committee wants Spain to "revise" this law to conform with the Convention. The Committee would like to see Spain develop more comprehensive "monitoring" systems at "all levels of the administration, central, regional, and local" to ensure that the Convention is "fully respected," and implemented (Section 12). Spain is encouraged to take measures to train law enforcement officials, judges, or any professional group that deals with children on the principles of the Convention (Section 16). The Committee wants Spain to do more to "strengthen the system of assistance to both parents in the performance of their child-rearing responsibilities" (Section 21). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Poland The Committee considered the Poland Report on January 16-17, 1995. The Committee is concerned by inadequate training on the principles and provisions of the Convention by professional groups (Consideration of Reports: Poland, Section 17). The Committee wants training programs to be organized and teachers, law enforcement officials, and judges, etc. to be periodically trained in the area of children's rights (Section 28). In regards to corporal punishment, the Committee regrets that "appropriate measures have not yet been taken to effectively prevent and combat corporal punishment and ill-treatment of children in schools or in institutions where children may be placed. The Committee is also preoccupied by the existence on a large scale of child abuse and violence within the family and the insufficient protection afforded by the existing legislation in that regard" (Section 18). The Committee wants national legislation made to prohibit "corporal punishment in the family" (Section 30). Further steps are recommended by the Committee to "strengthen the system of assistance to both parents in the performance of their child-rearing responsibilities" (Section 33). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Romania The Committee considered the Romanian Report on January 20-21, 1995. The Committee expresses its concern that adequate training of social workers, law enforcement officials, and judicial personnel on the principles and provisions of the Convention is not being practiced effectively (Consideration of Reports: Romania, Section 11). The Committee wants special training for social workers on this subject (Section 17). The Committee recommends that "Special efforts should be made to bring the existing legislation fully in line with the provisions of the Convention" (Section 14). In order to do this, the Committee wants the Romanian Family Code of 1954 be revised to comply with the Convention (Section 14). The Committee would also like to see research conducted on issues of "child abuse and neglect within the family" (Section 16). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Pakistan The Committee considered the Pakistan Report on April 4-5, 1994. Pakistan was one of the first countries to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Pakistan was also one of the six initiators of the World Summit for Children in 1990 (Consideration of Reports: Pakistan, page 1). The CRC Committee feels that the current legislation in Pakistan is "not sufficient to ensure the implementation of the Convention" (page 1). The Committee expresses its concern that sufficient attention has not been given to implementing Articles 2, 3, 6, 12, 37, 39, and 40 of the Convention. Article 2 bans all forms of discrimination against children and protects them against "punishment on the basis of the status, activities, expressed opinions, or beliefs" (Section 2). Article 12 gives the child total freedom of expression. Article 37 states, "every child that is deprived of liberty shall be separated from adults..." (Section c). The Committee recommends that Pakistan expand its health care system to further emphasize "family education, including family planning..." (Section 29). The Committee wants Pakistan to improve its education system in order to reduce the number of children working (Section 30). In other words, the Committee wants compulsory school attendance for Pakistani children. A Summary of the U.N. Report on the Philippines The Committee considered the Philippine Report on January 10-11, 1995. The Committee is concerned about the lack of "efficient mechanisms" to monitor the situation of children in the Philippines (Consideration of Reports: Philippines, Section 9). The Committee is aware that not all children born in the Philippines are registered after birth (Section 11). The Committee recommends that "monitoring mechanisms" be strengthened in order that "full enjoyment" of children's rights be promulgated (Section 20). The Committee is "seriously alarmed" at the existence of "child abuse" and neglect within the family (Section 13). Greater efforts are wanted by the Committee to provide "family life education" to develop awareness of the responsibility of the parents (Section 22). Children's rights-oriented programs are suggested by the Committee to be used to train professional groups such as teachers, judges, social workers, etc. in order to "emphasize the promotion and protection of the fundamental rights of the child" (Section 22). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Indonesia The Committee considered the Indonesian Report January 22-23, 1995. The Committee is concerned that "insufficient attention is given to the implementation of the general principles of the Convention (Consideration of Reports: Indonesia, Section 13). The Committee states that implementing the principles of the Convention "is not to be made dependent on budgetary resources" (Section 13). The Committee is disappointed that a very small portion of the Indonesian budget is reserved for social programs, "particularly primary health care and primary education" (Section 14). A Summary of the U.N. Report on Chile The Committee considered the Chile Report on April 14-15, 1994. Chile has worked hard to implement the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. Chile has worked with government officials, non-governmental coalitions, and other internationally interested parties (Consideration Reports: Chile, Sections (a) and (b)). They have established a national monitoring service for minors (SENAME) to help protect the rights granted under the Convention (Section 7). Chile is also considering ratifying the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (Section 9). The Committee is concerned that poverty among many of the people will have a constraining influence on the implementation of the Convention in Chile (Section 10). The Committee warns that the decentralization of government may lead to a decline in the quality of education and health services to "vulnerable groups of children" (Section 12). The Committee is also concerned that the geographical and social disparities may hinder some from enjoying the benefits granted by the Convention (Section 13). The Committee wants arrangements to be made to widely publicize the provisions of the Convention to the general public, especially to those who are responsible to maintain the implementation and application of the Convention, such as teachers, social workers, law enforcement officials, judges, etc. (Section 18). This analysis was prepared by the legal staff of theNational Center for Home Education, P.O. Box 125 Paeonian Springs, Virginia 22129 Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-3IA057-000942-B022-389http://www.learnathome.com:80/specrpts5.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215720 text/html 18990HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:52:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html Official Learn At Home Web Site:  National Center for Home Education:  Special Report #5 Page The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act: Establishing a Standard of Liberty "The right of a parent, under natural law, to establish a home and bring up children is a fundamental one and beyond the reach of any court." Court of Appeals of New York, Portnoy v. Strasser, 104 N.E.2d 895 (N.Y. 1952). Although parental rights and family freedoms are firmly established as "fundamental and beyond the reach of any court," lower courts and agencies have not prevented wholesale invasions of homes and families. Parental rights are under attack, and families across the nation are being harmed by a legal system that refuses to protect their fundamental rights. Senator Charles Grassley (R-IA) and Congressman Steve Largent (R-OK) have introduced legislation which will dramatically improve the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act of 1995 is sponsored by these and numerous other original co-sponsors. At the request of Senator Grassley, attorney Michael P. Farris of the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) has served as the chief draftsman of this legislation. Other major pro-family leaders and organizations have joined with HSLDA in promoting The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act including Beverly LaHaye of Concerned Women of America, Gary Bauer of Family Research Council, Dr. James Dobson of Focus on the Family, Phyllis Schlafly of Eagle Forum, and Ralph Reed of the Christian Coalition. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act (PRRA) does not manufacture a single new federal program or create a need for new bureaucrats at any level of government. Rather, it simply establishes the legal standard to be employed in judging cases where the right of parents comes in conflict with the decisions or policies of government officials. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act re-affirms the bonds of families by allowing parents to direct the upbringing of their children and make choices for their families while establishing the legal standard to determine when the government can interfere in the family. The PRRA clearly establishes the fundamental right to raise one's child. However, just as the rights to free speech or religious freedom set forth in the Bill of Rights have their limits, the PRRA does not allow parents to abuse their children, keep them uneducated, or deny life-saving medical treatment. The PRRA re-affirms the right of parents to make the decisions that are within the law, without the government looking over their shoulder. Why Do We Need a Parental Rights Act Now? The reason The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act is necessary is because the rights of parents have been slowly eroded away by numerous lower court decisions. The gradual erosion of parental freedom must be stopped now before it is too late. Below are numerous examples of how the rights of parents to educate, raise, discipline, and control their own children are being usurped in various court decisions. It is important to note that the Supreme Court employs two basic levels of protection in its analysis of constitutional rights. The higher level of protection is employed in cases involving "fundamental rights." Significantly lower levels of protections are provided to rights the Supreme Court has labeled "nonfundamental." For example, home school parents were thrilled by the excellent decision of the Supreme Court of Michigan in 1993, handled by the Home School Legal Defense Association, which declared that teacher's certification was unconstitutional as applied to religiously motivated home schooling parents (People v. DeJonge, 501 N.W. 2d 127, 1993). However, in a companion case decided the same day, the Michigan Supreme Court held that secular home schooling parents suffered no constitutional violation when forced to comply with the certification requirement (People v. Bennett, 501 N.W. 2d 88, 1993). The difference between these two decisions was simple, but profound. The Michigan court held that religious freedom was a fundamental right whereas "parents' rights" were "nonfundamental" in nature. Although there are a number of Supreme Court cases which make it clear that the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children is a fundamental right, lower courts have a very spotty record. Some of the higher courts plainly recognize that the constitution protects parental rights and family freedoms. This primary role of the parents in the upbringing of their children is now established beyond debate as an enduring American tradition. United States Supreme Court, Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205 (1972). The family is the principal conservator and transmitter of cherished values and traditions. Any invasion of the sanctity of the family, even with the loftiest motives, unavoidably threatens those traditions and values. Supreme Court of Utah, In re J.P., 648 P.2d 1364 (Utah 1982). The right of a parent, under natural law, to establish a home and bring up children is a fundamental one and beyond the reach of any court. Court of Appeals of New York, Portnoy v. Strasser, 104 N.E.2d 895 (N.Y. 1952). There are two constitutional texts which the Supreme Court has recognized as the source of parental rights protection. The provision of the Fourteenth Amendment which protects "life, liberty, and property" was the basis of the 1925 decision of Pierce v. Society of Sisters, which held that parental liberties were violated by an Oregon law which banned private schools. The Ninth Amendment declares that the failure to enumerate specific rights of the people does not mean that the rights are lost. This constitutional presumption in favor of the traditional rights of citizens was recognized and in place at the time of the adoption of the Bill of Rights. Parental rights have long been recognized as "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty." However, these constitutional protections are being ignored or misapplied by lower courts and agencies, resulting in the violation of parental rights and family freedoms. Court Decisions Which Usurp Parental Rights For example, the Supreme Court of Washington ruled that it was not a violation of parents' rights to remove a child from her family because she objected to their reasonable rules which were reasonably enforced. The parents had grounded their eighth-grade daughter because she wanted to smoke marijuana and sleep with her boyfriend. She objected, and the court removed her from the home. [In re Sumey, 94 Wash.2d 757, 621 P.2d 108 (1980)] A social worker testified under oath that if she received anonymous complaints against the Governor of Alabama, she would need to inspect his home, no matter what evidence was offered to rebut the allegations. [Transcript from trial court in H.R. v. Alabama Dept. of Human Resources, 609 So. 2d 477 (Ct. Civ. App. Ala. 1992)] Families challenged Illinois' practice of nude inspections of children, warrantless searches of homes, and failure to implement a probable cause standard for investigations of abuse. This suit was rejected, because the court held that the parents had consented to these practices by permitting the child abuse investigations. [E.Z. v. Coler, 603 F.Supp. 1546 (N.D.Ill. 1985), aff'd sub nom. Darryl H. v. Coler, 801 F.2d 893 (7th Cir. 1986)] When Maryland required every elementary school to provide comprehensive sex education for all students, parents went to federal court demanding an "opt-out" provision. The judge dismissed all their claims outright. [Cornwell v. State Board of Education, 314 F.Supp. 340 (D.Md. 1969), aff'd. 428 F.2d 471 (4th Cir. 1970), cert. den. 400 U.S. 942 (1970)] Parents in Chelmsford, Massachusetts were never told that their children would be required to sit through a ninety-minute presentation by "Hot, Sexy and Safer Productions, Inc." In this so-called "group sexual experience" a male child was told to lick a condom, after which a female student was told to pull the condom over his entire head and blow it up. [Brown v. Hot, Sexy and Safer Productions, Inc., CN 93-CV-11842K (D.Mass. filed Dec. 1993)] After the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states could require parental consent before a minor's abortion, California enacted exactly what the Court had permitted. Abortion activists filed suit against the law in a San Francisco courthouse, which ruled that under the California Constitution, a child's privacy right outweighed any rights of parents. [American Academy of Pediatrics v. Van de Kamp, 214 Cal.App.3d 831 (San Franciso Sup. Ct., 1989), aff'd sub nom. American Academy of Pediatrics v. Lungren, 26 Cal.App.4th 479 (Ct.App. 1994)] Kevin, aged 15, had "elephant man disease," which caused a large fold of skin to grow over the right side of his face. Kevin's mother wanted to wait until Kevin turned 21 before permitting any surgery. The doctors testified that the surgery was very risky, and offered no cure, and that waiting would decrease, not increase the risk. Even so, the judge overruled the mother's objections, declared Kevin a "neglected child," and ordered the series of operations. [In re Sampson, 65 Misc.2d 658, 317 N.Y.S.2d 641 (Fam.Ct. 1970), aff'd. 377 App.Div.2d 668, 323 N.Y.S.2d 253 (1971), aff'd. 29 N.Y.S.2d 900, 278 N.E.2d 918, 328 N.Y.S.2d 686 (1972)] A San Diego grand jury found that in child abuse cases in that county alone, family freedoms were violated in over three hundred cases. They found that 35 to 70 percent of the children who were taken from their families in San Diego County "should never have been removed from their parental homes." [See, "Sex, Lies, and County Government: Abuse Case Shows It All," The San Diego Union Tribune, July 19, 1992, 4C] One of the most major threats against parental freedom in America is coming form withou in the form of a treaty. President Clinton has ordered the U.S. to sign the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. The U.N. Committee on Children, which officially interprets the meaning of this treaty, has ruled that it requires Britain to outlaw corporal punishment, conduct public educational campaigns to cause society to accept the prohibition of corporal punishment, limit the rights of parents to withdraw their children from sex education classes, and change laws to increase the ability of children to participate in their parents' decisions concerning them. [Concluding Observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child: United Kingdom, CRC/C/15/Add.34 (Jan. 1995)] The dangers of this treaty, which has yet to be ratified by two-thirds of the U.S. Senate, are far reaching. What do American children and families need to be secure in their homes? We already have constitutional rights-we need legal remedies! We need an Act of Congress that lets states protect children, but makes sure they don't destroy families in the process. We need The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act. How Will The Parental Rightsand Responsibilities Act Protect Families? As can be seen above, traditional values and concepts are under constant attack. Social workers constantly tell parents that it is illegal to spank children. They're wrong, but such social workers can make the lives of innocent parents miserable in the process. School officials routinely invade the sanctity of the family with highly personal surveys and therapeutic programs based on relativistic values and anti-parent philosophies. Children are often told, "Nothing we say in this program should ever be shared outside this room." Lawyers and bureaucrats who cite tragic cases of abuse as grounds for opposing The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act ignore the fact that a child's most important right is to have an actively involved, loving parent to protect that child's interest. Besides The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act will actively fight child abuse by facilitating swift and just punishment for parents who abuse their children. Essentially, The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act draws a line in the sand. It declares that the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children is a fundamental right. The PRRA contains several answers to the hottest issues facing parents: When government officials claim that modest, reasonable spanking is illegal, parents can point to the PRRA to demonstrate that they have the right to lovingly administer reasonable physical discipline to their children. When social workers claim superior rights to make routine (nonlife-threatening) medical decisions for children, parents can point to the PRRA as support for the right of parents to choose among the available options. When school officials claim the right to trump the choices of parents in education, the PRRA provides the legal framework for parents to fight back. The PRRA does not mean that parents will win all cases, nor does it dictate the outcome in specific fact patterns. Rather, it enacts a specific legal standard which guarantees that courts will give parental rights the highest level of judicial deference. The PRRA gives a statutory, civil rights language protection which is absolutely consistent with the traditional understanding of the Constitution. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act makes explicit the fact that families and parents are irreplaceable. It sends a message the public officials that parental rights must be honored and a message to parents that parental responsibilities must be fulfilled. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act recognizes the fundamental authority of the family over the government. It's a simple way to limit government and, at the same time, strengthen the family. Why Should Congress Deal WithParental Rights in the First Place? The proper answer to that question must come from the text of the Constitution itself. Many believe that Congress has become drunk with power in the last forty years and the last thing Americans want is Congressional intervention in an area for which Congress has no constitutional authority. Simply put, Congress should stop doing things for which there is no constitutional mandate, and should do a good job at those few issues which are clearly enumerated in the Constitution. There is no grant of authority to Congress to legislate the details of family life. However, the 14th Amendment grants Congress explicit authority to pass legislation which serves to protect the constitutional rights of citizens. The problem with Congress is that oftentimes, its idea of protecting a right is to create yet another government program and subsidy. Such programs are normally a violation of the letter and spirit of the Constitution. However, for over 70 years the Fourteenth Amendment has been properly interpreted to serve as a national bulwark protecting citizens when state governments intervene in the sphere of authority reserved to parents. Again, when Oregon attempted to force all children to attend public schools in the 1920's, the Supreme Court correctly applied the Fourteenth Amendment to override the state's decision which invaded the parental authority. Under traditional constitutional doctrine, as well as the express language of the Fourteenth Amendment (Section 5), Congress has the responsibility and authority to protect the rights of citizens within these express areas. All early presidents and many founding fathers in Congress believed that all three branches of the federal government-not just the Supreme Court-have the authority to interpret the constitution. With that authority comes the responsibility to protect the constitutional rights of American citizens. To put it in simple words, Congress has no authority to regulate family life, but has express authority to protect the liberty of parents. Congress should be in the business of protecting liberty, not regulating our lives. The PRRA has strong possibilities for passing in this congressional session. Much ground work has been done and many co-sponsors have been secured. Chairman of key committees have promised support for The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act. However, the Children's Defense Fund and the National Education Association still wield a great deal of clout on Capitol Hill, and they can be expected to vigorously lobby to protect the legal prerogatives of bureaucrats. Using the pretense of "children's rights" these organizations will forcefully argue that government officials, and not parents, should have the ultimate authority to make decisions about the lives of children. The American family has been struggling to survive. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act will give families the needed relief and protection they need to preserve the family unit. Parents must act now and urge their Congressman and Senators to support The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act. No child can have a greater gift than a loving parent who is free to make responsible decisions without fear of unreasonable interference by the government. Who do you trust to make educational choices, medical choices and religious education decisions for you: parents or the government? Permission is granted to reproduce this report in its entirety. This report was produced by the legal staff of the National Center for Home Education, P.O. Box 125, Paeonian Springs, VA 22129, (540) 338-7600. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-4IA057-000942-B022-401http://www.learnathome.com:80/specrpts6.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215729 text/html 11153HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:52:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html Official Learn At Home Web Site:  National Center for Home Education:  Special Report #6 Page September 1995 We Need the Parental Rightsand Responsibilities Act Now! Overview: As a result of the recent changes in Congress, there is an ideal opportunity to pass H.R. 1946 and S. 984-the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act (PRRA). The purpose of this act is to restore the rights of parents to control the upbringing and training of their children, rights that have been eroded by conflicting court decisions. The PRRA would reaffirm parents' rights including the fundamental right to direct or provide the education of their children, control the religious training of their children, make medical decisions for their minor children, and administer corporal discipline for their children. The PRRA offers strong protection to parents: No federal, state, or local government or any official acting under color of law shall enter, shall interfere with or usurp the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children. Furthermore, the PRRA would mandate that courts apply the "compelling interest test," which requires the state to prove that its regulations and intervention concerning parental rights must be essential and the least restrictive means. The act would also allow for parents to recover attorney's fees. Although parental rights and family freedoms are firmly established as "fundamental and beyond the reach of any court," lower courts and agencies have not prevented wholesale invasions of homes and families. Parental rights are under attack, and families across the nation are being harmed by a legal system that refuses to protect their fundamental rights. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act does not manufacture a single new federal program or create a need for new bureaucrats at any level of government. Rather, it simply establishes the legal standard to be employed in judging cases where the right of parents comes in conflict with the decisions or policies of government officials. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act re-affirms the bonds of families by allowing parents to direct the upbringing of their children and make choices for their families while establishing the legal standard to determine when the government can interfere in the family. The PRRA clearly establishes the fundamental right to raise one's child. However, just as the rights to free speech or religious freedom set forth in the Bill of Rights have their limits, the PRRA does not allow parents to abuse their children, keep them uneducated, or deny life-saving medical treatment. The PRRA re-affirms the right of parents to make the decisions that are within the law, without the govern-ment looking over their shoulder. Senator Charles Grassley (R-IA) and Congressman Steve Largent (R-OK) have introduced legislation which will dramatically improve the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act of 1995 is sponsored by these and numerous other original co-sponsors. At the request of Senator Grassley, attorney Michael P. Farris of the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) has served as the chief draftsman of this legislation. Other major pro-family leaders and organizations have joined with HSLDA in promoting the Parental Rights Act including Beverly LaHaye of Concerned Women of America, Gary Bauer of Family Research Council, Dr. James Dobson of Focus on the Family, Phyllis Schlafly of Eagle Forum and Ralph Reed of the Christian Coalition. Why Do We Need a Parental Rights Act Now? The reason the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act is necessary is because the rights of parents have been slowly eroded away by numerous lower court decisions. The gradual erosion of parental freedom must be stopped now before it is too late. Below are numerous examples of how the rights of parents to educate, raise, discipline, and control their own children are being usurped in various court decisions. It is important to note that the Supreme Court employs two basic levels of protection in its analysis of constitutional rights. The higher level of protection is employed in cases involving "fundamental rights." Significantly lower levels of protections are provided to rights the Supreme Court has labeled "nonfundamental." For example, home school parents were thrilled by the excellent decision of the Supreme Court of Michigan in 1993, handled by the Home School Legal Defense Association, which declared that teacher's certification was unconstitutional as applied to religiously motivated home schooling parents. (People v. DeJonge, 501 N.W. 2d 127, 1993). However, in a companion case decided the same day, the Michigan Supreme Court held that secular home schooling parents suffered no constitutional violation when forced to comply with the certification requirement. (People v. Bennett, 501 N.W. 2d 88, 1993). The difference between these two decisions was simple, but profound. The Michigan court held that religious freedom was a fundamental right whereas "parents' rights" were "nonfundamental" in nature. Although there are a number of Supreme Court cases which make it clear that the right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children is a fundamental right, lower courts have a very spotty record. Some of the higher courts plainly recognize that the constitution protects parental rights and family freedoms. There are two constitutional texts which the Supreme Court has recognized as the source of parental rights protection. The provision of the Fourteenth Amendment which protects "life, liberty, and property" was the basis of the 1925 decision of Pierce v. Society of Sisters, which held that parental liberties were violated by an Oregon law which banned private schools. The Ninth Amendment declares that the failure to enumerate specific rights of the people does not mean that the rights are lost. This constitutional presumption in favor of the traditional rights of citizens was recognized and in place at the time of the adoption of the Bill of Rights. Parental rights have long been recognized as "implicit in the concept of ordered liberty." However, these constitutional protections are being ignored or misapplied by lower courts and agencies, resulting in the violation of parental rights and family freedoms. Court Decisions Which Usurp Parental Rights For example, the Supreme Court of Washington ruled that it was not a violation of parents' rights to remove a child from her family because she objected to their reasonable rules which were reasonably enforced. The parents had grounded their eighth-grade daughter because she wanted to smoke marijuana and sleep with her boyfriend. She objected, and the court removed her from the home. [In re Sumey, 94 Wash.2d 757, 621 P.2d 108 (1980)]. A social worker testified under oath that if she received anonymous complaints against the Governor of Alabama, she would need to inspect his home, no matter what evidence was offered to rebut the allegations. [Transcript from trial court in H.R. v. Alabama Dept. of Human Resources, 609 So. 2d 477 (Ct. Civ. App. Ala. 1992)]. Families challenged Illinois' practice of nude inspections of children, warrantless searches of homes, and failure to implement a probable cause standard for investigations of abuse. This suit was rejected, because the court held that the parents had consented to these practices by permitting the child abuse investigations. [E.Z. v. Coler, 603 F.Supp. 1546 (N.D.Ill. 1985), aff'd sub nom. Darryl H. v. Coler, 801 F.2d 893 (7th Cir. 1986)]. Parents in Chelmsford, Massachusetts were never told that their children would be required to sit through a ninety-minute presentation by "Hot, Sexy and Safer Productions, Inc." In this so-called "group sexual experience" a male child was told to lick a condom, after which a female student was told to pull the condom over his entire head and blow it up. [Brown v. Hot, Sexy and Safer Productions, Inc., CN 93-CV-11842K (D.Mass. filed Dec. 1993)]. A San Diego grand jury found that in child abuse cases in that county alone, family freedoms were violated in over three hundred cases. They found that 35 to 70 percent of the children who were taken from their families in San Diego County "should never have been removed from their parental homes." [See "Sex, Lies, and County Government: Abuse Case Shows It All," The San Diego Union Tribune, July 19, 1992, 4C]. What do American children and families need to be secure in their homes? We already have constitutional rights-we need legal remedies! We need an Act of Congress that lets states protect children, but makes sure they don't destroy families in the process. We need the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act. What You Can Do: 1. Call your two U.S. Senators and U.S. Representative at (202) 224-3121 (Senate Switchboard) or (202) 225-3121 (House Switchboard). Every voter in each household should call to urge their Senators and Representative to actively support the PRRA. In the House the PRRA is known as H.R. 1946; in the Senate it's S. 984. (Already, volunteers in the National Center for Home Education's Congressional Action Program who live near the D.C. area have visited most Congressional offices with a packet of information and the full text of PRRA). 2. Let them know that you want them to support the Parents' Rights and Responsibilities Act (PRRA). Explain that the PRRA will secure and affirm a parent's rights to direct the upbringing and training of their children as guaranteed under the 14th Amendment. This special report was prepared by the legal staff of the National Center for Home Education. Permission is granted to reprint this report in its entirety. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-5IA057-000942-B022-411http://www.learnathome.com:80/specrpts7.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215740 text/html 5691HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:52:39 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html Official Learn At Home Web Site:  National Center for Home Education:  Special Report #7 Page List of Cosponsors The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act U. S. H o u s e o f R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s * H. R. 1 9 4 6 Key Sponsors: Steve Largent (R-OK), Mike Parker (R-MS) Wayne Allard (R-CO)p Dick Armey (R-TX) Spencer Bachus (R-AL)* Bill Baker (R-CA) * Richard Baker (R-LA)* Cass Ballenger (R-NC)* Bob Barr (R-GA) p Bill Barrett (R-NE) Roscoe Bartlett (R-MD) * Joe Barton (R-TX) * Ed Bryant (R-TN) * Jim Bunning (R-KY) p Richard Burr (R-NC) Sonny Callahan (R-AL) Ken Calvert (R-CA) Dave Camp (R-MI) Saxby Chambliss (R-GA) Helen Chenoweth (R-ID) * Jon Christensen (R-NE) * Dick Chrysler (R-MI) Bob Clement (D-TN) Howard Coble (R-NC) * Tom A. Coburn (R-OK) * Michael Collins (R-GA) Larry Combest (R-TX) Wes Cooley (R-OR) Philip Crane (R-IL) * Michael D. Crapo (R-ID) * Barbara Cubin (R-WY) *p Duke Cunningham (R-CA) Tom Davis (R-VA) Nathan Deal (R-GA) Tom DeLay (R-TX) * Jay Dickey (R-AR) John Doolittle (R-CA) * Bob Dornan (R-CA) David Dreier (R-CA) John Duncan (R-TN) Bill Emerson (R-MO) Thomas Ewing (R-IL) Jack Fields (R-TX) * Mark Foley (R-FL) p Michael Forbes (R-NY) Jon Fox (R-PA) * David Funderburk (R-NC)p Robert Goodlatte (R-VA) * Lindsey Graham (R-SC) Gilbert Gutknecht (R-MN) Mel Hancock (R-MO) * Dennis J. Hastert (R-IL) Richard "Doc" Hastings (R-WA) * J.D. Hayworth (R-AZ) * Joel Hefley (R-CO) Frederick Heineman (R-NC) Wally Herger (R-CA) Van Hilleary (R-TN) * Peter Hoekstra (R-MI)* John Hostettler (R-IN) Duncan Hunter (R-CA) Y. Tim Hutchinson (R-AR) * Bob Inglis (R-SC) * Ernest J. Istook (R-OK) * Walter Jones (R-NC) John Kasich (R-OH) p Jay Kim (R-CA) Jack Kingston (R-GA) Joe Knollenberg (R-MI) Ray LaHood (R-IL) Tom Latham (R-IA) Greg Laughlin (R-TX) Ron Lewis (R-KY) *p John Linder (R-GA) William Lipinski (D-IL) Bob Livingston (R-LA) p Bill McCollum (R-FL) * Jim McCrery (R-LA) John McHugh (R-NY) p Scott McInnis (R-CO)p David McIntosh (R-IN) Jack Metcalf (R-WA) * G.V. Montgomery (D-MS) Sue Myrick (R-NC) Mark W. Neumann (R-WI) * Robert Ney (R-OH) Charlie Norwood (R-GA) Jim Nussle (R-IA) Michael Oxley (R-OH) p Ron Packard (R-CA) Bill Paxon (R-NY) Collin Peterson (D-MN)  Thomas E. Petri (R-WI) Richard Pombo (R-CA) * John E. Porter (R-IL) James Quillen (R-TN) Nick Rahall (D-WV) Ralph Regula (R-OH) p Frank Riggs (R-CA) Pat Roberts (R-KS) Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) * Charlie Rose (D-NC) Matt Salmon (R-AZ) * Joe Scarborough (R-FL) p Andrea Seastrand (R-CA) * James Sensenbrenner (R-WI) * John Shadegg (R-AZ) Bud Shuster (R-PA) p Joe Skeen (R-NM) p Christopher Smith (R-NJ)p Linda Smith (R-WA) * Nick Smith (R-MI) Gerald Solomon (R-NY) Mark Souder (R-IN) Floyd Spence (R-SC) p Cliff Stearns (R-FL) Charles Stenholm (D-TX) Steve Stockman (R-TX) * Bob Stump (R-AZ) p Randy Tate (R-WA) Billy Tauzin (R-LA) Charles Taylor (R-NC) Bill Thornberry (R-TX) Todd Tiahrt (R-KS) * Barbara Vucanovich (R-NV) p Zach Wamp (R-TN) * J.C. Watts (R-OK) p David Weldon (R-FL) Gerald Weller (R-IL) Roger Wicker (R-MS) Frank Wolf (R-VA) Don Young (R-AK) TOTAL: 132 Contacted by CAP: 82 (62%) (current as of ) S e n a t e * S. 9 8 4 Key Sponsor: Charles Grassley (R-IA) Thad Cochran (R-MS) pq Bob Dole (R-KS) p Lauch Faircloth (R-NC) q Bill Frist (R-TN) Jesse Helms (R-NC) *pq James Inhofe (R-OK) * Trent Lott (R-MS) *q Connie Mack (R-FL) *p Alan Simpson (R-WY) * John Warner (R-VA) *q Conrad Burns (R-MT) TOTAL: 12 Contacted by CAP: 12 (100%) (current as of ) Contacted by CAP: * May 3, 1995. p June 28, 1995. q September 21, 1995. October 24, 1995. November 15, 1995.  December 4, 1995. March 8, 1996. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-6IA057-000942-B022-424http://www.learnathome.com:80/alert1.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215750 text/html 1142HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:52:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html Official Learn At Home Web Site:  National Center for Home Education:  Alert #1 Page There are no alerts for your attention at this time. When the National Center identifies issues which require an Urgent Alert status, this page will provide you with the information needed to take the appropriate action. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-7IA057-000942-B023-10http://www.learnathome.com:80/22b2_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215806 text/html 83854HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:52:57 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  News and Court Report:  Volume 12, Number 2:  April  May 1996 The Home School Court Report Washington, D.C. Published by Home School Legal Defense Association The articles contained in this publication have been prepared for, and are intended to provide information that may be useful to members of the Home School Legal Defense Association. The Association does not necessarily warrant this information. The reader must evaluate this information in light of the unique circumstances of any particular situation and must determine independently the applicability of this information thereto. All material in The Home School Court Report is copyright 1996 by the Home School Legal Defense Association. Contents: National Legislative Strategy Day De-briefing Michael News Petition Denied Press Clippings: Home Schooling in the News Cover Story: Rally Draws Record Crowd to Indiana Capital National Center Reports: Freedom Watch PSAT Develops Home School Codes Across the States Unsung Heroes Revisited Prayer & Praise Litigation Report: How our Cases are Stacking Up From the Mouths of Babes, Part II Presidents Page: Old Stories Tell the Price of Freedom Michael Farris Debates Dr. William Spady on Outcome Based Education NATIONAL LEGISLATIVE STRATEGY DAY DE-BRIEFING Pooling their experience and desire to help families, home school leaders representing 48 states gathered in Washington, D.C., on March 7 for the National Legislative Strategy Day sponsored by Home School Legal Defense Association. A banquet the evening before gave leaders a chance to renew old acquaintances and make new friends. But early Thursday morning, participants were ready to seriously study the issues which will affect home schooling in the next year. HSLDA attorneys Michael Farris, Christopher Klicka, and Doug Phillips briefed the home school leaders on the latest developments and strategies concerning a host of federal issues. The topics included the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act, the national registry and identification system in the Immigration bill, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, abolishing the federal role in education, and the Careers Act. Several U.S. Senators and Representatives addressed the gathering on these issues, as well. Even with the days intense schedule, leaders found moments to laugh together, share hopeful stories from their home states, and affirm the hard work of legislators who want to help the family. Thunderous applause greeted each of the congressmen who took time out of their busy schedules to address the group. Rep. Steve Stockman (R-TX) rallied the troops by calling out, Christ is risen! eliciting the hearty response, He is risen indeed! On March 8, HSLDAs Congressional Action Program coordinated a full lobbying day on Capitol Hill to coincide with the home school leaders visit to Washington. As constituents, many of the leaders were able to meet directly with their U.S. Senators and Representatives. Afterwards, the leaders returned to their states, armed with information to spread throughout their home school networks. Back to top of the page. MICHAEL NEWS PETITION DENIED Michael News petition for writ of habeas corpus hearing was held on March 18, 1996. Michael Farris, along with Herb Titus and lead counsel Ronald D. Ray, appeared before Judge Paul Friedman in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia to argue that the federal courts should accept Army Specialist News case before the military courts have finished the appellate process. Attorney Robert Shapiro (not the same attorney who represented O.J. Simpson) argued for the government that the military should retain jurisdiction over Michael News discharge. Ten days later, Judge Friedman denied the petition. In his 18-page opinion, Judge Friedman signaled that the New case is very important, but like the military judge he refused to rule on the merits of the case. Friedman wrote, The consequences of holding that a serviceman on active duty can unilaterally escape military jurisdiction . . . could be disruptive to military discipline, obedience, and confidence. Colonel Ronald D. Ray, said of the ruling: The Clinton Administration admitted and does not dispute any of the defenses facts presented in the Petition for Writ of Habeas Corpus. The federal judge, like the military judge failed to rule upon the heart of the casethat the President clearly lacks any authority to order the wearing of the unauthorized UN uniform or the fact that the entire deployment to Macedonia was unlawful, not having the proper Congressional approval for this UN military mission staffed by U.S. soldiers. Judge Friedmans decision will be appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals. Meanwhile, the next step in the military court proceedings will be for General Montgomery Meigs, the Commanding General, to rule on the bad-conduct discharge. Colonel Ray will travel to Germany to plead Michael News case before the general. Michael New Defense Fund P.O. Box 1136 Crestwood, KY 40014 Back to top of the page. PRESS CLIPPINGS: HOME SCHOOLING IN THE NEWS Arizona Daily Star Tucson, Arizona Sunday, December 31, 1995 A Rebuttal Guest Comment A Public School Principal Praises Home Schooling by Jim Green Your Dec. 10 editorial, Trust but verify, has certainly given me much cause for concern. I believe your focus on home schooling was good, healthy and thought provoking, but Id feel better if you more accurately portrayed the public school system. I am a public school principal. My school, the Ida Flood Dodge Traditional School of Educational Excellence, a Magnet Middle School, is home to students from about 60 public and private elementaries. We are ethnically diverse and a rough representation of the Tucson Unified School District middle school. My experience (5.5 years in this job) indicates that all is not wellor getting betterin public education. Your editorial closed quoting Ted Sizers paradoxical ideal of a loose system that has rigor. I maintain that our present public system is a loose system that lacks rigor. Several points in your editorial demand attention. Your lead paragraph opines that home schooled children need a modest, unobtrusive, but still rigorous testing regime. Later you write or perhaps districts could administer brief, focused tests every two years, the minimum frequency professionals say can aid students and parents. At present tests are administered in fourth, seventh and 11th grades to public school students. A student can fail all these tests and much of the course work and still be promoted. I my district, a seventh-grade student can fail the test, fail all four quarters of language arts and mathematics and still be promoted. Worse, some schools promote all students regardless of effort. Clever, but misguided, students know these conditions and are content to idly give away their academic heritage. You suggest home school students showing poor progress should be returned to public education. Where would you send the multitude of public school students doing poorly? Your article quotes Mary Grace Wendel, an education service coordinator for the Pima County School Superintendents office. Wendels statement that parent attempts to avoid violence and gang problems are negative rationales for home school is her opinion. I would term that a positive rational. In spite of the police sweeps in downtown Tucson, nothing is really being done about truancy. Juveniles roam this city in spite of school attendance law. I know several home schoolers and they are doing a fine job of education. Your suspicion that home school may mean no school is no more likely to be accurate than to say public school may mean no school. I do not mean to bash public schools. I am a public school product; my children were; and my grandchildren all are public school students. Public school is my livelihood, and two of my children are public school teachers. I am proud of Dodge Middle School, our dedicated, wonderful staff and of the vast majority of our hard working, achieving students. However, all is not well in public education. It is my opinion the problems of home schooling pale by comparison with the problems of public school. I also believe that if we appropriately address public school problems that home schooling will essentially disappear. Home schooling consists of hard work with multiple preparations for up to six subjects per day per student, multiplied by the number of children. In public school, we cannot require a teacher to do more than three preparations. Surely if we can provide a safe, secure environment and a stimulating academic program, then home schooling will be difficult to justify. However, if we fail to do so, home schooling may be the majority classroom in the not too distant future. Jim Green is the principal of Dodge Middle School. Minneapolis Star Tribune Minneapolis, Minnesota February 21, 1996 Recently, as I sat in a gathering of enthusiastic home educators, I was struck by the rich common enterprise they have launchedan enterprise that flourishes despite the absence of central planning or government assistance. . . . In the sweep of history, this is a radical idea, and one still frequently challenged in many corners of the world. Yet in that roomand in the vibrant grass-roots movement represented thereI saw confirmation that Americas founders were right to put such faith in common people. Katherine Kersten Back to top of the page. COVER STORY: RALLY DRAWS RECORD CROWD TO INDIANA CAPITOL Nearly 2,000 parents and children gathered inside the Capitol Building in Indianapolis on Monday, March 4, making the Parental Rights Rally the second largest in the history of the state. As the parental rights bill came under increased attack, the Indiana Association of Home Educators and Home School Legal Defense Association worked together to quickly organize a rally for the following week. On the day of the rally, home schooling families began arriving in Indianapolis from all over the state. The crowd in the capital spilled over from the main hall into the upper balconies and stairways, squeezing in to hear Christopher Klicka and several state legislators speak about parental rights. After the rally, children delivered stuffed animals to each legislator. Every animal wore a tag around its neck which read, Dear Representative/Senator, My parents know best. All tags were signed by the children who donated the animals. Although the rally was covered by many local television stations and newspapers, it was given only the barest notice in the largest Indiana paper, the Indianapolis Star, which has been running articles featuring the Indiana State Teachers Associations opposition to the PRA. Indiana parents continue to lobby their state representatives in hopes that the PRA will come up again in the next legislative session. They hope repeated positive contact will convince legislators that parents really do know best. H.B. 1346: THE OUTCOME Indiana went on a roller-coaster ride in February and March, as home schoolers went into a pitched battle against the Indiana State Teachers Association, Planned Parenthood, and the rest of Hillary Clintons village people. In November 1995, a Marion County Superior Court judge ruled that parents have no fundamental Fourteenth Amendment right to direct the secular education of their children. This ruling undercuts the constitutional basis for home schooling, and turns the right to educate children at home into a government privilege. Indiana home schools are treated as nonaccredited private schools, but this court ruling would subject that status to the whims of the legislature. Home schoolers fought back in a massive rally at the Indiana state capitol on March 4, 1996. Close to 2,000 people gathered to ask their legislators to send a strong signal in favor of parental rights by supporting House Bill 1346. This legislation would guarantee that parents have the fundamental right to direct the upbringing of their children and guarantee parents certain due process rights during child welfare investigations. The size of the crowd set records and made a significant impact on the entire legislature. The legislature was supposed to wrap up its business some forty-eight hours after the rally, but the battle over parental rights dragged the session out for the rest of the week. Although H.B. 1346 passed, the section declaring parents have a fundamental right to direct the upbringing of their child was deleted. Senator Howard Luke Kenley [R-20th], who claims to be a pro-family conservative, singlehandedly forced the removal of the parental rights language. The Indiana State Teachers Association hot-line message has been thanking Senator Kenley for stopping the parental rights bill. Home School Legal Defense Associations Michael Farris, Christopher Klicka, and Scott Somerville all worked together to try to help Senator Kenley and other legislators understand the constitutional dimensions of parents rights, and to help draft constitutionally appropriate language protecting parents rights. Even through the parental rights language was removed from H.B. 1346, the House and Senate did pass it in an amended form. As now written, it trims back the child abuse investigations, puts some teeth in the laws against false and malicious child abuse reports, and sets up a study committee to document how parental rights are being trampled in Indiana. A special thanks goes to Representative John Padfield who led the charge for parents rights. The net result? A first down, not a touchdown. Parents are better off than they were, but there is still a long way to go. The Indiana Association of Home Educators and the Home School Legal Defense Association are committed to continuing this battleeven though it will mean direct confrontations with the teachers unionsuntil parents rights are clearly recognized under Indiana law. Back to top of the page. NATIONAL CENTER REPORTS: FREEDOM WATCH The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act (H.R. 1946/S. 984) The list of co-sponsors for the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act (PRRA) has grown to more than 130 in the House and 10 in the Senate. Home School Legal Defense Association and the National Center for Home Education have been working with the congressional sponsors to fine-tune the language of the bill. On March 7, the National Center sponsored a legislative briefing on Capitol Hill for state home school leaders from 46 states. Many congressmen addressed the group on the PRRA. On March 8, the National Center organized an intensive lobbying day with our Congressional Action Program volunteers and visiting state home school leaders. Many of the participants were able to personally visit with U.S. Senators and Representatives to gain support for the PRRA and immigration/tracking amendment (see accompanying article). The House and Senate sub-committees currently considering the PRRA are expected to issue favorable reports. At this time, however, no dates have been set for the PRRA to be considered by the full Judiciary Committees in either chamber. Action: Home schoolers need to continue to deliver a steady stream of calls to their Senators and Representatives to build support for the PRRA. The implications of this bill make it a priority. The U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child Thirty-seven Senators have expressed their opposition in writing to the ratification of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, the battle is not over. Left-wing childrens rights groups are heavily lobbying the Clinton Administration and selected Senators for ratification. On January 17, 1996, UNICEF issued a press release titled, Child Rights Convention Close to Universal Acceptance With 186 Ratifications; Only Six More to Go. It began, The United Nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF) today announced that only six countries remained until universal ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Convention has broken all records as the most widely accepted human rights treaty in history with the ratification by 186 state parties. . . . The only six countries in the world which have yet to ratify are Switzerland, United States, Oman, Saudi Arabia, United Emirates, and Somalia. Switzerland and the United States have already signed indicating their intention to ratify. . . . Ratification of the Convention obligates governments to bring their laws in line with the Convention. . . . But ratification of the Convention is itself just another step in a much bigger process. Governments, communities, and children themselves must work together to make the Convention a living charter for childrens rights. In bringing a new legal focus of childrens issues, countries are now enacting new laws, and amending national legislation to conform with the Conventions provisions. Special legal codes for children have been promulgated. Reports to the Committee of the Rights of the Child, and other sources cites specific examples of basic measures countries are taking to comply with the Convention. In Mexico, for instance, the constitutionally recognized Convention is considered supreme law of the land. Action: Remain vigilant. Remember, unratified treaties never die; they can always be brought up for a vote. Home schoolers are encouraged to continue sending letters to their Senators, reminding them to vote against ratification. Abolishing the Federal Role in Education Home School Legal Defense Association and the National Center for Home Education are continuing to meet with Senators and Congressmen to promote the Restoring Local Schools Act. Home schoolers should wait to encourage their legislators to sign on as co-sponsors until a sponsor is secured and a bill number assigned. A number of the of the Republican presidential candidates advocated abolishment of the Department of Education. This is significant, because the more that the issue is debated, the more palatable abolishment becomes to the body politic. The Alexis de Tocqueville Institution of Arlington, Virginia, has released a paper entitled, Who Got It Right? What Proponents and Opponents of the Creation of the Department of Education Promised and Predicted. The two aspects of the study which are particularly significant are a) an account of the origin of the Department of Education, and b) statistics showing the poor track record of the Department of Education. The paper, authored by John E. Berthoud, Ph.D., Vice President of the Alexis de Tocqueville Institution, focuses on six key areas: 1) benefits for school children; 2) overhead & bureaucracy; 3) efficiency; 4) local control; 5) cost; and 6) values. For each area Dr. Berthoud quotes what the supporters promised, what the opponents predicted (see below), and then, based on the data of the last 17 years, demonstrates the reality that Department of Education has reduced local control, increased the cost, reduced the efficiency, and eroded the values of public education. Copies of Who Got It Right? are available from the National Center for Home Education, P.O. Box 125, Paeonian Springs, VA 22129; (540) 338-5600. With your request, please include a self-addressed, 9x13 envelope, metered or stamped with 78 postage. Opponents to the establishment of the Department of Education: Senator Moynihan and I have joined in opposing this bill. We have both been teachers for a long time. But it appears that our colleagues would rather listen to the unfounded pleas of people who know only that there are problems in our schools today, but who do not know how to solve them. . . . I wish someone would tell me how this new department is going to make our children literate? Or how it will erase the violence that has erupted in our schools? . . . Senator S.I. Hayakawa [R-CA, and former President of San Francisco State College], Congressional Record, September 24, 1979, Page 25826. This is a back room deal, born out of squalid politics. Everything we had thought we would not see happening to education is happening here. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan [D-NY],Congressional Record, July 11, 1979, Page 18038. No matter what anyone says, the Department of Education will not just write checks to local school boards. They will meddle in everything. I do not want that. Representative Pat Schroeder [CO-D] Congressional Record, September 27, 1979, Page 26534. An integral part of the NEA design is to siphon ever more control of public education from the grass roots to Washington, closer to its own powerful lobbying influence, farther from the parents and taxpayers who elect the school boards and pay the bills. Senator John Ashbrook [R-OH], Congressional Record, September 27, 1979, Page 26529. The Immigration Control and Financial Responsibilities Act Senate Bill 269 and its companion bill, H.R. 2202, provide classic examples of a case of the cure being worse than the disease. Attempting to deal with the nations illegal immigration problem, these bills create a greater problem by proposing the establishment of a national database to verify the employment eligibility of every American worker. The National Center for Home Education and Home School Legal Defense Association oppose all national tracking systems and are working against those aspects of this legislation. A diverse coalition of more than fifty organizations has formed to oppose the identification and tracking provisions in these bills. The National Center and HSLDA have signed a coalition letter addressed to the United States Senate expressing unqualified opposition to anything resembling a national worker identification card, national worker registry, or any other comprehensive national database. The National Center also formed another coalition comprised of many pro- family groups which has had a positive impact as well. In the Senate, the full Judiciary Committee mark up for S. 269 began on February 29, 1996. The coalition hopes to split the bill in half, separating the legal and illegal immigration sections. Senators Russell Feingold (D-WI) and Spencer Abraham (R-MI) are working with our coalition to kill, by floor amendment, the national tracking registry. Knowing that the situation was grim, the National Center launched a surgical strike fax alert on March 4 asking home schoolers to call members of the Judiciary Committee and urge support of the Abraham/Feingold amendment. The amendment failed in the Judiciary Committee by a 9 to 9 vote. The split in the vote, however, indicates that the amendment will be successful on the Senate floor. Meanwhile, Feingold and Abraham have introduced S. 1535, which removes the national registry requirements, increases the penalties for illegal immigration, and boosts law enforcement. It is expected to be voted on in the full Senate in mid-April. In the House, a floor vote on H.R. 2202 took place in the U.S. House of Representatives on March 20. Representative Steve Chabot (R-OH) offered a floor amendment to kill the registry portion of the House version of the bill. The National Center and Home School Legal Defense Association launched a nationwide alert to remove the onerous provisions of the bill which would create an expanded national registry and require employers to call a 1-800-big-brother number to seek approval before hiring someone. Although the Chabot amendment failed, the thousands of calls pouring into the House effectively killed Representative Elton Galleglys (R-CA) amendment by a vote of 86 ayes to 331 nays (14 members did not vote). The Gallegly amendment would have made the 1-800-big-brother number mandatory. Also, the calls contributed to Lamar Smith, the sponsor of the bill, changing the national registry provision from mandatory to voluntary just days before the vote. Action: Home schoolers and all concerned citizens need to immediately contact their U.S. Senators and ask them to vote for the Abraham/Feingold amendment to eliminate all national registry provisions to S. 269. Back to top of the page. PSAT Develops Home School Codes For many years, home schoolers taking the PSAT have had difficulty filling in the section which asks for the school code. PSAT has now established Home School Codes. HOME SCHOOL CODES Home schooled students need to enter the 6-digit Home School code for their state in Section 6a on their answer sheets. For example, if there are home schooled students taking the test at your school who reside in Georgia, tell them to enter the code 991199 in Section 6a and Home School Georgia in Section 6b. Also the test supervisor will need to enter the appropriate code in Section 4: Other Schools on the 1995 PSAT/NMSQT Supervisors Report. 990199 Alabama 990299 Alaska 990399 Arizona 990499 Arkansas 990599 California 990699 Colorado 990799 Connecticut 990899 Delaware 990999 District of Columbia 991099 Florida 991199 Georgia 991299 Hawaii 991399 Idaho 991499 Illinois 991599 Indiana 991699 Iowa 991799 Kansas 991899 Kentucky 991999 Louisiana 992099 Maine 992199 Maryland 992299 Massachusetts 992399 Michigan 992499 Minnesota 992599 Mississippi 992699 Missouri 992799 Montana 992899 Nebraska 992999 Nevada 993099 New Hampshire 993199 New Jersey 993299 New Mexico 993399 New York 993499 North Carolina 993599 North Dakota 993699 Ohio 993799 Oklahoma 993899 Oregon 993999 Pennsylvania 994099 Rhode Island 994199 South Carolina 994299 South Dakota 994399 Tennessee 994499 Texas 994599 Utah 994699 Vermont 994799 Virginia 994899 Washington 994999 West Virginia 995099 Wisconsin 995199 Wyoming 995499 Puerto Rico & U.S Territories 995599 Outside the U.S. Back to top of the page. ACROSS THE STATES CALIFORNIA: CORPORAL PUNISHMENTIS IT A NO-NO? The number of Home School Legal Defense Association member families who are contacted by social workers continues to rise. Contacts are based upon either anonymous or identified individual complaints alleging that the families are abusing and/or neglecting their children. One constant theme throughout the complaints is that the type of discipline the parents administer to the children is abusive (i.e. spanking). Many people do not believe any child should be disciplined with corporal punishment. But despite the fact that most social workers regularly tell parents they do not have a right to spank their children, or that they can only spank their children with their hand, this is not the law in California. The law provides that reasonable, age-appropriate spanking cannot of itself be considered abuse or neglect of a child. There is nothing in the California statutes that prohibits a parent from using an object, other than the hand, to administer the corporal punishment. It must be clearly stated, however, that any abuse to a child which occurs during administration of corporal punishment will be presumed child abuse by the child protective industry. The burden will be on the parent to demonstrate otherwise. In light of the above, here are a few suggestions advocated by child psychiatrists and pediatricians for parents who use corporal punishment as one of the means of disciplining their children: 1. Do not spank your children or anyone elses children in public or outside the confines of your home. The windows and doors of your home should be secured when administering corporal discipline. Spanking should be done in private. 2. Avoid spanking someone elses child unless you have clear written authority to do so. 3. Do not administer corporal discipline when angry. A spanking is most effective administered immediately after the childs offense. 4. Use corporal discipline only for clearly understood and intentional disobedience. 5. Clearly explain to the child why corporal discipline is being administered. 6. After the discipline, always affectionately express your love for your child. A verbal review of the offense and verbal reassurance of the parents unconditional love for the child should be conveyed. 7. Spanking should always be administered with regard for the childs age and development. School Districts Assert Authority Public school districts continue to attempt to assert authority over private schools that they simply do not have. For example, one school recently sent out to private/home schools an Application for Exemption From Attendance at a Public School. The application required pupil information, including name, address, date of birth, and grade; and parent or legal guardian information. The cover letter requested the private/home school administrator to indicate what exemption the parent/administrator is claiming, i.e., the tutorial exemption, the private school exemption, or the independent study exemption. The application asked the parent to provide information regarding the tutor, the private school, or the public school administering the independent study program. It is true that California law does give public school districts the authority to verify that a child not enrolled in public school meets one of the attendance exemptions. However, that verification is to be initiated by a complaint that a parent or guardian does not have his child in a legal exemption from public school attendance. Some school district officials view home schooling as legal only through the tutorial exemptionwhich means instruction is done by a certified teacher. If the private school affidavit lists six students or less, these districts presume it is a home school and send a letter accompanied by a form for the parents to complete and return. In most cases, the public school does not know the names, ages, or number of children who are of compulsory school age in the family. The form is simply a fishing expeditionwithout the names and ages of the children, the public school does not have sufficient information to pursue a truancy complaint. HSLDA continues to inform such school districts that the private schools will not respond to this type of inquiry and that the form exceeds the authority of the school district as pronounced in the California Education Code. Lucia Mar Unified School District Requests Proof of Certification The Lucia Mar Unified School District, a school district in San Louis Obispo County, sent a letter to all the small private schools that had filed private school affidavits indicating that the only legal way to home school was under the exemption which requires the tutor to be a certified teacher. The parents were told that if they did not send a copy of their teaching certificate to the district by March 3, 1996, their private school affidavit would be referred to the School Attendance Review Board (SARB). The implication of this threat is that the school district would challenge their right to home school under the private school exemption. The school district indicated that the letter was sent at the instruction of the State Department of Education. The letter also urged parents to attend a meeting for the purpose of learning about the independent study program the school district is planning to launch in September 1996. Michael Smith told HSLDA members not to attend the meeting and assured the parents that their private school legally exempts their children from the requirement of being instructed in a public school or tutored by a certified teacher. In addition, Vice President Smith forwarded a letter to the Assistant Superintendent informing the school district of its incorrect interpretation of the law in California as it relates to home schoolers. The letter advised the school district that the SARB did not have any authority over private schools, only over students alleged to be truant. The students in attendance in the private schools which received the letter are exempt from public school attendance. Therefore, the SARB has no authority at all over the students enrolled and receiving instruction in the private schools. The school district responded by letter to the families, cancelling the scheduled independent study program meeting and apologizing for any misunderstanding the letter may have created. However, there has been no indication whether the Lucia Mar Unified School District will turn over the home educating families private school affidavits to the SARB. Stay tuned for further developments. Los Angeles County Assesses Processing Fee HSLDA has been informed by home schoolers in Los Angeles County that they have received phone calls from the LA County Board of Education informing them that their private school affidavits have not been properly filed because they failed to pay the $25.00 processing fee. The school official informs the parents they are not legal and tells them where to send the processing fee. HSLDA instructed our member families not to pay the processing fee and to forward their affidavits directly to the Department of Education in Sacramento via certified mail with a return receipt requested. Member families who filed their affidavit and received the return receipt need not be concerned about receiving such a call. Simply inform any caller from the Los Angeles County Board of Education that you have filed the affidavit with the Superintendent of Public Instruction as required by the private school law (Ed. Code 48222) and you have a certified mail return receipt as proof that it was received and properly filed with the State Board of Education. There is nothing further you need to do. However, any member family who receives further contact by telephone or letter should immediately contact the HSLDA legal department for guidance. IOWA: FAMILY FIGHTS BACK AGAINST DHS Howard and Debbie Taylor are a typical Iowa home schooling family, with this difference: Debbies mother is described by her whole family as paranoid, and Debbies sister is a public school teacher. When Howard and Debbie spanked their three-year-old at a family gathering last year, Debbies mother and sister went ballistic. They threatened to call social services immediately and have the children taken away. Grandmothers have rights! Aunts have rights! they shouted, as Howard and Debbie gathered up their children and fled (with the remains of a birthday cake in their arms) from the home. One year later, those threats came true. Social workers appeared at the door demanding to see the children. Debbie refused. The social worker went to court asking for an order to enter the home and talk to the children. The judge, acting completely contrary to law, wrote out a court order to seize the children and bring them to the courthouse. After hours of interrogation, the social workers had blown the original allegations up into a wild tale of ritual bondage and dangerous behavior. The court-appointed guardian ad litem described the parents as exhibiting a Ruby Ridge mentality. Home School Legal Defense Association attorney Scott Somerville flew in to assist local attorney Ray Sullins at a hearing challenging the order removing the children. After a two-day trial attended by over 120 spectators, DHS agreed to release the children and give the family an opportunity to challenge the taped interview through expert testimony. Debbie Taylor fell to her knees as her seven-year-old daughter ran through the courtroom door. My baby! My baby! Debbie cried as she gathered her little girl into her arms. Iowas Department of Human Services blatantly disregarded the statutes when enforcing the protective orders to remove the Taylor children from their home. Attorneys Sullins and Somerville documented almost a dozen different procedural errors in this case. Given the lawless acts of DHS, even though the Taylor children may be home, it is clear that this case is far from over. Please pray that the Taylors traumatic experience will work out to change the whole Iowa child abuse system. KENTUCKY: HOME VISITS REVISITED A letter from the pupil personnel direct for Caldwell County announced that she will be conducting home visits during the months of March and April. The letter, sent to home schoolers in the county who notified under the private school statue, instructed the parents to prepare and produce a portfolio of each childs work, attendance records, student progress reports and the curriculum for the subjects taught. The director of pupil personnel cited Kentucky Revised Statute 159.040 for the authority to conduct the home visit and review the education records. Section 1590.040 reads as follows: Attendance at private and parochial schools shall be kept by the authorities of such schools in a register provided by the state board for elementary and secondary education, and such school authorities shall make attendance and scholarship reports in the same manner as is required by law or by regulation of the state board for elementary and secondary education of public school officials. Such schools shall at all times be open to inspection by directors of pupil personnel and officials of the department of education. Michael Smith, Vice President of Home School Legal Defense Association, responded on behalf of the families pointing out that the above code section does provide that private schools will keep attendance records and scholarship reports in the same manner as required for public schools, but that the statute does not require those reports to be available to public school officials. Public school officials argue that because private schools are to be open to inspection, the inspection must mean an inspection of the attendance and scholarship reports. This argument does not hold water because the statute does not specify what is to be inspected. Additionally, the request to view a portfolio of each childs work and the curriculum for the subjects taught is not mentioned anywhere in the statute. The rule of law in situations like this one is that unless the legislature specifically provides authority to a governmental agency or employee to perform a specific function, the authority is reserved to the people. Since the Kentucky Statute does not specifically give authority to public school officials to inspect attendance and scholarship reports, school officials cannot compel private school officials to turn over for inspection the aforementioned reports. The Supreme Court of Kentucky has given guidance regarding the issue of governmental interference in the affairs of private schools in the case of Kentucky State Board of Elementary and Secondary Education v. Rudasill, 589 SW 2d 877. The Supreme Court found that the state did have a compelling interest to see that children in Kentucky are educated to become good citizens and that children be prepared to intelligently exercise the right of suffrage. However, the states interest may not be enforced at the expense of conscience or at the expense of diversity of the parents and their children. The Court ruled that the state had to use the least restrictive means available where private schools and parents assert that state activity interfere with their freedom to direct the education of the children. A home visit to inspect records clearly is not the least restrictive alternative available to local school districts to ensure private schools meet the states compelling interest in education. Additionally, private schools conducted in homes are protected by the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution which protects citizens against unreasonable searches and seizures. With few exceptions, entry into a home against the consent of the occupants can only be accomplished by the issuance of a warrant based upon probable cause. HSLDA also informed the director of pupil personnel that the occupants of the homes did not consent to home visits. Therefore, any attempt to enter the home without the consent of the occupants would be considered a violation of the occupants civil rights. As of March 18, 1996, none of the families who received the directors letter have been contacted by the district, nor have any attempts been made to exercise home visits. MAINE: COMMISSIONERS LETTER CAUSES CONFUSION On December 14, 1995, Dr. Wayne L. Mowatt, Maine Commissioner of Education, directed a letter to district superintendents regarding non-approved private schools. The letter stated, It has come to my attention that an increasing number of students are enrolling in non-approved private schools that are actually home schooling programs. Home School Legal Defense Association attorney Scott Somerville wrote to Dr. Edwin N. Kastuck of the Maine Department of Education asking for clarification, I am confused as to what Dr. Mowatt means when he says something is actually a home schooling program. Attorney Somervilles letter went on to explain that under Maine law, only individual families are eligible to apply for equivalent instruction through home instruction, which Dr. Mowatts office usually handles. Any families working together to educate their children in a cooperative manner are excluded from applying under these regulations, since any regular instructional program conducted for purposes of the compulsory attendance law which enrolls two or more unrelated students is defined to be a school under chapter 130 1(C). The Maine Supreme Court has ruled the presence or absence of an objective third party makes a critical difference under Maines education law, Blount v. Department of Educational and Cultural Services, 551 A.2d 1377 (Me. 1988). Families who seek the benefit of such cooperative schooling arrangements should not be precluded from using them just because Maines home school regulations only apply to individual families. Private schools all over the country have found that home schoolers are eager to enroll in their programs and benefit from their resources. It is important to note that Maines rules for equivalent instruction programs define a school as any instructional program conducted for purposes of compulsory attendance law which enrolls two or more unrelated students. [Rules, 1(C), emphasis added.] These cooperative school arrangements clearly fall within the definition of these rules. Maine home schools are well within their rights to choose a cooperative school arrangement, but we can expect new challenges from state officials who prefer their own opinions over the language of the law. NEW MEXICO: Phone Calls Kill H.B. 337 In February, Home School Legal Defense Association sent out a legislative alert to its members in New Mexico regarding House Bill 337, introduced by Barbara Casey of Rosewell. The proposed legislation would have amended the home school law by striking the requirement that home school teachers have a high school diploma and replacing it with the requirement that home schooled students receive instruction in a manner that is substantially comparable to that required . . . . for students in public school. Had this language been adopted, it would have opened up the potential for home schools to be regulated by public schools. Phil Schultz, President of New Mexico Christian Home Educators, informed HSLDA that H.B. 337 did not get out of committee because the co-sponsors received enough telephone calls to cause them to withdraw their support. Home School Legal Defense Association members who responded to our alert are to be congratulated: your time and effort were well invested. Telephone calls do make a difference. There is a very good possibility, however, that this legislation will be introduced again next year, and we will have to go through the process once more. Should another telephone blitz be necessary, we trust that home schooling families will have the same faithfulness to respond, to make the telephone calls, to participate in democracy, and to protect their freedom and their families. OHIO: SPREADING CONFUSION An article appeared in the December 1995 issue of the Ohio School Boards Association newsletter which has caused concern in the home school community. This newsletter is read by virtually every superintendent in the state of Ohio, and misinformation regarding the current home school regulations could have a very detrimental affect on the working relationship between many superintendents and home schoolers. Entitled, Staying Home: A Look at Home Education, the article was written by staff attorney Adam C. Miller. The central problem with the analysis of the current home school requirements revolves around preeminence given to the compulsory attendance law found in Ohio Revised Code Ann. 3321.04(A)(2) over the home school regulations established by the State Board of Education. The author fails to recognize, first, that the legislature authorized the State Board of Education to draft regulations for home education. Second, the principle of law which governs in this situation is that the specific always overrides the general. In other words, the Administrative Code Regulations on home education are controlling in this situation (the specific guidelines), not the Ohio Revised Code (the general discretionary authority of the superintendent). The very purpose of the regulations was to bring uniform application to the excusal of home schooled children from public school attendance by the public school superintendent. According to the article, superintendents are given a high degree of discretion in approving home school programs. Again, the author draws this conclusion from his interpretation of the Ohio Revised Code, which states that a child is excused from public school attendance if it is demonstrated: (2) That he is being instructed at home by a person qualified to teach the branches in which instruction is required, and such additional branches, as the advancement and needs of the child may, in the opinion of such superintendent, require. (emphasis added) Numerous inaccurate statements regarding the authority of the superintendent and what is required of home educators follow as the article continues. If the superintendent is dissatisfied with the [curriculum] plan, he or she can require a parentwithin 14 daysto provide more written information or to present additional information at a conference. Contrary to the authors opinion, the curriculum information is submitted to demonstrate that the required subjects are being taught, NOT FOR THE APPROVAL OF THE SUPERINTENDENT. The authority given to the superintendent in the regulations is to review materials submitted to make ensure the regulations are being complied with, not for evaluation. In the same vein, the author tells the superintendent that he or she has the authority to evaluate the home education program to see if it meets the childs needs. The article states: Clearly, the superintendent must conduct a reasonable inquiry to whether the child has any special needs and whether the plan for home education meets these needs. This can include, but is not limited to, special education, gifted education and remedial education. The State Board has already determined what information is required to satisfy the states interest in education. That information is contained in the notification requirement. Nowhere in the regulations is such broad authority given to the superintendent to evaluate and approve any home education program. The article continues, Parents are encouraged to treat the code requirements as a minimum and update the superintendent and staff regularly as to their childs progress and proficiency. This issue was clearly addressed by the Superintendent of Public Instruction at the time the regulations were enacted. In a memorandum by the Superintendent of Public Instruction addressed to local superintendents the questions was raised, Are the requirements in Rule 3301- 34-02 just minimum standards that local districts can exceed? The answer was an emphatic No. These are rules of the State Board that carry the same effect as law, and school districts may not exceed these standards. The author asserts that each superintendent is able to draft his/her own policy regarding home schoolingbut this is the very problem intended to be corrected by the State Board when the regulations were drafted in 1989. The Administrative Regulations are the current law on home schooling, not the local superintendent and/or school board. The author attempted to provide a summary of the regulation requirements for notification and assessment, but again, he promulgated misinformation. He states that under the assessment option, the childrens tests must be taken with the rest of the students in the district as scheduled during the year. Any person who has carefully read the home school regulations knows that standardized testing of home school students may be provided independent of the school district as long as it is administered by a person duly authorized by the publisher of the test. It is because this type of legal advice is provided to local school districtseven after seven years of operating under the State Board of Educations regulationsthat home schoolers continue to encounter many difficulties with school districts, even when they are actually in compliance with the law. SOUTH DAKOTA SCORES TWO MAJOR VICTORIES! For years, South Dakota families and local school districts have battled over the requirement that home schooled children be tested with the same standardized tests used in the public schools. Many families object to this, wanting their children to be evaluated by means that measure what their children have learned, not what the public school children have learned. These conflicts came to a head two years ago, when home schoolers discovered that the most common school district test, the MAT-7, had a number of questions that were really shocking to Christian families. A number of Home School Legal Defense Association members refused to test their children with the MAT-7 tests. In response, many of the school districts threaten the parents with court action. With the consent of the test publisher, HSLDA carefully scrutinized the MAT-7 test questions and found some of them to be heavily weighted against traditional moral values and in favor of politically correct attitudes. HSLDA attorney Christopher Klicka was able to convince the superintendents to hold off prosecution for that year, but the root problemthe wording of the lawremained. HSLDA drafted language to change the law as it pertained to the testing requirements and forwarded it to the South Dakota home school leaders. Aspects of the language were finally incorporated into H.R. 1286 which improved South Dakotas testing requirements for home school children in two significant ways. First, children may now be tested with any national achievement test. And second, the legislation also ended the requirement that families have children tested annually. Now, children are only required to be tested in the same grades that public school children must be tested. By Gods grace, Governor William J. Janklow signed House Bill 1286 into law on March 4, 1996,. Families with significant objections to the MAT-7 should call HSLDA about testing this spring. All families will be able to select any nationally standardized achievement tests starting in the 1996-1997 school year. The other bill signed into law on March 4 was House Bill 1279, an act to provide additional safeguards against false and malicious reports of abuse and neglect. This was an unusually well- written and much-needed amendment to the law, which prohibited the Department of Social Services from removing any portion of their records that would tend to prove, affirm, corroborate, or support the innocence of the subject of a child abuse report without express written authority of the subject of the child abuse report. In an entirely new section of the Code, any subject of an unfounded report of child abuse or neglect who believes that the report was made in bad faith or malicious intent may petition the court for the release of the records of the investigation. This finally makes it possible for families who are maliciously hot-lined to defend themselves. VIRGINIA: S.B. 621 DEFEATED All Virginia Home School Legal Defense Association member families received a letter in late February asking them to mobilize against Senate Bill 621. Virginia is unique in having the highest degree of protection for parents of any state in the country. In 1995, the Virginia Court of Appeals ruled that the Department of Social Services may not identify an allegation of child abuse or neglect as founded without clear and convincing evidence of abuse. Every other state permits families to be identified as abusive with much less proofin fact, the reality in most states is that families are founded as abusive on a mere suspicion of abuse with any evidence to support it. Senate Bill 621 was going to remove this protection for Virginia families. On February 8, 1996, Senator Stolle amended in the following language: That standard of proof in determining whether a report of abuse or neglect is founded shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. This language would have nullified the Court of Appeals ruling that the proper standard should be clear and convincing evidence. When it came to a vote, the senators split 20 to 20 on this bill. Lieutenant Governor Don Beyer cast the deciding vote against parental rights. As usual, home schoolers responded with lightning speed to a threat to their freedoms. When this bill reached the House committee, it was promptly killed. God deserves all the glory for stopping this bill for without His protection, this bill would almost certainly have become law. Triennial School Census Every three years, Home School Legal Defense Association is barraged with telephone calls from Virginia home school parents who have just received the school census and are inquiring whether they are mandated to participate. We advise our member families that participation in the school census is voluntary and they may decide for themselves whether or not to take part. There are a number of reasons home schooling families may decide not to participate in the school census. The primary reason, however, is tax dollars. The schools receive funding based on the number of children in the district. Many home schoolers do not want their tax dollars to go to the public school system and their only opportunity to voice their conscientious objection comes once every three years, when they just say no to the school census. Of course, if tuition tax credit legislation is ever enacted, home schoolers will be relieved of this double burden. Until that time, many Virginia families will no doubt continue to exercise their legal option and refuse to participate in the school census. In summary, Home School Legal Defense Association does not advise any family to not participate in the school census. We merely respond that participation is not required by law, and explain to sincere religious families that non-participation provides one way to express their religious objection to the religious vacuum of the public schools. Each family is left to decide according to their own convictions. Back to top of the page. UNSUNG HEROES REVISITED In the last issue of the Court Report we printed a letter from a mother who asked us to recognize the other unsung hero of home educationthe fathers who lay down their lives for their families. Her honest account of the struggles her family is facing prompted an outpouring of love from HSLDA members across the country. We have received letters and telephone calls from members who were touched by the letter and wanted to communicate their support, empathy, and encouragement to this family. Unfortunately, I cannot do that directly because the letter was truly anonymous. The mother signed it name withheld, and the envelope did not bear a return address. God has used this mothers letter and the response of HSLDA members to build our faith and encourage us. We are privileged at HSLDA to be able to share in the joys and sorrows of many of our member families. You share with us your childrens accomplishments, send us birth announcements, and fondly bid us good-bye when your last child has graduated. But we also hear from families who are struggling to survive. Sometimes the difficult circumstances involve job loss, illness, or even the death of a mother, father, or child. And sometimes we hear from families who arent survivingone parent has abandoned the family, leaving his or her spouse and children hurting and alone. As HSLDA members have reached out to express love and encouragement to this unknown family, we have been privileged to hear their stories. Moms and dads who have called or written have struggled through some very dark days. Some are still struggling. Yet they offer their testimonies of what God has done and is doing for them. Through His power and grace they are overcoming! Even though we cannot communicate directly with this family, we can uphold them in prayerfaithfully interceding for them and for other home schooling families across our nation who face difficult circumstances. And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints Ephesians 6:18. Confidential to Name Withheld, If you would like to contact us, we would be delighted to forward to you the letters we have received for you. Back to top of the page. PRAYER & PRAISE Be anxious for nothing but in everything let your requests be made know to God. And the peace of God that transcends all understanding will guard your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Phillipians 4:6-7 Praise God for the excellent turnout at the recent parental rights rally in Indiana, and pray that God would continue to use the home school families in that state to reach their legislators with the message of parental rights. House Bill 1346, a parental rights bill, was passed, but the section declaring parents have a fundamental right to direct the upbringing of their child was deleted. Praise God that freedom has been strengthened, and pray for Indiana home schoolers as they seek to continue this battle. The Immigration Control and Financial Responsibilities Act, which seeks to establish a national database, passed the House and is being considered by the Senate. Senators Russell Feingold (D- WI) and Spencer Abraham (R-MI) have introduced an amendment to eliminate all national registry provisions to this bill. The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act now has 130 co-sponsors in the House and 10 in the Senate. Please pray that this legislation would continue to move forward. Please pray for the families, lawyers, and judges involved in our active litigation: The Jones family in Arkansas is unable to pay the state-required testing fee of $35.00 per test, and they are seeking to declare that requirement in violation of their fundamental parental and religious liberties. The Kennedy family in California has filed a civil rights lawsuit against the department of social servicies, who entered their home and interrogated and examined their children without a search warrant. A Maryland home-schooling mother, Cheryl Battles, is being criminally prosecuted for her refusal to sign the state assurance of consent form, which violates her religious beliefs. The C. Family in Virginia has filed a civil rights lawsuit against the department of social services, who, in cooperation with the domestic relations court clerk and intake officer, issued bogus subpoenas to force Mr. and Mrs. C. to cooperate with their child abuse investigation. The Taylor family in Iowa is battling the department of human services over allegations of child abuse. Praise the Lord for legislative victories in several states: In New Mexico, home schoolers launched a phone blitz against House Bill 337, which would have opened up the potential for home schools to be regulated by public schools. As a result of the telephone calls, the bill was killed in committee. Two good bills were signed into law in South Dakota. House Bill 1286 improves the testing requirements for home school children, and House Bill 1279 provides additional safeguards against false and malicious reports of child abuse and neglect. In Virginia, which is the state with the highest protection for parents against false allegations of child abuse, home schoolers mobilized to defeat Senate Bill 621, which would have removed this high level of parental rights protection. Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us, to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! Amen. Ephesians 3:20-21 Back to top of the page. LITIGATION REPORT: HOW OUR CASES ARE STACKING UP ARKANSAS Rudolph & Jolynn Jones v. State Department of Education A civil rights lawsuit has been filed on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Jones who are home schooling four children. Arkansas law requires home-schooled children to take an annual standardized achievement test and to reimburse the state a fee of $35.00 per test. Mr. Jones has been injured and reinjured on the job within the last few years and cannot afford to pay the requisite fee. An inability to pay the fee would result in the revocation of his familys legal home school status. Both sides have asked the judge to rule on the case without the necessity of a trial. Home School Legal Defense Association contends that the Arkansas reimbursement statute violates the Jones familys fundamental right to direct the education of their children when coupled with their right to the free exercise of religion. We argue that the state cannot show a compelling interest in the fee sufficient to justify such a law. The State Department of Education, on the other hand, argues first that Mr. and Mrs. Jones are not indigent, but can afford to pay the testing fee. Second, they argue that even if the Joneses are indigent, there is no such thing as the fundamental right to home educate children, so the state must only show that there is a rational basis for the law, namely, the recoupment of expenses. A decision from the court is imminent since the trial is set for May 13, 1996. CALIFORNIA Kennedy v. Aluzri, et al. This civil rights lawsuit stems from the warrantless entry into the home of Robert and Maria Kennedy for inspection of the house, and interrogation and physical examination of the children. The Kennedys would later learn that this unlawful conduct was precipitated by an anonymous caller reporting that Mrs. Kennedy left her children in the backyard unsupervised. The Los Angeles County Department of Social Services filed a motion to dismiss the complaint on the ground that their social worker is entitled to immunity from such claims. HSLDA responded to the motion by arguing that the defendant is entitled to assert only qualified immunity, which does not protect a government official from claims for violation of clearly established law. We assert that the law governing these circumstances is clear, that absent an exigent circumstance, the Fourth Amendment demands a search warrant prior to the invasion of a private home. The parties await the courts decision. ILLINOIS Children & Family Services v. Mrs. B. Following a hearing before an administrative law judge in Springfield, Illinois, the finding of child abuse against Mrs. B will be expunged from the record. The finding stemmed from a cut beneath the eye of Mrs. Bs 6-year old daughter. The cut required stitches at the local emergency room. The incident occurred when Mrs. B was walking into the playroom. She stepped on a bucket the children had promised to pick up. Mrs. B picked up the bucket and threw it against the wall in anger. Mrs. B did not intend to throw the bucket at a child, nor did she even see her children when she threw it. Nevertheless, the bucket bounced off the wall and hit her daughter in the face, injuring the child. The judge concluded that the injury to Mrs. Bs daughter was by accident and that Mrs. B was not guilty of abuse, nor had she created a real and significant danger of physical injury to the child. All findings were expunged. MARYLAND State v. Cheryl Battles This mother of a kindergartner with sincerely held religious beliefs that she should teach her child at home is being criminally prosecuted for her refusal to sign the Maryland assurance of consent home school form. According to Mrs. Battles, consenting to be under the jurisdiction of the local school district would violate her Christian faith because the public schools are atheistic and require education that denies the absolute truths contained in Scripture. Mrs. Battles does not object to demonstrating that she is in compliance with the compulsory attendance statutes requirement that she provide a regular and thorough education. A standardized test administered to the child indicates that the her progress is considerably advanced for her age. The trial is presently scheduled for April 9, 1996. OHIO Children Family Services Board v. Family of V. The Ashtabula County Juvenile Court was the scene of one of the most bizarre hearings in which HSLDA has been involved. Fourteen-year old and four-year old sons were removed from this members home without notice by order of the court. HSLDA appeared on the mothers behalf two days later to persuade the court that there was not probable cause to justify the immediate removal of these children. What made the case so odd was the fact that the individuals alleging educational neglect and physical abuse by the mother were three older children, ages 15, 18, and 20, who had not been in the home for more than nine months. All three of these children claimed to have been witches, the two youngest claimed to have been sexually abused by their father and have been in psychological counselling for several years. Now they deny their activity in the occult and recant on their allegations against their father. Yet it is based on their testimony that the court removed the two younger boys. Following a seven hour hearing, the court dismissed the allegations of educational neglect, but ordered the boys to be placed into the custody of Mrs. Vs sister, an aunt with whom the boys have a good relationship. About three weeks later, however, the boys were placed in foster care in order to insure their continued education. The hearing on the allegations of physical abuse is set to begin March 19, 1996. RHODE ISLAND State v. Thomas & Kathleen SanBento These parents of a 10-year old daughter and 8-year old son are being criminally prosecuted for failure to comply with the states compulsory attendance statute. The truth is that the SanBentos have been educating their children since the beginning of the 95-96 school year and requested approval from the Lincoln School Committee in September. The SanBento curriculum was not approved by the school committee, but HSLDA had been attempting to resolve the differences when Mr. and Mrs. SanBentos were served with criminal summonses. In the second week of March 1996, the Lincoln School Committee approved the SanBento curriculum. The criminal actions should now be dismissed. Nevertheless, the school superintendent continues to insist upon the SanBento children taking the Metropolitan Achievement Test, as well as the state mandated written evaluation assessment test each year. We believe the requirement of both of these tests to be beyond the terms of a written agreement between the SanBentos and the superintendent, so we are working to resolve this dispute. VIRGINIA Mr. and Mrs. Daniel C. v. Roarke-Ruiz, et al. Though we previously reported that this civil rights lawsuit against the Pittsylvania County Department of Social Services (DSS) and Pittsylvania County court clerks had been settled, DSS refuses to participate in the settlement. This lawsuit is the result of an effort by the DSS, with the cooperation of the domestic and relations court clerk and intake officer, to issue bogus subpoenas to obtain the cooperation of Mr. and Mrs. C with the departments child abuse investigation. On October 16, 1995, a uniformed officer from the sheriffs department delivered three subpoenas to the Cs home demanding they appear with three of their children at the district court office supervising child abuse complaints. The officer advised them that he would obtain a warrant for their arrest if they refused to comply with the subpoenas. When we obtained a copy of the subpoenas, we recognized that they were fraudulent because there was no underlying court proceeding or legal authorization of any kind. A civil rights lawsuit has been filed and settled between all defendants other than DSS. The case will now proceed against them for their violation of procedural due process. Back to top of the page. FROM THE MOUTHS OF BABES, PART II Seven-year-old Tyler Reed knows about the presidents of the United States. He can list them in order and he knows lots of interesting facts about the men and their presidencies. On the Wednesday afternoon that the FebruaryMarch 1996 issue of the Home School Court Report arrived at the Reed home, Cheryl, Tylers mom, sat down to read him the Presidents Page column.* We were excited, Cheryl reported, because you dont see too many things written about past presidents. I started reading the article to him and he stopped me. Mom, that doesnt sound right. I dont think he was assassinated in 1902. We got out our book on the presidents and it said that McKinley was in his second term and he was assassinated in September 1901. Tyler Reed is right. William McKinley was first elected president in 1896 and reelected in 1900. He was shot on September 6 and died eight days later on September 14, 1901. (*Home School Court Report, Volume 12, Number 1, FebruaryMarch 1996, page 28.) Back to top of the page. PRESIDENTS PAGE: OLD STORIES TELL THE PRICE OF FREEDOM The Old Testament records that eventually there arose a Pharaoh who knew not Joseph. Under the hand of this leader who did not know his nations history, the Israelites were cruelly oppressed. In Deuteronomy 11:2-3, Moses reminded Israel that their children were not the ones who saw and experienced the discipline of the Lord your God: His majesty, His mighty hand, His outstretched arm; the signs He performed and the things He did in the heart of Egypt. In order that future generations would know and remember this important history, God told the Israelites to fix these words of mine in your hearts and minds; tie them as symbols on your hands and bind them on your foreheads. Teach them to your children, talking about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down and when you get up (Deut. 11:18-19). Our enemies, like Pharaoh, forget. We forget. But our children, who have never heard our history, do not have an opportunity to remember. Two years ago, one of the most exciting victories ever experienced in the home schooling community occurred when we saw a million telephone calls used by God to deliver us from national teacher certification in H.R. 6. Now, in 1996, when I speak at home schooling conventions, almost a third of those in attendance have never heard of H.R. 6. There are hundreds of thousands of home schooling parents who have no memory of the Bismarck Tea Party in 1989. Home school leaders from 11 states flew to Bismarck to stand in solidarity with the home schoolers there in an attempt to embarrass North Dakota into repealing its teacher certification law. We certainly have enough fights today to keep all of us on our toes. But we cannot afford to forget the early fights for the freedom of our home schools. We need to tell and remember the stories, like: Eight-year-old Carey Dagley in North Dakota who was subpoenaed to testify against her parents. She had to claim the Fifth Amendment. Robin Deigle of Ohio who was delivered from a judge who announced his intention to rule against her before her case was ever begun. Helene Richards, the first of our Fourth Amendment heroes, who stood in her doorway and told a social worker she couldnt enter her home unless she had a warrant. The Katy 5five families near Houston who ignited the fire for Texas home schooling freedom by standing tall against a criminal prosecution. Yes, new home schooling parents need to know and remember these stories. But even more important is our duty to tell the stories of freedom to our children. After two decades of political involvement, I am convinced that the best political activists are people who have had to personally fight for their freedom. Since home schoolers have had to engage in hand-to-hand political combat, we have become the single most effective group of pro- family activists in the nation. Had the National Education Association had any idea of what a vibrant political force they were helping to create, they would have done well to urge states to quickly liberalize all laws regulating home schooling. Instead, they resisted. We won. And in the process, the NEAs resistance helped to create Americas best grassroots lobbying team. Our children need to know these things if we want them to be freedom fighters. They need to be involved in our battles of today. They should be writing letters to their congressmen and state legislators. They should do these things, not only for the effect such letters have today, but also because their personal experience in fighting for freedom will change them for a lifetime. I firmly believe that the job of this generation is to hold on to a semblance of freedomalmost by our fingernailsuntil the army we are raising is ready to take back our nation and restore the constitutional principles upon which we were founded. These are grand dreams and glorious possibilities, none of which will happen if we dont tell our children and the families who are just beginning to home school about the battles and victories of the past. Old soldiers love to tell battle stories. New soldiers need to hear them so they know the price of freedom. Back to top of the page. Michael Farris Debates Dr. William Spady on Outcome Based Education At the 1995 National Christian Home Educators Leadership Conference, Michael Farris and Dr. William Spady went head to head on the topic of OBE. Cassette tapes are available from CTI Conference Taping for $5.00. When ordering, indicate that you would like Conference #542; Tape #103OBE Debate: Michael Farris & William Spady. Orders may be placed through the mail, or by telephone or fax: CTI Conference Taping, Inc. 1704 Valencia, N.E. Albuquerque, NM 87110 phone: 505-265-1177 fax: 505-255-1270 Back to top of the page. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-8IA057-000942-B023-24http://www.learnathome.com:80/22aa_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215816 text/html 22781HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:53:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  News and Court Report:  Volume 11, Number 6: December 1995  January 1996 Parental Rights Drama Unfolds A Home Grown Case for Freedom (President's Page) Parental Rights Drama Unfolds Primarily drafted by Michael Farris and Home School Legal Defense Association attorneys, the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act (PRRA) was introduced on June 28, 1995, in the House and the Senate as H.R. 1946 and S. 984. The PRRA affirms the right of parents to control the upbringing and training of their childrenrights that have been eroded by conflicting state court decisions. Home School Legal Defense Association believes that passage of the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act will significantly increase the protection of home schooling freedoms. Too often state courts refuse to hold parental rights as fundamental. The 1993 Michigan Supreme Court's rulings in DeJonge and Bennett clearly illustrate the need for the PRRA. In DeJonge, the Court ruled that teacher certification, as applied to religiously motivated home schooling parents, was unconstitutional. But in the companion Bennett case decided the same day, the Court found that secular home schooling parents suffered no constituional violation when forced to comply with the certification requirement. The Michigan Supreme Court held that religious freedom was a fundamental right, whereas "parents' rights" were "nonfundamental" in nature. HSLDA staff have been working hard to promote this important legislation and secure co-sponsors in the House and Senate. The following is a summary of the key events which have taken place during the past several months. October 24  Doug Phillips, Director of Federal Issues for the National Center for Home Education, led a group of Congressional Action Program (CAP) volunteers, several National Center staff members, and HSLDA's four interns to Capitol Hill to lobby for the PRRA. As a result, more than 20 congressmen added their names to the list of PRRA co-sponsors. October 26, Rayburn House Office Building  After months of work by legislators, home schoolers, and concerned parents, the House Sub-Committee on the Constitution heard testimony on the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act in a hearing room packed with legislative aides, media representatives, and supporters and opponents of the bill. Members of the Committee present for this first round of hearings included Congressmen Charles Canady (Chairman R-FL), Robert Goodlatte (R-VA), Bob Inglis (R-SC), Barney Frank (D-MA), Patricia Schroeder (D-CO), John Conyers, Jr. (D-MI), and Melvin Watt (D-NC). The first panel of experts to testify included the primary congressional sponsors of the PRRARepresentatives Steve Largent (R-OK) and Mike Parker (R-MS), and Senator Charles Grassley (R-IA). Congressman Largent asserted, "The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act is needed because the government is using its coercive force to dictate values, offend the religious and moral beliefs of families, and restrict the freedoms of families to live as they choose." A skeptical Congressman Watt challenged him, "You think you can clear the fog with eight pages of legislation?" "This is not a complicated issue," Largent responded, "It is just a shield for parents. This is only a legal recourse for parents to protect their rights as parents." Senator Grassley contended that Congress has a constitutional responsibility to pass this legislation: It is appropriate for Congress to act within its 14th Amendment, Section 5 power to see that liberty rights are properly protected . . . The PRRA accomplishes this goal by clarifying that the proper standard to use in disputes between the government and parents is the highest legal standard available. This standard, known as the 'compelling interest standard' means that before the government can interfere in the parent-child relationship, it must demonstrate that there is a 'compelling' interest to protectnot a good or even very good interest. It must be compelling. But Congressman Schroeder expressed concern that the PRRA may make it easer for parents to abuse their children with impunity. Representative Parker quickly responded: My wife and I have housed over a dozen foster children in our home during our 25 years of marriage. All those children came from homes of parents who did not care for them, with many of them having their parental rights terminated. This legislation will not prohibit the social service agencies from continuing the difficult job they perform daily. Children that are being abused or neglected will hopefully be removed from their uncaring homes immediately. From a personal standpoint, I say to the critics of this bill that my family has invested too much in the protection of children to support legislation that might further harm them. This legislation offers a balance between the rights of parents and the protection of our precious children. After the sponsors spoke, committee members heard from a second panel consisting of Vicki Rafel, National PTA Board of Directors; Greg Erken, Executive Director, Of the People; Martin Guggenheim, Professor, New York University School of Law; Colleen Pinyan, Coordinator, Office of Public Affairs, The Rutherford Institute; Marilyn Van Derbur, former Miss America; and Michael P. Farris, President, Home School Legal Defense Association. Not surprisingly, Rafel testified in opposition to the PRRA, stating that the PTA believes many entities at the local, state, and federal levels have responsibilities in providing for and protecting children. These individuals and institutions are not just a part of a local community. They are also part of a total system of services and accountability that must be intertwined to provide an optimum environment for all children. Decisions affecting children should be made in a collaborative effort involving all the stakeholders, including parents, educators, health-care givers and governing bodies. Farris sharply disagreed: Government lawyers, government agencies, courts, and the United States military all need to know that this nation believes parents' rights are fundamental. They need to know that parents whose rights are threatened by government intrusions will receive the highest level of legal protection. They need to know that the government cannot run over those parents and decide for itself how children should be raised. Van Derbur gave an emotional account of her abusive home, urging Congress to defeat the Act. She pleaded with committee members that someone must "speak for the children . . . [the PRRA would] . . . smother their voices." Congressman Schroeder thanked Van Derbur for "putting a human face on this issue." The third and final panel of the hearing consisted of academics George W. Dent, Professor, Case Western Reserve University School of Law; Barbara Bennett Woodhouse, Professor, University of Pennsylvania School of Law; and Wade F. Horn, Ph.D., Director, National Fatherhood Initiative. Committee members asked: What are reasonable corporal punishments? What about medical decisions such as blood transfusions? Should parents really be making these decisions for their children? Wouldn't this intrude on the rights of children? Another hot issue was federalism. Opponents of the PRRA argue that this legislation is an infringement of state's rights. Congressman Barney Frank chided conservatives, "This is the most blatant augmentation of the federal government I've ever seen." Michael Farris responded to these concerns: I would like to say a final word about federalism. I am a staunch believer in the Tenth Amendment. I believe that Congress should only do those things that are explicitly authorized in the Constitution. I am not a fan of implied congressional power. But I believe that Congress has a solemn obligation to do its utmost to discharge all of its explicit constitutional duties. One of those duties, pursuant to section five of the Fourteenth Amendment, is to protect the rights of American citizens when state governments diminish or violate those rights. The right of parents to direct the upbringing of their children has been grounded in the Fourteenth Amendment for nearly seventy-five years. I believe that the Supreme Court was absolutely correct in saying that it was a violation of Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution for the State of Oregon to ban private education in the 1920's. I would submit that if the Supreme Court correctly discharged its duties as a branch of the federal government to protect the rights of American parents when a state went too far, this Congress has a co-equal duty to protect the constitutional liberties of American parents. State courts, state agencies, lower courts, bureaucrats, and lawyers are diminishing the rights of American parents. This bill does not create any federal programs. It does not spend a dime of taxpayer money. It does not create a single administrative position. It simply sets a legal standard. Adoption of this bill will indicate that this Congress believes that parents rights are fundamental, nothing more, nothing less. November 1  Michael Farris appeared with Congressman Largent on CNN's Burden of Proof, a program analyzing the legal aspects of current national issues and legislation. Representing the opposition was former Surgeon General Jocelyn Elders. Mike and Congressman Largent did an outstanding job refuting arguments brought against the PRRA. December 1  James Dobson interviewed Congressman Steve Largent and Senator Charles Grassley about the PRRA on the December 1 Focus on the Family radio program. Listeners were encouraged to contact their congressman and senators and urge their co-sponsorship of the PRRA. December 4  CAP volunteers visited 80 senate offices, encouraging the senators to co-sponsor the PRRA and to attend the subcommittee hearing. December 5, Dirksen Senate Office Building  The Senate held sub-committee hearings on the PRRA. The senate subcommittee members are Senator Charles Grassley (R-IA)the PRRA's key sponsor, Mike DeWine (R-OH), Hank Brown (R-CO), Strom Thurmond (R-SC), Howell Heflin (D-AL), Russell Feingold (D-WI), and Herbert Kohl (D-WI). Michael Farris, along with several other witnesses from the House hearings testified. Rep. Steve Largent opened as first witness on behalf of the PRRA. "When the government becomes an obstacle or chips away at the freedoms parents rely on to raise their children, our country risks losing that fundamentally important quality that has made our country greatfreedom. I introduced the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act to protect and support the backbone of our countryfree citizens and free parents." Rep. Largent urged subcommittee members to take a realistic look at the increasing obstacles parents face today. "The Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act is needed because the government is using its coercive force to dictate values, offend the religious and moral beliefs of families, and restrict the freedoms of families to live as they choose." Sen. Howell Heflin questioned the PRRA's purpose and expressed concern that it would intrude upon states' rights. "If the Supreme Court has already upheld these rights, I see no need for this Act," he stated. Rep. Largent responded, " [the PRRA is] consistent with the proper concept of Federalism. While states have the general jurisdiction and authority over education, child welfare, and health care issues, the federal government has authority to protect the rights of its citizens and ensure that states employ their power in a way that respects the rights of American parents." Opening the second panel of witnesses, Michael Farris reminded subcommittee members that it would be impractical to ask every family to take its case to the Supreme Court. "Parents' rights should be protected at the first court they go to; they should not have to go to great lengths and expense to receive a just ruling." Farris further explained the problem with relying on lower courts without the aid of the legal standard which would be established by the PRRA: "The Supreme Court has failed to use explicit enough language and has failed to take enough parental liberty cases in the past twenty years. Lower state and federal courts, and the countless government agencies just don't seem to understand that parental rights should be accorded this high level of protection." Sammy Quintana, president-elect of the National School Boards Association, claimed the PRRA is "about making it more difficult for public schools to teach our children. It is about lining the pockets of lawyers and draining the scarce educational resources in our schools. It is about playing politics with our children." Another anti-PRRA witness, Margaret Brinig of the University of Louisville, insisted the Act would hurt children's rights in favor of parental whims. She claimed that the PRRA would harm the state's ability to protect children. Director of the National Fatherhood Initiative and child psychologist Wade Horn countered, "Some see the declining well-being of children as the rationale for further state intervention in family life. But there is very little evidence that further abdication of authority over children to the state will enhance the well-being of children. Rather, I believe that the declining well-being of children in America is the direct result of the increasing authority the state has obtained over the rearing of children." Georgia lawyer Chip Angell aptly summed up the issue (and brought down the house several times) with his direct, rhetoric-demolishing testimony. "We must not deny the simple plain fact that parents can parent better than any agency or school. Parents are tired of government intrusion. They don't need busybodies in Washington telling them what to do. I have seven children of my own, and I pray you'll pass this bill." ActionHome schoolers need to continue to deliver a steady stream of calls to their congressmen and senators to build support for the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act. This extremely important piece of legislation will likely pass in 1996if we keep up the momentum. Please read the list of PRRA co-sponsors on page 23. If your senators and representative are not co-sponsors of this legislation, please call today and ask them to take a stand for parents' rights by supporting the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act of 1995. If your congressman or senator is a co-sponsor of the PRRA, we encourage you to send a letter of appreciation. A Home Grown Case for Freedom by Michael Farris Oliver North, John Poindexter, and Ronald Reagan were pillaged in the editorial pages of this nation for their allegedly unlawful activities. What were they accused of? In simple terms, they were accused of supplying military aid to the Contras in Nicaragua in violation of a congressional prohibition on such aid. They were accused of conducting foreign policy in a manner which allegedly violated an act of Congress. Even though the media regularly screamed about the "illegality" of Iran-Contra, there seemed to be extra vehemence in the press attacks because the whole affair was originally executed in secret. The press hates all secrets which do not involve them. Bill Clinton has shown that it is completely acceptable to conduct illegal foreign military operations so long as everything is done in the open. Home schooler, Specialist Michael New refused to obey an order which required him to undertake service for the United Nations on a mission into Macedonia. Spc. New was ordered to wear a U.N. uniform. Awaiting him in Macedonia would be a further requirement that he surrender his U.S. Army identification card to be replaced by a U.N. cardidentifying him not as an American soldier but as U.N. personnel. New was also placed under the command of a French General and an Iraqi ambassador who serve the United Nations. Legal research I undertook for New's lawyers demonstrates that it is clearly illegal to require any American soldier to wear U.N. insignia on a U.S. military uniform (transforming it into what the military calls the U.N. uniform). Foreign insignia are strictly prohibited on U.S. military uniforms unless specifically authorized by Congress. And, needless to say, Congress has never dared to cross the American public by ordering U.S. soldiers to wear U.N. uniforms. But not only is it illegal to require U.S. soldiers to wear the U.N. uniform, it is clearly illegal for Clinton to send American troops to serve in a U.N. military action. Clinton and the U.N. claim to be operating under the U.N. Charter which the United States ratified in 1945. Chapter VII, Article 43 of the U.N. Charter authorizes the use of armed forces on loan from willing member-nations "for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security." There is an important restriction on this use of armed forces by the U.N. which is spelled out in both the U.N. charter and U.S. law. The U.N. Charter calls for "special agreement or agreements" to be negotiated by the member-nations to specify the numbers, types of forces, their degree of readiness, and the nature of the military assistance to be provided. The United States Congress passed a law in 1949 to implement America's participation in the U.N. This act, 22 U.S.C.  287d, requires the President to negotiate such "special agreements" before sending any U.S. military personnel into the service of the United Nations under Article 43. Importantly, the law requires that such agreements must be ratified by Congress. Has this been done? Well don't take my word for it. Read the testimony of Conrad K. Harper, Legal Advisor, Department of State, given in Congress on March 4, 1994. With respect to U.S. law, the President has both statutory and constitutional authority to enable the United States to participate in and support U.N. peace operations. In particular under Section 6 of the United Nations Participation Act [22 U.S.C.  287d], the President is authorized to negotiate special agreements with the U.N. Security Council, thereby making units of the U.S. Armed Forces available to the Council on its call pursuant to Article 43 [Chapter VII] of the UN Charter. Such agreements are subject to the approval of Congress, but further Congressional authorization would not be required for the President to make forces available pursuant to such an agreement in a particular case. In practice, of course, no action had ever been taken under Section 6 of the Act because no agreements have ever been concluded under Article 43. The United Nations has passed a number of resolutions calling for the use of military forces in Macedonia. Every resolution references Chapter VII, Article 43 as the source for its authority. In other words, it is completely illegal for Bill Clinton or any other U.S. president to send American troops into a war zone under the command or auspices of the United Nations because Congress has never ratified any Article 43 special agreements to specify the terms and conditions of U.S. military actions with the United Nations. An election year is coming and it is reasonable to suppose that Bill Clinton realizes that a popular military action will result in greater popularity. Apparently, this is an old political ploy, because the founding fathers took the trouble to build a constitutional barrier to this kind of grandstanding. James Madison wrote a letter to Thomas Jefferson on April 2, 1798, which proclaimed, "The Constitution supposes, what the history of all governments demonstrates, that the executive is the branch of power most interested in war, and most prone to it. It has accordingly with studied care vested the question of war in the legislature." Clinton's incursion into Macedonia, and the related even larger deployment to Bosnia, may or may not be in the best interest of the United States. The same, however, could have been said about the sale of military weapons to Iran and the diversion of profits therefrom to supply the Contras in Nicaragua. Back then we were repeatedly told, "it is not a question of policy, it is a question of legality." Where are these voices today? Clinton's military exercise to Macedonia is debatable on policy grounds. But it is clearly illegal. If Clinton's policy is good policy, let him negotiate the special agreement and bring it to Congress for ratification. Since he has not done so, he is without lawful authority to send America's bravest men and women into harms way to die in U.N. uniforms carrying U.N. identity cards. Perhaps it's time for yet another special prosecutor. Home schoolers are appropriately wary of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. We know that U.N. control over American policy threatens our freedoms to educate and raise our children. We have fought hard for the sovereignty of our families and our nation. We can be proud that the young American who has the moral courage to call the President to account for his violation of the law is from our own ranks. Freedom is not store-bought. It is grown at home. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-9IA057-000942-B023-56http://www.learnathome.com:80/2252_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215836 text/html 76683HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:53:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  News and Court Report:  Volume 11, Number 5: September  October  November 1995 A Week in the Life of HSLDA Across the States The Marine Corps of the Home School Movement An Open Letter to Home School Moms (President's Page)Attorney Scott Somerville and Legal Assistants Cathy Gilstrap and Steve McGarvey present . . . A Week in the Life of HSLDA The four-day work log for Scott Somerville and his two legal assistants, Cathy Gilstrap and Steve McGarvey, was originally 30 pages long. Obviously it was impossible to include every activity in this report. We have, therefore, selected highlights of their week's activities, and we hope this "brief" account will give you a glimpse of HSLDA in action during our busiest time of year. Monday, September 4 Labor dayfederal holiday. HSLDA is closed. Tuesday, September 5 8:30 a.m. Scott, Cathy, and Steve join other members of the HSLDA staff in the legal library for a time of prayer. Every Tuesday and Thursday morning, HSLDA sets aside a half hour to pray for members, organizational needs, and pressing state and federal issues. 8:52 a.m. Prayer meeting is over and the HSLDA staff prepare to meet their work week. Voice mail messages have accumulated over the long weekend. Both Steve and Cathy retrieve their messages. Steve begins returning phone calls. Cathy prints out the dictated correspondence she typed over the weekend for Scott's signature. 9:10 a.m. Scott breaks away from discussion with fellow attorneys. Arriving in his office, he switches on his computer, checks e-mail messages, and plays back his voice-mail messages. Calls Pat, a single mother in Florida who is trying to home school despite problems from welfare, social workers, and an ex-husband who is in prison. 9:13 a.m. Steve's phone rings. It is a member who permanently resides in Oklahoma, but is temporarily living in Kansas dealing with family matters after her father's death. Does she have to comply with Kansas law? She is also concerned about the possibility of family members turning her in to social services. Steve transfers the call to Scott. 9:15 a.m. Scott picks up the transferred call. Oklahoma law is much better than Kansas, so it will be better if she can stick with Oklahoma law. Scott suggests she not contact any Kansas officials until she gets within 186 days of the end of the school year. If she is still in Kansas then, she should register her school with the Kansas Department of Education. Scott spends the rest of his morning answering questions from members: A Rhode Island member calls. She has been told she "must register" her five-year-old with the school district, even though the child doesn't reach compulsory attendance age until next year. Scott tells her this is nonsense. "Tell your school official you have spoken to your attorney, and that you are not required to register this child at this time," he says, "if they give you any trouble, tell them to talk to your attorney, Scott Somerville, at our phone number. That usually does it." "This is outrageous!" A member from Virginia calls and explains that she is in a battle over custody for her two sons from a previous marriage. On the day she was in the hospital delivering twins, her ex-husband went to court, claiming that home schooling is illegal. The mother's divorce attorney didn't know what to do and the judge took the two boys and put them in temporary custody of the father. (Later, Scott makes several calls and writes several lettersincluding a letter to the Virginia Attorney Generalto try to help this family.) 9:30 a.m. Correspondence completed, Cathy begins returning phone calls. She starts with several left over from last Friday afternoon. During the time she is on the phone, ten new messages are left in her voice mail. 9:54 a.m. Steve answers his phone. A member from Illinois needs the Illinois sample letter. Her school district is demanding that the family fill out a notification form and submit grades for their children every semester. Neither of these regulatory measures are required by Illinois law. Steve sent her the sample letter to send the district instead of the form. He told her that if the school district continued to insist on the notification form, to call us and Scott will respond on her behalf. 12:00 p.m. A lull in the constant stream of telephone calls allows Scott to execute a quick exit from his office. Crossing to the opposite office suite, he enters the legal library. Four people wait for him  it's time for Logic at Lunch. (Scott teaches logic twice a week to any interested HSLDA staff and interns. A local 13-year-old home school student also attends.) In the meantime, Cathy watches (and applauds) as Chuck Hurst, HSLDA's Office Manager, removes the "old, yucky copier." Mechanical unreliability andin spite of frequent visits from the repair manconsistently bad copies, have caused Cathy, Steve, and Scott to spend a lot of time at the copier upstairs. A replacement should arrive this afternoon. 1:00 p.m. Logic is over. Scott returns to his office and calls a family in Virginia who is having a custody battlethe biological father is trying to take the children away from the home schooling mom. 1:30 p.m. Cathy is back from lunch and, in between the steady stream of incoming calls, works on returning call messages left on voice mail. Telephone calls fill her afternoon. A member in Virginia calls. The mother just got married, and the father of her child is suing for custody (they never were married). The new husband wants some counsel. A hearing is set for the 11th, and the family plans to represent itself. Cathy passes the message on to Scott. Several people call, concerned that their school systems haven't responded to their home school notices. Cathy tells them that as long as the school hasn't written back to say they can't home school, they shouldn't worry about it; the schools are very busy getting started with the public school students. The families will hear back soon enough, but they don't have to wait to hear back before starting their home school programs. 2:49 p.m. Steve answers his telephone. A lady from Texas wants to know if she has to fill out the forms her school district sent her and if, by filling out the forms, she is giving up her rights to keep the truant officer out of her home. Steve advises her that she is not required by state law to fill out the school district's home school notification form, nor is she required to allow a truant officer into her home. "If a truant officer comes, call us immediately." 3:19 p.m. Steve begins transcribing an Illinois Court Report article that Scott dictated. 3:21 p.m. Scott calls an attorney in West Virginia who represents a child with special needs and is appealing a special education case to the 4th circuit. The family took the child out of a public school and home schooled him. The attorney is trying to figure out how this will affect the federal case. 3:58 p.m. David Gilstrap delivers the day's mail. Normally, HSLDA's daily mail is sorted and delivered by 11:30 a.m. However, the combination of yesterday's federal holiday and the beginning of the school year resulted in a mountain of mail. 4:00 p.m. Cathy decides to give the new copier a test drive. Unfortunately, it jams (the "duplex" isn't working), so she makes the familiar trek upstairs. She manages to get the copying done and all the envelopes stuffed so the letters can all go out in the afternoon mail. 4:01 p.m. Scott sees the pile of mail David has delivered. The busyness of the day is beginning to show. Scott can't even keep up with the e-mail, much less the surface mail. 4:08 p.m. Scott works through the mail. He finds a wonderful letter of thanks from a family in Virginia and a card from a family in Texas. "This almost makes going through the mail worthwhile," he muses. 4:12 p.m. Scott opens the next piece of mail and finds a letter praising the Lord because, after a full year of legal maneuverings, one Iowa family's special program for their 15-year-old with Down's Syndrome has been approved by the required authorities. Scott takes a minute to call and congratulate the family for this good news. 4:18 p.m. Scott is still going through his mail. He reads a letter from a school district in Rhode Island which has a blatantly unconstitutional policy. They say, "We have not revised our policy. We will not approve any home school requests if our policy is not followed. We are referring this matter to our attorney." 4:25 p.m. Scott completes a letter to the Rhode Island school district attorney regarding their unconstitutional policy. 4:29 p.m. Scott opens a letter from a Texas family. Their school district issued them a ridiculous 5-page form to complete and return. Scott fills out the form, marking 9/10ths of it "not applicable." 4:43 p.m. Scott is still going through the morning's mail. He sighs as he reads a letter from Frederick County, Virginia, public schools. HSLDA has had six different battles going on with this one county. Scott directs Cathy to instruct our member family on how to respond. 5:03 p.m. Scott is down to the last piece of mail. That's it for Tuesday, September 5! Wednesday, September 6 7:45 a.m. Cathy arrives early in an attempt to get a head start on the day. She begins by gathering up some studies and other materials to send to a member in Rhode Island who's going to be making a presentation at the end of the month to her school committee. 8:27 a.m. Steve arrives at work. 8:30 a.m. Cathy walks next door to the Membership Department to pick up labels she printed for all the members in Duval County, Florida. She is preparing to send them a copy of the letter Scott wrote to their superintendent. Erin Smith, one of HSLDA's receptionists, hands her a note with the phone number of a new Massachusetts member who has a meeting with her superintendent this morning. Cathy returns to her desk immediately and calls the woman back. She advises her on what the officials do and do not have a right to ask her about. The member seems a lot less nervous by the time Cathy finishes the call. 9:00 a.m. Cathy calls the copier repair company and they promise to come and fix the machine. Now it's on to mail. 9:00 a.m. Scott is processing mail. A letter notifies him of a religious exemption hearing half way across Virginia. Why is this such a big state? But there is good news, too: a news report indicates that an Illinois school district is creating a positive home school policy. 9:30 a.m. Scott calls an attorney in Massachusetts to resolve outstanding details on a black single mother who was prosecuted for taking her children out of the public school. (Conflict with school officials began when the mother refused to send her daughter, who was becoming suicidal, back to public school.) This mother faced three different legal charges, plus a child neglect charge when she asked Massachusetts home schoolers for help. With HSLDA's help, she decided to start home schooling. 9:50 a.m. Cathy listens to her voice mail. One message is from a West Virginia member who says she has a school official at her door! Scott is on another call, so Cathy calls her right back. The situation has already been dealt with and the mother is relieved. David Gordon, HSLDA's litigation attorney, was able to take her call and the officials had already left. The mother indicates that they have neighbors who are nosey about their children occasionally being outside during school hours. She thinks the officials might come back. Cathy tells her that any time there is an official at the door or it is an emergency situation to tell the receptionist so she won't get transferred into voice mail. 9:53 a.m. Scott assigns Thad Cardine the task of researching and writing an article for the Court Report on the current status of Florida home schoolers participating in public school sports. 9:54 a.m. Scott calls the Massachusetts attorney about the black single mother situation. 10:10 a.m. Steve prepares for his trip to the Oregon Home School Conference in Portland. He will be working the HSLDA table. He runs various errands, picking up petty cash, confirming materials sent, verifying Mike Farris' schedule, etc. . . . 10:20 a.m. Cathy calls one of our members in Prince William County who will be required to appear at a religious exemption hearing at the end of the month. She just wants to touch base with the family and make sure they are prepared. They should be getting a letter from the school district soon. 10:55 a.m. Scott has a very unpleasant conversation with a school board attorney regarding a mother whose two sons were taken away by a family court judge. After completing the call, Scott sets up meeting with David Gordon, HSLDA's litigation attorney, to discuss the matter. 11:11 a.m. Steve takes a call from a lady in New Hampshire who asks if she can home school someone else's child for a short amount of time. He tells her it is fine as long as she notifies the person to whom she sent her notice of intent. In New Hampshire, notification can be made to either the school district superintendent, the private school principal, or the commissioner of education. 11:26 a.m. Scott meets with David Gordon to have an extended discussion regarding the case in which the mother's two sons were taken away by a family court judge. 12:26 p.m. Scott spends quite a while counseling a Massachusetts mother who is deeply concerned because she was told by her principal that her children had to be on the school bus tomorrow. Scott says, "This happens thirty or forty times every year. You do what is best for your child, and I'll deal with the school district." 12:36 p.m. Scott calls a home schooling mother in Massachusetts whose school district has an absolutely insane policy. The district's policy dates back almost 14 yearslong before the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court held that home schooling is constitutionally protected. Scott assigns himself the task of writing a "squawk" letter to let the district know that their policy exceeds the law. (Scott and Cathy have a whole drawer full of "squawk" letters.) 1:04 p.m. Scott is back from lunch and checking the messages that have accrued while he was away from his desk. 1:08 p.m. Scott finds good news! Iowa now permits substitute teachers to supervise home school programs. Requirements for home school supervisors has been a gray area in Iowa law since the statute was passed in 1991, but it looks like the department of education is on our side on this one. This is great for Iowa families who want to work with a teacher they know and trust, rather than an unknown, full-time state employee. 1:10 p.m. Scott gets a call from Prince William County saying the hearings are confirmed for Wednesday, September 27th. 1:15 p.m. Steve receives a fax from a Texas member in the Early Independent School District (ISD). The fax explains that the principal of the local primary school is trying to require home schoolers to submit their curriculum for approval. 1:16 p.m. Cathy receives an e-mail from Scott asking her to arrange for a court reporter for the hearing. 1:32 p.m. Scott calls a principal in Rhode Island about a family who is trying to get started legally there. 1:34 p.m. Scott is dealing with the Granite School District in Utah that has been very difficult to deal with. The Granite district is in the Salt Lake City area, and they use form letters to try to process hundreds of home schoolers each year. Home schoolers don't like to be "processed." 2:00 p.m. Cathy answers a call from a Utah member who says they have moved to a new school district. Last year HSLDA wrote to their old school district. The father tells her, "This new one is even worse." He faxes us the district's forms and other materials and asks for our opinion. Cathy calls him back and tells him that they don't need to use the school's forms; they can just write a letter. She assures him that Scott will write a letter to the district and that we'll fax him a copy of the letter and a sample letter for his use in responding to the district. 2:10 p.m. Scott types a letter to the Utah school district protesting its illegal policy. Home schoolers in Utah are not required to use the school district's "permission" forms. Scott spells out what districts can and cannot do in Utah. A Rhode Island mother calls about the difficult situation in her district. Rhode Island, like Utah, insists on "approving" home school programs. This Rhode Island district demands a whole laundry list of promises and evidence before they will "approve" a family. 2:45 p.m. Scott concludes a long conversation with the political operator for the Accelerated Christian Education schools who alerted us to the Maxwell v. TEA case in Texas. In this public school case, the Texas Attorney General filed a brief which argues that "parents do not have fundamental rights." Texas home schoolers go ballistic over this! 2:51 p.m. Scott contacts a truant officer in Frederick County, Virginia about a family claiming religious exemption. Next he calls another official about the same issue. 3:18 p.m. Scott prints out the letter to Utah's Granite School District. 3:20 p.m. Scott formulates a letter to the Early ISD (Texas) advising the school officials that there is no provision in Texas law which allows them to review home schoolers' curriculum. 3:23 p.m. Scott answers questions from a member about home schooling children who are not immediate family members (i.e. nephews, grandchildren, etc.) in Massachusetts. 3:30 p.m. Cathy receives a call from a member in Frederick County, Virginia, who says that a school official (truant officer from the high school) called her husband at work to find out where their children are. They are applying for religious exemption, but the husband just told the person that they're planning to home school. Cathy tells her we will call the school official back to tell them the family is applying for religious exemption and to see if there are any problems. 3:35 p.m. Scott gives Steve the Early ISD letter. It is to be sent to the school principal and the superintendent. Steve is also to send copies to each HSLDA member in the Early district. 3:45 a.m. The mother in Frederick County, Virginia, calls back. The truant officer called her husband again and this time he told the officer to call HSLDA. 3:51 p.m. Scott takes a call from a Frederick County school official regarding religious exemptions. School officials there have been systematically harassing home schoolers all fall. More and more members want to opt out of this nasty situation through the religious exemption law. This would end any on-going contact with the school. 3:52 p.m. Steve runs a query on HSLDA's membership database to determine the number of members in the Early ISD. He prints address labels and prepares the mailing. 4:20 p.m. Steve talks to a woman in Pennsylvania who is moving to New Hampshire. She asks what New Hampshire law is like and if she needs to notify the Pennsylvania school district that they are moving. Steve answers her questions and says he will send her a copy of the New Hampshire home schooling statute summary. He transfers her to Dana Sweeney, the legal assistant for Pennsylvania, for an answer to her question about notifying her school district of her impending move. 5:02 p.m. Scott talks to a Rhode Island principal about a family. He explains that Rhode Island law is very limited as applied to families with sincere religious objections to public school approval. The principal agrees to back off on several of his demands. 5:10 p.m. Cathy works until 6:00 p.m. making phone calls. She just can't seem to break away! One of the families needs a special-ed attorney referral for Massachusetts. She sends Scott an e-mail note about this. Thursday, September 7 7:00 a.m. Steve takes an early flight out of Dulles on his way to Portland, Oregon, where he will work the HSLDA table at the home school conference. 8:10 a.m. Cathy arrives at work. She begins the day by mailing information on the Virginia law to a Michigan member who is considering moving. 8:30 a.m. Cathy goes to HSLDA staff prayer meeting in the legal library. 8:30 a.m. Scott arrives for morning prayer. Today we pray for the work loadit's always very intense at the beginning of the school year, the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act, and a number of other issues. 9:00 a.m. Cathy listens to her voice mail messages. 9:15 a.m. Scott flips on his computer. By some miracle he hasn't received any voice mail messages yet, but two e-mail messages are already waiting for him. 9:15 a.m. Cathy returns a call from a family in Worcester, Massachusetts. The school psychologist had called the family to set up an appointment to come by their house with their "school adjustment counselor" with a form for the mother to sign. The psychologist and adjustment counselor had wanted to come by that day, but the mother explained that she is busy, and they agree to an appointment next week. Cathy tells the mother that she should offer to go to their office to sign the form rather than have them come to her home. If she has any questions about the form, she can explain that "her lawyer needs to review it first." 9:23 a.m. Scott begins a letter to a member family in Rhode Island. 9:35 a.m. Cathy returns the call of a member in Florida who is enrolled in an umbrella school requiring physical examinations of their children. The law says that any child enrolled in a public or private school is required to have a physical examination, but that "any child shall be exempt from the requirement of a health examination upon written request of the parent or guardian of such child stating objections to such examination on religious grounds." Cathy tells her to just write a letter and give it to the school for their files. 9:58 a.m. Scott answers a telephone call from a member family in Tennessee who is still trying to get the first ever exemption to the home school bachelor's degree requirement granted. 10:19 a.m. Scott takes a call from an Illinois member. Her abusive husband is divorcing her and, after five years of successful home schooling, is trying to attack the home school and take custody of the children. Scott outlines the basic defense for home school custody cases and promises to help bring her divorce lawyer up to speed on home schooling. 10:39 a.m. Scott calls Pat Farrenga of Holt Associates in Boston to ask for help finding expert witnesses for an un-schooling family who is being rejected by their school district. 10:47 a.m. Scott calls the un-schooling family in Massachusetts to check on their status. Massachusetts school districts have real trouble "approving" families who have no formal schedule or structure for their program. This family was approved last year by a very understanding assistant superintendentbut he has since moved to Vermont. 11:00 a.m. Cathy is listening to more voice mail messages when Cynthia Clapp, a membership coordinator, stops by. Cynthia wants to talk to Scott about the Virginia law's five-year-old exemption and about permissible work hours for 17-year-olds, but Mike Farris is in Scott's office. 11:21 a.m. Scott talks to Doug Phillips about an attorney who is an expert on child abuse cases. Doug needs to know whether he is a good resource. 11:29 a.m. Scott takes a call from an Indiana family member. The local school district has forced the family into a due process hearing. We're going to have to sue this district. 11:45 a.m. Cathy is paged to pick up a call. It is a member family in Virginia who was visited by social services. They were reported for physical abuse of their children. The mother is calling from a pay phone. Cathy transfers the call to Scott. 11:46 a.m. Scott answers the phone, and advises the mother on how to handle a social worker contact. (Editor's note: several weeks later, HSLDA files a federal civil rights lawsuit against the social worker in this case.) 11:55 a.m. Cathy answers a call from Cynthia who had just taken a call from a non-member. The non-member pulled her child out of school last spring, but didn't do anything else to comply with the Virginia home school law. Whenever the school called, she would just tell them that she was home schooling under a religious exemption. When the school told her that she had to apply for the exemption, she refused to do so. Now that another school year has begun, the school district is calling and insisting that she apply for a religious exemption by tomorrow, or her child will have to go back to school. The mother says she just found out yesterday that she was supposed to write a letter requesting a religious exemption. Cynthia told the mother that she should tell the school district that she'll mail them a letter. Cathy told Cynthia that was fine. The mother is express-mailing her membership application. 12:05 p.m. Cathy hears a desperate page over the intercom. A member in Ohio was reported to social services by a neighbor and needed to speak to someone. Scott is on the telephone. Cathy picks up the call, and, realizing it's the lunch hour, scrambles to find an attorney. Christopher Klicka takes the call. 12:10 p.m. Scott hangs up the phone. He has been talking to a Virginia home schooling mother who has been visited by social workers claiming educational neglect and physical abuse. The social worker, frustrated by the family's refusal to waive their constitutional rights, goes off to find some other way to get to the children. 1:29 p.m. Scott gets off the phone with a welfare worker who says our home schooling mother has to make $7.50 more per week or else her food stamps will be cut. 1:43 p.m. Scott receives a letter from a Massachusetts school district attorney dismissing child neglect charges against our black single mother. 3:18 p.m. Scott speaks to the Massachusetts un-schooling mother about the program approval process. 3:20 p.m. Cathy receives an e-mail from Scott which contains the name of a special education attorney in Massachusetts. She calls the member who requested the information. 4:32 p.m. Scott talks to the Assistant Superintendent of Massachusetts regarding the un-schooling situation. The child has special needs. 4:45 p.m. Scott talks with the Virginia home schooling mother who is on welfare. She has managed to get extra hours from her employer. She called her case worker who said, "That should do it. Get it in writing, and we won't cut your food stamps." 4:51 p.m. Scott calls the family in Indiana. He also calls CPS and the police officers. He leaves messages. The police station is radioing the police officer so he can get back to Scott about this child protective service issue. 5:13 p.m. Scott speaks to a local support group leader in Kansas. Their district is coming up with a new truancy policy. Scott outlines what that policy should include. 5:00  6:00 p.m. Cathy stays late to catch up on her telephone calls. Friday, September 8th 8:15 a.m. Cathy logs into her computer. 8:20 a.m. Cathy finds a voice mail message forwarded to her by the HSLDA receptionist from a Canadian member who is interested in the laws of South Dakota. Cathy records the message with a note to call later this morning (if she calls now it will only be 6:20 a.m. Alberta time). 8:22 a.m. Scott walks in the door. Stops to look at the Washington Post story on Senator Packwood's resignation. He notices Steve McGarvey's dark office and remembers that he is at the Oregon conference. This isn't a pretty time for him to be elsewherewe had 32 calls yesterday, and altogether too many of them were from social workers. 8:25 a.m. Cathy prints out the religious exemption letters she typed last night and places them on Scott's desk for his signature. Of course, he's already on the telephone. 8:40 a.m. Cathy makes a quick trip to the mailroom. As she walks by the receptionist desk she hears Son-Mi being paged for a call. Since Son-Mi isn't in yet, Cathy takes the call. It is a non-member from New Hampshire who is having problems with her school district. Cathy offers some suggestions and puts a membership application in the mail for her. 8:56 a.m. Scott processes e-mail and voice mail messages. 9:25 a.m. Scott discovers that the batteries in his microcassette have gone dead. All the entries he so diligently spoke into the microphone this morning weren't recorded. He calls Cathy on the intercom and asks her to find him some new batteries. 9:30 a.m. Cathy answers a call from Lisa, one of HSLDA's receptionists. The Rhode Island family with custody problems needs to talk to someone right away. The school board can't approve their program because the ex-wife has issued a restraining order, preventing the family from home schooling. Cathy transfers the call to Scott. 9:46 a.m. Scott installs new batteries in his microcassette recorder and recaps the entries he thought he'd already made that morning . . . He spoke with a family who got a letter from CPS in Indiana yesterday outlining how to defend themselves if investigated by social workers. 9:53 a.m. Scott dictates a letter closing the Massachusetts case where the school district prosecuted a black single mother. 10:00 a.m. Cathy begins returning telephone calls. She reads an e-mail note from Linda. A new member family in Florida says their doctor has informed them he will have to report the family because they don't have paperwork filed for their religious exemption to immunizations. (The family had written a letter for the umbrella school's file.) Cathy calls the mother and tells her that she will send her the required formthe family and the doctor will have to sign it and it will have to be placed on file at the umbrella school where the family is enrolled. 10:04 a.m. Scott dictates a letter to a Massachusetts superintendent who has suddenly changed the rules for home schoolers in his district. 10:34 a.m. Scott writes a letter to the Providence, Rhode Island, school district, explaining that their rigid policy must be changed to accommodate sincere religious objections. 10:55 a.m. Scott completes a telephone call with a Rhode Island father whose ex-wife has filed a restraining order preventing his school district from approving his home school program. 11:01 a.m. Scott dictates a fire-breathing letter to the superintendent of Middleboro, Massachusetts, who won't approve home schoolers unless they establish a predetermined time for their child to be involved with educational time activities, allow on-site visits by school officials, allow testing by school officials, provide documentation that the "educational rights of the child have been properly and appropriately maintained," cooperate "fully with the school department in all matters related to the education of the child," and "provide to the satisfaction of the school department a wholesome and stimulating environment which promotes the intellectual, emotional, and physical development of the child." 11:13 a.m. Scott dictates a letter to an attorney for the really obnoxious school district in Williamsburg, Virginia. This district had refused to "acknowledge" the home school program for a single mother unless the father agreed. The father used this fact to gain custody of the children. 11:32 a.m. Scott speaks to the Massachusetts attorney about the black single mother case. 11:35 a.m. Scott suddenly lifts up his eyes and sees a mountain of incoming mail. "Oh help!" 12:02 p.m. Scott hangs up the phone. He has been talking to an Indiana Child Protection Service worker, and then with the family in this case. CPS received a report that the child may be a victim. But after Scott grilled the social worker, she said, "Well, the parents are not the ones who are suspected to have done anything." Scott called the parents and advised the family to meet with the CPS worker at her office to discuss what is alleged to have happened to their child. They were very glad to hear that they were not the suspects, but obviously disturbed to hear that their child had been reported to be a victim. The parents closed the conversation by thanking Scott over and over again for what he'd done in this case and saying, "Our membership fee has been earned many, many times over just in the last couple of days here." 12:21 p.m. Scott receives a call from the education secretary in the Oklahoma governor's office. She is asking for our comments on an Oklahoma school district which is trying to unlawfully regulate home schoolers. 12:42 p.m. Scott hangs up the telephone. He has just finished speaking with the Oklahoma governor's educational policy advisor. This lady ran for state superintendent of education and lost by 1/3 of 1% of the vote. The governor then nominated her to be secretary of education, and the Democrats, on a straight party line and very public vote, rejected her. She is now the educational policy advisor for the governor, and she is just a fabulous person. 1:31 p.m. Scott completes a call with Oklahoma home school leaders. A year ago, the Oklahoma Department of Education "floated" a new policy, but it was soundly rejected by state officials. Unfortunately, the department never bothered to tell the school districts that the policy was not to be used, and it has resurfaced. Scott and the Oklahoma home school leaders discussed strategy for dealing with this situation. 2:07 p.m. Scott talks to the Massachusetts un-schooler who is trying very hard to get a home school program approved. The school officials just can't handle the un-schooling philosophy. (Editor's note: Several weeks later, after many telephone calls, this family was finally approved.) 2:33 p.m. Scott talks to a Massachusetts state leader on the phone. School districts all over the state are harassing home schoolers. Scott encourages the leaders to meet with local support groups to fight bad policies. 2:59 p.m. Scott goes over Florida sports story assignment with Thad Cardine, one of HSLDA's interns. 3:15 p.m. Scott skims through pleadings in a federal suit brought by a non-member. 3:23 p.m. Scott is still processing the day's mail. 3:42 p.m. Scott calls school officials in Massachusetts about nasty threatening letters to our member family. 4:40 p.m. Cathy calls a family in South Dakota who is wondering if it's okay to have their teenaged daughters occasionally babysit during school hours. There is no legal reason why this should be a problem, but Cathy suggests that if possible, it might be better for the children to come to the teenager's home for babysitting during school hours. If that is not an option, Cathy stresses making sure that the teen knows the proper procedures for handling people at the door or answering the phone. 4:40 p.m. Scott returns the call of a non-member mother in a desperate condition in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Her children are probably going to be taken away from her unless she gets them into a private school immediately. 5:00 p.m. Scott completes the phone call with the desperate single mother in Milwaukee. She is a Black Muslim, so Scott assists her in locating a private Muslim school that may be able to help her. 5:08 p.m. Scott talks to another Massachusetts family who is being driven "up their tree" by obnoxious and ignorant superintendents. 5:30 p.m. Cathy listens to a message from a new member in Uxbridge, Massachusetts. The Uxbridge school district has implemented a new policy which allows home schoolers to receive vouchers for their programs, but now it's official that there are strings attached: the families must agree to home visits, they have to use the school district's tests, etc., and it looks like the home schoolers are going to be required to follow OBE guidelines. This is not good. Cathy calls her back and talks to her about it. She also copies the mother's message over to Scott because she thinks he'll be interested in hearing all this. 5:50 p.m. Cathy logs out of her computer and turns off the light. Another week at HSLDA is over.Across the States California Still a State of Confusion for Home Schoolers In the golden state, an onslaught of misinformation and misinterpretation regarding home schooling again accompanies the beginning of school. The following items are representative of the kind of misinformation communicated to home school families in California: 1. San Diego City Schools informed home school families a $25 fee would have to accompany the private school affidavit in order for it to be accepted for the 1995-96 school year. Additionally, it was suggested that the administrator of the private/home school provide attendance records, teacher qualifications, and course of study for review by public school officials. 2. Los Angeles continues to assert, as it has in past years, that home school families are required to pay a $25 processing fee for filing the private school affidavit. 3. Accompanying affidavits received by home schoolers in Fontana, California, was a letter indicating that the administrators of the private school should provide the school's attendance journal, the qualifications of the teachers teaching in the private school, and the courses of study which would be offered. 4. San Francisco City Schools informed a home school mother that since she was not a certified teacher, she was not entitled to receive an affidavit. After the family read information from the CHEA Introduction to Home Schooling Manual, they decided they would have the father go down to see if he could obtain the affidavit. Along with CHEA, we have discovered that social workers, police officers, and school officials treat mothers differently than they do fathers. Sure enough, when the father politely but forcefully demanded the affidavit, the school officials handed it over. 5. It is almost universal now in every county that sends out a packet of information accompanying the private school affidavit, that there will be a letter outlining the State Department of Education's position that home schooling is only legal under the tutorial provision in California, found in Education Code  48224. It bears repeating that home education in California is accomplished under the private school provision of the Education Code. California is not unique in this respect. Eleven other states recognize home education under private school provisions. However, not everyone in Californiaespecially the state department of educationagrees that home schooling can be accomplished under the private school exemption. It is important to understand that the state department of education does not have any legal jurisdiction to determine which children are exempt from public school attendance. All they can do is furnish their opinions to local school districts which do have jurisdiction over attendance issues. The state department of education's position that home schoolers must be certified teachers is arguably an unconstitutional invasion of a parent's right to choose home education. For religiously motivated parents, this interferes with religious rights under both the California and the United States Constitutions. In order to legally interfere with a fundamental right (i.e., the right to home educate under the 14th and 1st Amendments of the U.S. Constitution), the state would have to demonstrate that it had a compelling interest in seeing every child is taught by a certified teacher and that certification is the least restrictive means available to achieve its objective of literacy and self-sufficiency. This could not be proven, since 49 other states do not require certification. Therefore, the requirement for certification for home school teachers would be the most oppressive law in the United States, and the state of California should fail in its attempt to require certification for home school teachers. Requests by school districts to view courses of study, qualifications of teachers, and attendance registers are beyond the school district's authority as well. The Education Code provides that the school district is entitled only to verify that the private school affidavit, which is to be filed between October 1st and 15th each year, has been filed. The local school district, which is charged with enforcing attendance, does not have the authority to approve, evaluate, or license private schools or any program of a private school. The attempt to charge a fee for processing the affidavit by county departments of education also exceeds the county's authority under the Education Code. Under Education Code  48222 and  33190, the State Superintendent of Public Instruction, not the county office of education, is to receive the filing of the annual affidavit. However, out of courtesy, the county offices of education have undertaken the role of providing and receiving the private school affidavits. But merely undertaking another's function does not give authority to "legislate" new requirements. We continue to urge member families not to pay the filing fee, which would set bad precedent for further inroads into the freedoms of private schools in California. Florida Sports Bill Update First they can't, then they can, then they can't again, and now . . . well, no one knows for sure. Florida home schoolers have been on quite a roller coaster ride lately, regarding whether or not they can participate in inter-scholastic, extra- curricular student activities. The guidelines of the Florida High School Activities Association (FHSAA) require all students to attend an "accredited public or private school." Home schoolers have not been permitted to participate in inter-scholastic activities in the past, because the FHSAA does not recognize the legality of home education in the state of Florida. Earlier this year, a bill allowing participation of home schoolers was passed almost unanimously, only to be vetoed by Governor Lawton Chiles. In hopes of returning authority to communities, the Governor called the legislation unnecessary, saying every district was free to permit home schoolers to participate on sports teams. His judgment has been proven false. In an attempt to demonstrate cooperation, the FHSAA has stated that they will allow home schoolers to participate in public school activities as long as they follow certain guidelines. The FHSAA stipulates that home schoolers must ask their local school board for permission to participate in school activities. The school district must then draft a provision allowing individual students to participate. But even if home schoolers get permission to play from their own school district, the sports event could be considered forfeit, because of previous FHSAA regulations. The regulations require all students to attend an "accredited public or private school." Therefore, the FHSAA could declare a forfeit in any competition in which home schoolers are involved. According to Florida home school lobbyist Brenda Dickinson, this situation is unsatisfactory. Home schoolers want to be able to participate not only in athletic competitions, but all inter-scholastic activitieswithin public or private schools, and as separate home school groups as well. Many home school groups in Florida are larger than a lot of private schools. Florida home school leaders are scheduled to meet with Governor Chiles and the director of the FHSAA within the next few weeks for possible negotiations. Florida residents are encouraged to write their senators and representatives polite, grammatically correct letters requesting access to all inter-scholastic, extra-curricular activities for public schools, private schools, and separate home school groups. Kentucky School Districts Send Intrusive Forms Some school districts in the state of Kentucky are requesting that home schoolers fill out a census form which contains essentially the same information required of public school students. Some information contained in the census is authorized for private school reporting. The only information that a private school (home schoolers operate as private schools in Kentucky) are obligated to provide is the following: 1. The name of the school; 2. The address of the school; and 3. The names and ages of the children attending the school. Kentucky Revised Statute  159.160 does provide that, in addition to the names, ages and places of residents of all pupils in attendance at the school, the superintendent may request any other facts the public school superintendent might require to help carry out the laws relating to compulsory attendance and employment of children. However, it is our position that the names, ages and places of residences of the pupils is sufficient to assist the attendance officer in carrying out his/her responsibilities. To require social security numbers, race of child, and other intrusive information about private school students interferes with parental rights under the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, and, for religiously motivated parents, interferes with the Free Exercise of Religion freedoms under the 1st Amendment. For the school district to require this information, they would have to demonstrate a compelling interest in receiving the requested information (i.e., it is of the highest importance and that is the least intrusive alternative available). In this case, the least intrusive means is what is already being provided by home schoolers submitting notification information. We believe the subject school districts will back off; however, at this time we do not have affirmation from the school districts to that effect. Any HSLDA family receiving requests for information exceeding what is indicated above should contact our office for direction. Missouri No Accuracy in Advertising in Knox County The Knox County Office of Education has taken an interesting approach in their attempt to make home schoolers provide notification of enrollment. The Office of Education took out a classified ad in the local newspaper, entitled, "NoticeKnox County Parents Who Are Home Schooling." The advertisement stated that home schoolers had to notify the Recorder of Deeds or the chief school officer of the public school within 30 days of establishing a home school program, and by September 1st annually thereafter in order to comply with the Missouri law. The ad further indicated that parents had to provide the name and age of each child attending the school, the address and telephone number of the home school, the name and address of each person teaching, and the names, addresses, and signature of each person making the declaration of enrollment. The notification was accurate in almost every respect with the exception of one major provision: that, in order to be in compliance with the Missouri law, a home schooler has to give notification. The home school law provides that: "For the purposes of minimizing unnecessary investigations due to reports of truancy, the home schooling parent or other person responsible for causing the child to participate in a home school program may provide notification to the recorder of deeds or the chief school officer." Home School Legal Defense Association continues to take the position that home schoolers do not need to provide notice in Missouri. Unless you are uncomfortable not giving notice, you should not do so. If you do provide notice, then you are obligated to provide notice annually thereafter according to the statute. One home schooler was on the ball in Knox County. She immediately ran a "rebuttal" ad to clarify the matter and correct the inaccuracy. This is a situation where the home schooler had to educate the educators! New York Families in Wappingers Falls Continue to Face Difficulties Thirteen Home School Legal Defense Association families residing within the Wappingers Central School District in Wappingers Falls have been notified by the local superintendent that their individualized home instruction plans (IHIPs) are deficient because they are not "measurable." According to Mr. John G. Marmillo, Superintendent of Schools, measurability can be achieved by either submitting a scope and sequence for all subject areas or copies of the table of contents for all textbooks to be utilized. The authority cited by Mr. Marmillo in requiring this information as part of the families' IHIPs is the handbook developed by the Dutchess County Board of Cooperative Educational Services (BOCES) which is, in effect, performing the administrative function of the school district without any express authority to do so. Home instruction in New York is regulated exclusively by the provisions of Section 100.10 of the Regulations of the Commissioner of Education. In developing an IHIP, parents must submit either a list of the syllabi, curriculum materials, textbooks, or plan of instruction to be used in each of the required subjects. There is no requirement that parents submit a table of contents or scope and sequence chart in order to comply with this regulatory provision. The state education department has provided guidelines for parents and public school officials in situations where a local school district may not be familiar with the textbooks being utilized by the parent. In this situation, it is considered reasonable for the district to require more than the name, publisher, copyright date and author's namethe district may request additional information in the form of a table of contents or written scope and sequence describing the text. Wappingers Falls officials, however, do not claim to be unfamiliar with the textbooks or other curriculum materials described in the IHIPs. Rather, the officials contend that the measurability of a home instruction curriculum must be demonstrated through the submission of the table of contents or scope and sequence charts as a part of the initial IHIP submission to the school district. HSLDA attorney Dewitt Black has responded on behalf of all the member families involved in this controversy, which first arose during the 1994-95 school year. Unless the school officials accept HSLDA's position, it is likely that the superintendent's decision will have to be appealed to the local Board of Education. Last year the local public school officials failed to notify the families of their objections to the IHIPs within the time frame established by the home instruction regulation, a procedural defect which the school district has avoided this year. North Dakota Home School Representatives Meet with DPI Officials On August 10, 1995, Home School Legal Defense Association attorney Dewitt Black, Reverend Clinton Birst, Executive Director of the North Dakota Home School Association, and North Dakota attorney Greg Lange met with six officials from the North Dakota Department of Public Instruction (DPI) and a representative from the North Dakota Attorney General's office in Bismarck to review proposals for new administrative rules. The new rules are necessary because of changes in the home school law during the most recent legislative session. DPI officials expressed a desire to include representatives from the home school movement in the development of the new administrative rules in an effort to avoid future litigation and other difficulties. In the past, HSLDA has challenged the actions of DPI and local school districts in North Dakota based upon a different understanding of the legislative intent of the home instruction statutes and our position that the DPI exceeded its authority in administrative rules which were supposed to be issued only on the basis of enacted legislation. After the meeting, it was agreed that five questions would be submitted to the Attorney General of North Dakota for an opinion before the administrative rules are drafted. The issues raised relate to the revised monitoring requirements and standardized testing provisions. After the Attorney General's opinion is received by DPI, another meeting is planned sometime in November to discuss any remaining differences. Ohio Contacts Kick Off the School Year The 1995-96 school year began with an unusual amount of calls from families who were contacted with requests that exceed the home school laws. One would expect that after six years under the current regulations these matters would become routine. However, the phone logs at HSLDA prove the contrary. A member family in Covington Exempted Village submitted their notification accompanied by the required outline and list of text books. In response they received a letter stating that the school district's form must be completed. We continue to see these kinds of demands in numerous counties. However, this superintendent went a step further, indicating he wanted "to see, in advance, all the materials, specifically, textbooks and workbooks you would use in your home instruction project." This demand far exceeds any authority given to superintendents by home school regulations. Countless county and city superintendents continue to use the "approval" language home schoolers find so objectionable. They continue to send home schoolers "applications" and "requests for home schooling" even after the family has submitted a notification in compliance with the regulations. Home schooling is a right protected by the Constitution, not a privilege. Letters to families that have been "approved" for home schooling violate this principle. In response, HSLDA has mailed letters to superintendents addressing these concerns. Dayton City Schools continued requiring home schoolers to have their "request" form notarizedanother demand which exceeds regulations. The Dayton City Schools sent an additional form to home schoolers requesting the student's social security number, ethnic background, last school attended, and an explanation of why the family chose home schooling. Confusion regarding mandatory kindergarten and the compulsory school age continues to reign. Once again, kindergarten is mandatory if you are going to attend public school first grade. Home schoolers are not required to report five-year-olds to school officials, nor are they required to start kindergarten once they begin reporting their six-year-old. A student's academic progress was called into question in Highland County as a result of curriculum submitted. However, academic progress is not measured by curriculum. Additionally, curriculum is submitted "for informational purposes only." The superintendent does not have authority to "approve" curriculum. His job is to ensure that the required subjects are being covered; not to monitor content. Greene County Board of Education and Xenia City Schools are at the heart of a controversy regarding their revision of home school regulations. The controversy revolves around the language indicating that the superintendent "or his designee" is to receive and process notifications and, ultimately, excuse children from compulsory attendance. The home school regulations are clear that the excuse must come from the superintendent. This has been a matter of much debate and correspondence, and the outcome of this situation is still unclear. Home school leaders are determining what course of action would be best. HSLDA recommends that Ohio home schoolers become very familiar with the provisions of the home school law in order to detect requests that exceed the law. If you do not have a copy of our summary of the Ohio law, please contact our legal department and we will be happy to forward one to you. South Carolina Jasper County Board of Education Reverses Home Schooling Disapproval The Jasper County Board of Education has reversed its earlier decision to deny six home schooling families the right to operate home schools for their children. The controversy arose when the board of education, at its meeting on August 14, 1995, voted to disapprove the home schooling applications of these families even though they met all of the legal requirements of the home school statute, Section 59-65-40 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. No reason was given to the families in the letters notifying them of the board's decision, but a newspaper article appearing in the Jasper County Sun indicated that the decision was based upon the board's opinion that the parents did not possess the necessary qualifications to teach their children at home. Not only did the board refuse to recognize that the parents met the teacher-qualification requirements of the law, the board also failed to notify the parents of the date and time of the meeting and of their right under the home school law to speak in support of their application. Home School Legal Defense Association attorney Dewitt Black wrote a letter to the local superintendent on behalf of the two HSLDA member families in the group. In a later telephone conversation with Attorney Black, the local superintendent agreed to again place the applications on the agenda for the next meeting of the board scheduled for August 28, 1995. This meeting was attended by a number of the parents whose applications had been denied, and they were given an opportunity to express their objections to the board's earlier decision. The board then voted to reverse itself, and all of the home schooling families were approved for the 1995-96 school year. Although there is no question that home schooling is legal in South Carolina by virtue of the statute enacted in 1988, this situation in Jasper County is another example of how parents may be challenged in their right to conduct home education by public school officials who are misinformed or philosophically opposed to home education. The Marine Corps of the Home School Movement Congressional Action Program Volunteers Put a New Face on Lobbying It's a cold and drizzly autumn day in Washington D.C. The patter of rain on the steps of the Senate office building is accented by the constant swish of umbrellas opening and closing as staffers and politicians scurry to their destinations. Inside the massive marble structures that house America's most prestigious legislators, decisions will be made that affect our entire nation. But that is nothing new. Today is a day like all other days in our nation's Capital. Today, Congress will pass laws. Today, men will make speeches, and special interests will court the favor of Hill staffers. And there will be meetingsthousands of them. Hundreds of yards away, a very different gathering is taking place. In the newly renovated conference room of the Holiday Inn, 60 home educators gather. Many have traveled hours to be here. They come in all ages, heights, and colors, but are absolutely unified in their theme: They have come to ask Congress to leave them alone. As the meeting commences a speaker takes the podium. In his lapel he is wearing a bright red pin with an embossed design of the Capitol domethe insignia of the Congressional Action Program. His name is Doug Phillips. For three years Phillips has been preparing home educators for face-to-face meetings with Congressional leaders. And for three years these moms and dads have been travelling the corridors of Capitol Hill in pursuit of a dreama dream that the blessings of liberty they have enjoyed will pass to their posterity. These families are the minutemen of the home school movement. They are a specially trained group that meets for one purposethe defense of the home schooling family. Sometimes their visits to Washington are carefully planned weeks in advance, other times they are emergency responses to late-breaking legislation. Today's mission: Stop a Congressional attempt to build a nationwide computer-driven registry and tracking system. As home schoolers, these families are painfully aware of the fact that these registries can be used against parents who home educate their children, who employ corporal discipline, or who hold to religious beliefs that are unacceptable to the social workers who surf the database. Complicating matters, some leaders have called for the government to mandate a national I.D. card with a unique biometric identifier. This would mean that every time an American wanted to get a job he would have his retina scanned or his hand geometry analyzed. Phillips begins the debriefing. He walks the group through the key provisions of the bill. Next, he addresses the primary arguments against the tracking program. There is an opportunity for questions and answers followed by a brief time of role playing which gives the Capitol Coordinators a chance to test their familiarity with the issues. Last minute details are covered. Each of the teams has been given a specific assignment and handed information packets. Headquarters is established in the foyer of the Hart Senate Building. Throughout the day, volunteers can check in there, get additional information packets, and report about their meetings. "Remember," Phillips reminds them, "We will meet by that giant, ugly sculpture that hangs from the ceiling. What is that thing called anyway?" He can never remember what that sculpture is called, but everyone knows what he's talking about. It is hard to miss. The meeting comes to a close. Across the room heads are bowed. Children are praying. Fathers have their arms around their wives and children. God's blessing is invoked. Forty-five minutes after the meeting began, these teams of home school families are off and running. Many will be on their feet for more than six hours before they can return to their cars and begin the long journey back to the warmth and comfort of home. Within a ten mile circumference of this hotel room are the headquarters of more than 200 education-related organizations and special interest groups. Many of them exist on taxpayer subsidies. They have set up camp in D.C. to deliver a message: "More money + more power (for them) = better education." Their jobs and their salaries depend on Congress getting this message. Like the home educators assembled in the quiet Holiday Inn meeting room, these lobbyists will be traveling today to the halls of Congress, but on the quest of a very different agenda. The largest of these groups, the National Education Association, would like to see home schooling banned for the average family. Their lobbyists are well-paid professionals with clout. After being routed in February of 1994 when one million parents said "no" to an NEA-inspired teacher certification provision in the H.R.6 bill, they are on their guard. The contrast between these two groups is stark. One group is comprised of professional lobbyists in search of more government hand-outs for the special interests they represent. The other consists of volunteer parents who are sacrificing time and money to appeal to legislators to make wise decisions on issues which impact the home school family. One chief-of-staff for a well known Democratic Senator told a CAP mom: "Every day I get calls from lobbyists who want to wine me and dine me. Everybody wants a hand-out. I'm tired of it. You are the real thing. A mom who just wants to look out for her family. I'll meet with you any time!" (Paraphrase) These families are making a difference. Often, they are the first, and sometimes even the only, people to hand-deliver outside analysis to the Representatives and Senators on key issues. Of course, sometimes the Congressmen just want to talk about home education. And the results are often surprising. After one visit by home schoolers, a California Congressmen called the National Center and announced that he was so impressed by the meeting that he was persuaded to home school his own children. "How do I get started?" he asked. "Even if they don't agree with us on every point," Phillips mused to the Capitol Coordinators, "perhaps we'll get them by attrition if we keep having visits like that." Most of these home schoolers were nervous the first time they entered a Congressional office. The thought of bringing an appeal directly to a United States Senator can make a first-timer quiver in his Rockports. But these home school foot soldiers quickly earn their "Hill-legs." By the third or fourth visit of the day they are raring to go. Before these families are released as official Capitol Coordinators they must go through an intensive, one-day training program. Since January of 1993 more than 250 home educators have gone through CAP Basic Training. Many of these individuals and families have gone on to be Capitol Coordinators. For three years these stalwarts have been the marine corps of the home school movementthe first to hit the beaches, clearing the way for the calls and letters of thousands of concerned parents whenever legislative threats arise. The last CAP Basic Training brought about one hundred home educators together for an intensive day of preparation. Those assembled learned about the key federal battlefronts which threaten to undermine home school freedoms and were given Scriptural insights and practical suggestions on how to present home education in the best possible light when meeting with leaders. Emphasis was placed on attitude as well as methodology. And whether the issue was the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, or "how to set up a meeting with a Congressman," parents were urged to approach their mission with Christian charity and respectfulness. Joe Adams, chaplain of the Kentucky State Legislature, described the way he has seen the Lord work in various legislators' lives. His story is a powerful illustration how one man with faith and vision can make a difference. HSLDA President Michael Farris shared war stories from his experience as a home school litigator which illustrated God's sovereign hand of protection over the home school movement. Veteran "Cappers" shared their experience with the prospective lobbyists about their first visit to Capitol Hill. After sharing the history of the children's rights movement and its assault on the family, CAP Director Doug Phillips discussed the most common pitfalls of Christians entering the political arena. "Christians enter politics to change the world for Jesus, but they end up employing the strategies of compromise and adopting the world's attitudes," Phillips told the families. "We must act wisely, but all of our activities must be predicated on the understanding that God and God alone is responsible for our success. Our responsibility is simply to be obedient." The importance of the basic training can not be underestimated. Even so, the heart of CAP is not the training, but the people: fathers and mothers who are willing to sacrifice their time, and lead their children to "stand in the gates of the nation," families who believe in an America where the sanctity of the home is inviolable, and parents who are free to raise their children in the fear and admonition of the Lord without interference from Big Brother. Some might be surprised to learn that the most effective members of the CAP team are the children. Over the years CAP volunteers have learned that the greatest asset during these visits are the sweet spirits and simple honesty of the students. Frequently, skeptical staffers are uninterested in what Mom and Dad have to saythey want to confront the children. But when confronted with hostile questions, these young people just speak from the heart about why they like being taught at home. Out of the mouths of these babes, the truth is often confirmed. And here is the interesting thing. When a family visiting a Congressional office demonstrates a unity and strength which comes from the togetherness fostered by home education, the barriers of party affiliation, race, and gender cease to be impediments to a successful meeting. Why? In the words of one Congressman, "I will listen to you because I wish my kids loved each other the way yours seem to." An Open Letter to Home School Moms by Michael Farris One of the special privileges I enjoy is the opportunity to interact with thousands of home schooling parents every year at state home schooling conferences and conventions. At every conference, people come up to me and express gratefulness and appreciation for the work of HSLDA. I am always especially moved by those who tell me that they pray for us on a regular basis. That means more to all of us here than can ever be adequately explained. But as I have been watching my wife, Vickie, begin the process of starting our family's fourteenth year in home schooling, a question suddenly occurred to me: Who thanks the real heroes of the home schooling movement? Vickie is teaching five of our school-age children this year (two have graduated; two are too young). She is teaching a total of twenty-eight subjects. And she is washing and cooking and washing and cleaning and washing and driving and washing and shopping and washing and mending and washingall on top of her teaching responsibilities. Vickie is unusual compared to the world at large. And she is obviously uniquely special to me. But there are another two or three hundred thousand home schooling moms who are doing essentially the same things. And it's my guess that these ladiesthe real heroes of the home schooling movementrarely hear words of thanks. So let me give it a try. To all home schooling moms: T hanks for being willing to sacrifice the minutes, hours, days, months, and years that constitute your life so your children will have the opportunity to grow up godly, mature, wise, intelligent, and loving. People who give great sums of money are widely heralded as great philanthropists. You have given something of far greater value. You have given your children your very essence so that they may achieve the kind of greatness that God values. Keep in mind that their only hope for achieving those character qualities is bound up in the fact that you serve the one true God who endows you with those same characteristics. Thank you for your plain old hard work. In the midst of a society bent on obtaining the maximum in convenience, you demonstrate that things of value are not accomplished quickly or on the first try. You are the exemplars of the virtue of the third, fourth, and fifth tries. If your children take your example into the American work place, our nation will rise to its former prominence as the country which succeeded because of its simple commitment to hard work. Thank you for being willing to encourage other moms who struggle, who are new to the movement, who are discouraged, who need your counsel, your experience, or your wisdom. The selflessness you demonstrate in the lives of your children pours over into the hours you devote so that others may succeed. Arguably you have a vested interest in the success of your own children. You have nothing to gain from helping others. It is an act of pure altruism. Thank you for your obedience to God. Together with your husband you have read the Scriptures. You have understood them to lead you in this path of home education. And regardless of the costs, the difficulties, or the lack of immediate rewards or gratification, you have done what is right simply because it is right. Few are willing to do right these days for its own sake. You serve as an example of moral courage that our leaders would do well to copy. Thank you for loving your husband. Your marriage is the human foundation of your home. When it cracks and crumbles, all that you valueincluding your home schoolingis threatened. Your selfless love for your husband is an essential ingredient to keeping that foundation strong and true. Thank you for taking the time to teach your children the Truth. So much of education today ignores the truth and simply attempts to impart knowledge separated from the principles of absolute truth which flow from Almighty God. Your children have the advantage of learning what is real and true and good. Those things which are cheap counterfeits will always be self-evident frauds to those who have had the good fortune to spend years being exposed to the Truth. And finally, thank you for being willing to swim against the stream of society's definition of success. Stay-at-home moms are given little praise in our society today. The "mothers of the year" are normally "great moms," but they are really chosen because they also serve as captains of industry, public policy, or finance. At the very time the world ridicules a mom who devotes herself exclusively to her family, you have embraced that role with even more enthusiasm than the generations who have gone before you. Your version of "having it all" means shouldering all of the responsibility for the rearing of your children. The feminists won't hold a women's conference in Chinaor anywhere elseto give you the accolades you so richly deserve. But your true reward will never be meager efforts of thanks like this letter. Your true rewardat least the one you will see here on earthwill be children who rise up, while the rest of the world is stooping in compromise, and call you blessed with their lives, their words, and their deeds. It is your legacy of love. Thanks. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-10IA057-000942-B023-74http://www.learnathome.com:80/225a_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215850 text/html 6389HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:53:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:   Resources:  Answers to Commonly Asked Questions About Home Schooling Prepared by the Home School Legal Defense Association Q. How many home schoolers are there nationwide? A. In a study published in 1990, Dr. Brian Ray of the National Home Education Research Institute estimated that there were 474,000 children being home schooled in America. This data was based upon the Department of Education's assessment of the 1989-90 school year. Since that time, HSLDA's membership has grown approximately 25% per year. Based upon HSLDA's growth and the growth of the home schooling community as a whole (15-25% per year, according to Dr. Ray), there will be approximately 1.2 to 2 million children schooled at home during the 1996-97 school year. Our best estimation is that there are between 900,000 and 1.2 million children being taught at home in America. That would be equal to approximately 330,000 families that are home schooling their children. Q. Why do parents decide to home educate their children? A. Most parents decide to home school because they feel they can provide a better education for their children than public schools or private schools offer. The rampant problems of drugs, crime, violence, teen pregnancy, and sexually transmitted diseases in our nation's schools are compelling parents to find alternative learning environments free from these social ills. Home schooling allows parents to promote good academics, common sense morality, and family unity. Q. Is home schooling legal in all 50 states? A. Yes. Each state has its own statutes, court decisions, or regulations that pertain to home schooling. (For more information on a particular state, please contact HSLDA.) Q. What are the legal problems home schoolers face and how does HSLDA attempt to solve them? A. Many families are contacted by school or government officials questioning the legality of home schooling. The majority of legal challenges we handle are resolved amicably, through peaceful negotiations. However, thousands of families have faced situations which are far from pleasant. Hundreds have ended up in court or administrative hearings. For example: Warrants were issued for the arrest of Mark and Chris DeJonge, home-schooling parents in Michigan who were home schooling without a certified teacher. After being found guilty by lower courts, the DeJonges' case was eventually appealed to the Michigan Supreme Court. In 1993, the Court ruled that the teacher certification requirement for religious home schoolers was unconstitutional, transforming Michigan from the worst state in the nation for home schooling to one of the best. The criminal convictions of the DeJonge family were reversed. HSLDA filed a federal civil rights action, Jeffrey, et al v. O'Donnell, et al, on behalf of nine home-schooling families against 11 oppressive school districts in 1986. In 1988, a U.S. District Court Judge ruled that "the tutorial provision of Pennsylvania Compulsory Attendance Law . . . is unconstitutionally vague" and therefore, unenforceable. As a result of this victory, over twenty cases in court against HSLDA families were won or dismissed. In February of 1994, thousands of home schoolers from across the nation flooded the U.S. House of Representatives with phone calls urging an amendment that protected home schoolers from a teacher's certification requirement in H.R. 6. An amendment protecting home and private schools was passed overwhelmingly. The Lund and Reimche families in North Dakota were tried and convicted for the crime of home schooling their children. HSLDA appealed their case to the North Dakota Supreme Court. The Court ruled in favor of the families and reversed their truancy convictions. HSLDA has also worked successfully to achieve legislative victories by assisting state home schooling organizations with their legislative goals. The following are just a few examples: In 1989, Governor George A. Skinner signed into law North Dakota's new home- schooling law, which repealed the state's former teacher certification requirement for all teachers. Kansas home schoolers defeated H.B. 2392 in 1991, which would have required home school children to be taught by certified teachers. In Oregon, Governor Barbara Roberts signed into law a bill allowing home schoolers to participate with public school students in interscholastic activities. Maryland home schoolers convinced the Maryland Legislature to remove the home visit requirement from the department of education's regulations. In 1993, after making it through the Senate Education Committee with the help of an amendment, H.B. 1260 passed, repealing the South Dakota home visit law. Q. What are some of the more restrictive states for home schooling? A. The battlegrounds shift around the nation. Over the years we have faced fierce or multiple legal conflicts in South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Michigan, Virginia, Iowa, Tennessee, New York, Rhode Island, and North Dakota just to name a few. Presently, we have cases pending in California, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon and Virginia. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-11IA057-000942-B023-82http://www.learnathome.com:80/225e_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215858 text/html 9165HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:53:56 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  Resources:  Colleges That Have Accepted Home Schoolers Compiled January, 1996 by Home School Legal Defense Association Adrian College, MI Allegheny College, PA American River Community Junior College, CA American University, Washington, DC Amherst College, MA Anderson University, IN Antelope Valley College, CA Antioch College, OH Appalachian Bible College, WV Arkansas State University Asbury College, KY Austin College, TX Baptist Bible College, PA Barber College,, OH Baylor College, TX Belhaven College, MS Belmont College, TN Bethany College of Missions, MN Bethany Lutheran College, MN Bethel College, IN Biola University, CA Blackburn College, IL Bob Jones University, SC Boston University, MA Brigham Young University, UT Broome Community College, NY Brown University, RI Bryan College, TN Buffalo State, NY Calvin College, MI Carleton College, MN Casper College, WY Cedarville College, OH Central Piedmont Comm. College, NC Christendom College, VA Christian Brothers University, TN Christian Heritage College, CA Christian Liberty College, VA Chowan College, NC Cincinnati Bible College, OH Circleville Bible College, OH The Citadel, SC Clearwater Christian College, FL College of Lake County, IL College of Southern Idaho, ID College of William and Mary, VA Colorado Christian University, CO Columbus College, GA Concordia College, MN Cooke County College, TX Cornell University, NY Corning Community College, NY Covenant College, TN Crichton College, TN Criswell College, TX Cumberland County College, NJ Dallas Christian College, TX Dartmouth College, NH David Lipscomb University, TN DeKalb Community College, GA Delta College, MI Diablo Valley College, CA Dordt College, IA Drake University, IA East Central College, MO Eastern Hillsdale College, MI East Texas Baptist University Emmaus Bible College, IA Evansville University, IN Evergreen Valley Comm. College, CA Faith Baptist Bible College, IA Fitchburg State College, MA Freed-Hardeman University, TN Fresno Pacific College, CA Garden City College, KS Geneva College, PA George Fox College, OR George Mason University, VA G.M.I. School of Engineering, MI Goddard College of Plainfield, VT Gonzaga University, WA Gordan College, MA Goucher College, MD Grace College Grand Rapids Baptist College, MI Grand Valley State University, MI Grove City College, PA Harding University, AR Harvard University, MA Heritage Baptist University, IN Hillsdale College, MI Hope College, MI Houghton College, NY Houston Baptist University, TX Indiana University Joliet Junior College, IL John Brown University, TX Kalamazoo Valley Comm. College, MI Kenyon College, OH Keystone Community College, PA King College, TN Kings College, NY Lancaster Bible College, PA Lansing Community College, MI Lawrence Technological Univ., MI Lee College, TN LeTourneau College, TX Liberty University, VA Louisiana State University Loyola College, MD Lutheran Bible Institute, WA Magdalen College, NH Maranatha Baptist Bible College, WI Maryland Bible College and Seminary The Master's College, CA Memphis State University, TN Messiah College, PA Michigan Institute of Technology Middlebury College, VT Mid-Plains Community College, NE Mississippi State University Mississippi College MIT, MA Modesto Junior College, CA Montana Wilderness School of the Bible Montreat Anderson, NC Moody Bible Institute, IL Morrisville College, NY Mt. Vernon Nazarene College, OH Nazareth College, NY Nebraska School of Tech. Agriculture New Mexico State University, NM New River Community College, VA Niagra University, NY Northampton Community College, PA Northeast Missouri State University Northern Michigan University, Marquette Northland Baptist Bible College, WI Northwest Christian College, OR Oakland University, MI Oberlin College, OH Ohio State University, Agricultural Technical Institute, Wooster, OH Oklahoma Baptist University, OK Oklahoma City Comm. College, OK Oklahoma State University, OK Oklahoma University of Science & Arts, OK Onondago Community College, NY Oral Roberts University, OK Owens Technical College, OH Oxford University, England Pennsylvania State University, McKeesport, PA Pennsylvania State University, York Pensacola Christian College, FL Pepperdine University, CA Purdue University, IN Piedmont Bible College Prince Georges Comm. College, MD Princeton University, NH Redlands College, OK Redwoods Junior College, CA Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, NY Rice University, TX Ricks College, ID Roberts Wesleyan College, NY St. Johns College, MD St. Joseph's College, ME St. Joseph's School of Nursing, NY St. Louis Christian College, MO St. Phillips College, TX St. Vincent College, PA Salem College, WV Samford University, AL Sam Houston State, TX Shimer College, IL Simpson College, CA Stanislaus State University, CA Stockton State College, NJ Southern Arkansas University, AR Southern Illinois University, Carbondale Southern Nazarene University, OK Southwest Baptist University, MO Southwest Texas State University Taylor University, IN Tennessee Temple University, TN Texas A&M, TX Texas Christian University Texas Tech University, TX Texas Woman's University Thomas Aquinas College, CA Thomas More Institute, NH Towson State University, MD Tyler Junior College, TX U.S. Air Force Academy, CO Union University, TN University of Akron, OH University of Alabama in Huntsville, AL University of Alaska, Fairbank University of Arizona University of Arts, PA University of California, Berkley University of California, Los Angeles University of California, Sacramento University of California, Santa Cruz University of Colorado, Colorado Springs University of Dallas, TX University of Delaware University of Evansville, IN University of Florida University of Houston, TX University of Mary Hardin Baylor, Belton, TX University of Michigan University of Minnesota University of Mississippi University of Missouri-Rolla University of Nebraska-Lincoln University of New York University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill University of Oklahoma University of Pennsylvania University of St. Thomas at Houston, TX University of South Carolina University of Southern Indiana University of Steubenville, OH University of the South, TN University of Stubenville, OH University of Tennessee University of Texas, Austin University of Texas, El Paso University of North Texas University of Virginia, Charlottesville University of Washington University of Wisconsin, Madison University of Wyoming U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD Vanderbilt University, TX Victoria College, TX Virginia Military Institute, VA Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University, VA Walsh University, OH Washington and Lee University, VA Washington Univ. Medical Center, MO Western Texas College, TX Wharton County Junior College, TX Western Baptist College, OR Western Washington University, WA Wheaton College, IL Whitman College, WA Whitworth College, WA Wisconsin Lutheran College, WI Word of Life Institute, NY Yale University, CT York College of Pennsylvania Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-12IA057-000942-B023-99http://www.learnathome.com:80/2262_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215916 text/html 32687HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:54:08 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  Resources:  Home School Heartbeat Radio Broadcasts Home School Heartbeat is designed with you in mind! Topics are chosen to encourage you, to notify you of legal "hot spots," and to inform you of other news of interest to home schoolers. Stations airing Home School Heartbeat as of June 1, 1995, are listed below. Click on state abbreviation to find the Home School Heartbeat nearest you AK AL AR AZ CA CO CT DE FL GA HI IA ID IL IN KS KY LA MA MD ME MI MN MO MS MT NC ND NE NH NJ NM NV NY OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VA VT WA WI WV WY DC APO NMI ALABAMA _______________________________ Centreville WBIB 1110 AM 8:30 a.m. Dothan WVOB 91.3 FM 11:05 a.m. Enterprise AFRN 90.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Montgomery WLBF 89.1 FM 11:40 a.m. Opelika WJHO 1400 AM 7:55 a.m. Selma AFRN 90.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Sheffield AFRN 89.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. ARIZONA _______________________________ Bullhead City KNLB 88.9 FM 12:45 p.m. Ehrenburg KNLB 89.3 FM 12:45 p.m. Kingman KNLB 91.3 FM 12:45 p.m. Lake Havasu City KNLB 91.1 FM 12:45 p.m. Phoenix KXEG 1010 AM KRDS 1190 AM KRDS 105.3 FM Yuma KNLB 91.3 FM 12:45 p.m. ARKANSAS _______________________________ Arkadelphia AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Bentonville AFRN 88.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Blytheville AFRN 91.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Clarksville AFRN 89.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Crossett AFRN 91.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. El Dorado AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Forrest City AFRN 91.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Jonesboro KNEA 970 AM 7:35 a.m. AFRN 90.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Mena KENA 1450 AM 9:35 a.m. Pine Bluff AFRN 91.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Pocahontas AFRN 91.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Warren AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. CALIFORNIA _______________________________ Angwin KCDS 89.9 FM 11:30 a.m. Blythe KNLB 89.3 FM 12:45 p.m. Burney-Redding KIBC 90.5 FM 12:12 p.m. 5:02 p.m. Chico KCJH 91.9 FM 11:45 p.m. Elk Grove KCJH 99.5 FM 11:45 p.m. Fortuna KCDS 88.1 FM 11:30 a.m. Livermore KCJH 90.3 FM 11:45 p.m. Modesto KCIV 99.9 FM Sacramento KCJH 97.7 FM 11:45 p.m. KCJH 94.5 FM 11:45 p.m. Santa Maria KGDP 660 AM KGDP 95.7 FM 10:55 a.m. M-F 8:58 a.m. Sat. 11:50 a.m. Sun. Stockton KCJH 90.1 FM 11:45 p.m. Ukiah KCDS 91.3 FM 11:30 a.m. Vacaville KCJH 93.5 FM 11:45 p.m. COLORADO _______________________________ Breen KLLV 550 AM 3:40 p.m. Cedaredge KJOL 100.9 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Cimarron KJOL 88.1 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Cortez KNMI 100.9 FM 9:35 a.m. Delta KJOL 100.9 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Denver KPOF 910 AM 8:45 p.m. Durango KNMI 90.5 FM 9:35 a.m. Garfield KJOL 89.9 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Glenwood SpringsKJOL 107.7 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Grand Junction KJOL 90.3 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Gunnison KJOL 91.9 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Johnstown KHNC 1360 AM Sat. Mornings Nucla KJOL 88.3 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays Pagosa Springs KNMI 90.9 FM 9:35 a.m. Pueblo KERP 91.9 FM 9:32 a.m. Rio Blanco KJOL 89.9 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays DELAWARE _______________________________ Camden WRBS 100.1 FM 9:55 p.m. Thursdays Dover WRBS 100.1 FM 9:55 p.m. Thursdays FLORIDA _______________________________ Chiefland WTBH 91.5 FM 11:00 a.m. Ft. Walton Beach WPSM 91.1 FM 10:20 a.m. 12:50 p.m. Gainesville WJLF 91.7 FM 1:20 p.m. Jacksonville WAYR 550 AM 3:00 p.m. Lake Wales WIPC 1280 AM 7:31 a.m. 4:45 p.m. Madison WMAF 1230 AM 12:15 p.m. Palm Bay WEJF 90.3 FM 12:05 p.m. Pensacola WVTJ 610 AM 1:45 p.m. Punta Gorda WVIJ 91.7 FM 2:45 p.m. 11:30 p.m. Sarasota WKZM 105.5 FM 12:30 p.m. Starke WTLG 88.3 FM 8:39 a.m. Tallahassee WLOR 1120 AM 8:30 a.m. GEORGIA _______________________________ Atlanta WFTD 1080 AM 11:50 a.m. Augusta WLFJ 100.1 FM 3:20 p.m. Dublin AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Macon WJTG 91.3 FM 4:15 p.m. Marietta WFOM 1230 AM Valdosta WAFT 101.1 FM 3:30 p.m. Waycross AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. HAWAII _______________________________ Hilo KFSH 97.1 FM 7:20 a.m. Honolulu KLHT 1040 AM 8:00 p.m. IDAHO _______________________________ Boise KFXD 580 AM Mornings ILLINOIS _______________________________ Mt. Vernon AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Olney WPTH 88.1 FM 7:31 a.m. 4:46 p.m. Salem AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. INDIANA _______________________________ Evansville WBGW 101.5 FM 1:15 a.m. Ft. Wayne WFCV 1090 AM 3:55 p.m. Indianapolis WBRI 1500 AM 5:03 p.m. WXIR 98.3 FM 6:25 a.m. Jeffersonville WZCC 1570 AM 7:15 a.m. WXLN 105.7 FM 7:15 a.m. Salem WSLM 1220 AM WSLM 98.9 FM Mornings Southbend WHME 103.1 FM Terre Haute AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. IOWA _______________________________ Fairfield AFRN 88.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Ottumwa AFRN 88.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Sioux City KTFC 103.3 FM 6:25 a.m. Sioux Rapids KTFG 102.9 FM 6:25 a.m. KANSAS _______________________________ Emporia KNGM 91.9 FM 2:00 p.m. Ft. Scott KVCY 101.7 FM 12:30 p.m. Goodland KGCR 107.7 FM 2:15 p.m. Great Bend AFRN 89.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Hays AFRN 89.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Kansas City KLJC 88.5 FM 9:15 a.m. Medicine Lodge KREJ 95.9 FM 8:58 a.m. Salina KCVS 90.7 FM 10:00 a.m. Topeka KBUZ 90.3 FM 1:15 p.m. Wichita KCFN 91.1 FM 1:15 p.m. KENTUCKY _______________________________ Ashland AFRN 91.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Cambellsville AFRN 91.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Covington WTSJ 1050 AM 1:20 p.m. Danville WDFB 1170 AM WDFB 88.1 FM 3 times daily Louisville WZCC 1570 AM 7:15 a.m. WXLN 105.7 FM 7:15 a.m. McDaniels WBFI 91.5 FM Somerset WTHL 90.5 FM 10:27 a.m. 5:35 p.m. LOUISIANA _______________________________ Alexandria AFRN 88.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Baton Rouge WJFM 88.5 FM Jonesboro AFRN 89.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Lafayette KSJY 90.9 FM 12:20 p.m. Monroe AFRN 94.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Ruston AFRN 88.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. MAINE _______________________________ Freeport WMSJ 91.9 FM 10:45 a.m. 1:45 p.m. 6:45 p.m. MARYLAND _______________________________ Baltimore WRBS 95.1 FM 9:55 p.m. Thursdays Denton WKDI 840 AM 12:50 p.m. Frederick WJTM 88.1 FM 3:15 p.m. Mon., Tues., Th. Princess Anne WOLC 102.5 FM 2:30 p.m. Salisbury WRBS 100.1 FM 9:55 p.m. Thursdays MASSACHUSETTS _______________________________ Boston Songtime Radio WROL 950 AM 6:05 a.m. Quincy WEZE 1260 AM Weekends MICHIGAN _______________________________ Albion WUFN 96.7 FM 3:53 p.m. Escanaba WHWL 100.1 FM 12:18 p.m. 5:18 p.m. Gaylord WPHN 90.5 FM 7:30 p.m. Hancock WMPL 920 AM 12: 25 a.m. 3:03 p.m. WZKR 93.5 FM 3:03 p.m. Houghton WHWL 99.9 FM 12:18 p.m. 5:18 p.m. Kingsford WEUL 98.9 FM 11:18 a.m. 4:18 p.m. Marquette WHWL 95.7 FM 12:18 p.m. 5:18 p.m. Newberry WPHN 88.7 FM 7:30 p.m. Traverse City WLJN 89.9 FM WLJN 1400 AM 11:30 a.m. Victoria WHWL 98.1 FM 12:18 p.m. 5:18 p.m. MINNESOTA _______________________________ Babbit KBHW 99.5 FM 8:45 a.m. Bemidji KBHW 92.7 FM 8:45 a.m. Duluth WWJC 850 AM 8:45 a.m. 1:30 p.m. Ely KBHW 95.3 FM 8:45 a.m. Fosston KKCQ 107.1 FM Grand Rapids KBHW 98.3 FM 8:45 a.m. International Falls KBHW 99.5 FM 8:45 a.m. Little Falls KTIG 95.9 FM 3:00 p.m. Park Rapids KTIG 95.9 FM 3:00 p.m. Pequot Lakes KTIG 100.1 FM 3:00 p.m. Red Lake KBHW 93.5 FM 8:45 a.m. Virginia KBHW 95.3 FM 8:45 a.m. Wadena KTIG 98.3 FM 3:00 p.m. Walker KTIG 92.7 FM 3:00 p.m. Worthington AFRN 88.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. MISSISSIPPI _______________________________ Brookhaven AFRN 89.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Cleveland WDFX 98.3 FM 1:15 p.m. Columbus AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Forest WQST 92.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Jackson WQST 92.5 FM 1:15 p.m. Kosciusko WJTA 91.7 FM 4:15 p.m. McComb WAKK 1140 AM 3:30 p.m. AFRN 90.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Natchez AFRN 91.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Oxford AFRN 101.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Starkville AFRN 88.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Tupelo WAFR 88.3 FM 1:15 p.m. West Point AFRN 96.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. MISSOURI _______________________________ Brookfield AFRN 91.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Joplin KNEO 106.3 FM 7:30 a.m. Kansas City KLJC 88.5 FM 9:15 a.m. Kennett AFRN 91.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Memphis AFRN 91.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Mexico KJAB 90.1 FM 1:13 p.m. Neosho KNEO 91.7 FM 7:30 a.m. Springfield KLFJ 1550 AM 11:30 a.m. MONTANA _______________________________ Belgrade KGVW 640 AM NEBRASKA _______________________________ Dakota City KTFJ 1250 AM 5:30 p.m. Omaha KCRO 660 AM 11:27 a.m. Scottsbluff KCMI 96.9 FM 11:25 a.m. NEVADA ______________________________ Carson City KCDS 90.7 FM 11:30 a.m. Las Vegas KNLB 91.9 FM 12:40 p.m. KNLB 97.7 FM 12:45 p.m. KNLB 107.1 FM 12:45 p.m. Reno KRCV 630 AM 11:23 a.m. KCDS 90.7 FM 11:30 a.m. KCJH 88.3 FM 11:45 p.m. NEW HAMPSHIRE ______________________________ Concord WEZE 103.5 FM Weekends NEW JERSEY ______________________________ Trenton WRDV 91.9 FM 6:00 p.m. NEW MEXICO ______________________________ Clovis AFRN 91.1 FM* 2:15 p.m. Farmington KNMI 88.9 FM 9:35 a.m. Hobbs KKKK 98.3 FM 12:28 p.m. NEW YORK ______________________________ Cape Vincent WMHI 94.7 FM 12:24 p.m. Castorland WMHI 95.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Copenhagen WMHI 95.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Dansville WMHR 88.1 FM 12:24 p.m. Endicott WMHR 95.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Gouveneur WMHI 100.1 FM 12:24 p.m. Homer WMHR 95.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Houghton WJSL 90.3 FM 12:24 p.m. Ithaca WMHR 101.7 FM 12:24 p.m. Lima WMHN 90.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Little Falls WMHR 100.3 FM 12:24 p.m. Lowville WMHI 95.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Lyons Falls WMHR 95.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Malone WMHI 101.3 FM 12:24 p.m. Norwich WMHR 97.7 FM 12:24 p.m. Ogdenburg WMHI 105.7 FM 12:24 p.m. Oneonta WMHR 97.7 FM 12:24 p.m. Potsdam WMHI 100.1 FM 12:24 p.m. Rochester WASB 1590 AM 11:30 a.m. 5:00 p.m. Syracuse WMHR 102.9 FM 12:24 p.m. Webster WMHN 89.3 FM 12:24 p.m. NORTH CAROLINA _______________________________ Asheville WGCR 720 AM 4:15 p.m. WKJV 1380 AM 3:15 p.m. Columbus WKJT 1160 AM 3:30 p.m. Dobson WYZD 1560 AM Durham WRTP 1530 AM 11:15 a.m. Gastonia WGAS 1420 AM Mocksville WDSL 1520 AM 3:30 p.m. New Bern AFRN 88.5 FM* 12:15 p.m. Statesville WHYM 550 AM 12:15 p.m. Tryon WTYN 1160 AM 3:30 p.m. Winston Salem WSMX 1500 AM NORTH DAKOTA _______________________________ Ellendale KTBC 89.3 FM 12:30 p.m. Jamestown AFRN 90.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Williston AFRN 91.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS _______________________________ Saipan KSAI 936 AM 3:05 p.m. OHIO _______________________________ Castalia WGGN 97.7 FM 1:55 p.m. Cincinnati WAKW 93.3 FM 7:58 p.m. Cleveland WCCD 1000 AM 11:25 a.m. Columbus WRFD 880 AM 2:30 p.m. Conneaut WGOJ 105.5 FM 7:25 a.m. Lancaster WFCO 90.9 FM 8:40 p.m. Shelby AFRN 89.9FM* 1:15 p.m. Steubenville WSTV 1340 AM 2:30 p.m. AFRN 88.9 FM* 12:15 p.m. Toledo WJYM 730 AM 8:55 a.m. Zanesville WCVZ 92.7 FM 10:00 a.m. 5:30 p.m. OKLAHOMA _______________________________ Ada AFRN 88.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Elk City KPDR 88.3 FM 1:41 p.m. 11:16 p.m. Enid KBVV 91.1 FM 8:15 a.m. 4:30-5:00 p.m. Idabel AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Norman AFRN 89.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Oklahoma City KQCV 800 AM 3:26 p.m. Poteau AFRN 91.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Sand Springs KTOW 1340 AM 7:20 a.m. Stillwater AFRN 89.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Tulsa KCFO 970 AM 2:00 p.m. 8:30 p.m. OREGON _______________________________ Brookings KYTT 105.5 FM 9:00 a.m. Coos Bay KYTT 98.7 FM 9:00 a.m. Eugene KYTT 105.5 FM 9:00 a.m. Gold Beach KYTT 105.5 FM 9:00 a.m. Myrtle Creek KYTT 96.7 FM 9:00 a.m. Portland KBVM 88.3 FM 2 times daily Roseburg KYTT 105.5 FM 9:00 a.m. Springfield KORE 1050 AM 3:47 p.m. Sutherlin KYTT 107.1 FM 9:00 a.m. PENNSYLVANIA _______________________________ Altoona WFRJ 90.7 FM 11:15 a.m. Bedford WBFD 1310 AM 12:10 p.m. Bensalem WRDV 107.9 FM 6:00 p.m. Carlisle WTRM 106.3 FM 2:15 p.m. Coatesville WDAC 103.9 FM 12:30 p.m. Halifax WTRM 90.9 FM 2:15 p.m. Hanover WRBS 107.1 FM 9:55 p.m. Thursdays Harrisburg WDAC 104.9 FM 12:30 p.m. WTRM 90.1 FM 2:15 p.m. Johnstown WFRJ 88.9 FM 11:15 a.m. Lancaster WDAC 94.5 FM 12:30 p.m. Lebanon WADV 940 AM 9:10 a.m. Millersburg WTRM 90.9 FM 2:15 p.m. Phillipsburg WPHB 1260 AM 11:40 a.m. Pittsburg WFRJ 97.7 FM 11:15 a.m. Reading WDAC 103.9 FM 12:30 p.m. Red Lion WGCB 96.1 FM WGCB 1440 AM Warminster WRDV 89.1 FM 6:00 p.m. RHODE ISLAND _______________________________ Portsmouth WJFD 90.7 FM 9:00 a.m. SOUTH CAROLINA _______________________________ Beaufort WAGP 88.7 FM 9:30 a.m. Greenville WMUU 94.5 FM 2:30 p.m. WLFJ 89.3 FM 3:20 p.m. WTBI 91.7 FM 8:42 a.m. Spartanburg WTYN 1160 AM 3:30 p.m. SOUTH DAKOTA _______________________________ Gregory KVCX 101.5 FM 7:31 a.m. 4:45 p.m. Murdo KVCX 104.9 FM 7:31 a.m. 4:45 p.m. TENNESSEE _______________________________ Ardmore WLSV 1110 AM 8:30 a.m. Bristol WHCB 91.5 FM 4:35 a.m. 4:45 p.m. AFRN 90.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Chattanooga WDYN 89.7 FM 12:12 p.m Church Hill WMCH 1260 AM 6:25 a.m. Cookville WWOG 90.9 FM 9:27 a.m. 4:25 p.m. Dayton WREA 1520 AM 3:30 p.m. Jackson AFRN 88.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. Harrogate WRWB 740 AM 2 times daily Memphis WCRV 640 AM 4:00 p.m. WGSF 1210 AM Shelbyville AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Springfield WDBL 94.3 FM 9:00 a.m. Tullahoma AFRN 88.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. TEXAS _______________________________ Abilene AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Amarillo KPDR 88.5 FM 1:41 p.m. 11:16 p.m. AFRN 90.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. KRGN 103.1 FM 6:55 p.m. Austin KIXL 970 AM 6:20 a.m. Big Springs KKKK 103.9 FM 12:28 p.m. Borger KPDR 88.1 FM 1:41 p.m. 11:16 p.m. AFRN 91.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Brenham KSBJ 91.9 FM 1:20 p.m. Brownfield AFRN 90.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Bryan KSBJ 93.1 FM 1:20 p.m. Canadian KPDR 88.1 FM 1:41 p.m. 11:16 p.m. Dalhart AFRN 91.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Dumas AFRN 91.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Farwell KIJN 92.3 FM 10:15 a.m. KIJN 1060 AM 10:15 a.m. Giddings KOKE 101.7 FM 8:20 p.m. Hereford AFRN 90.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Houston KKHT 106.9 FM KTEK 1110 AM 6:40 a.m. Humble KSBJ 89.3 FM 1:20 p.m. Jacksonville KBJS 90.3 FM 12:28 p.m. Jasper KSBJ 92.9 FM 1:20 p.m. Kilgore KHYM 1060 AM 5:22 p.m. Lake Jackson KSBJ 91.1 FM 1:20 p.m. Lamesa AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Levelland AFRN 91.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Lufkin KSWP 91.9 FM 1:21 p.m. Midland KKKK 99.1 FM 12:28 p.m. Pampa KPDR 91.9 FM 1:41 p.m. 11:16 p.m. AFRN 90.9 FM* 1:15 p.m. Pecos AFRN 91.3 FM* 1:15 p.m. Plainview KWLD 91.5 FM 2:00 p.m. AFRN 90.7 FM* 1:15 p.m. Sugar Land KSBJ 99.7 FM 1:20 p.m. Texarkana KHSP 1400 AM 6:37 a.m. Victoria AFRN 88.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. KSBJ 101.7 FM 1:20 p.m. Waco KBBW 1010 AM 6:00-7:00 a.m. 5:00-6:00 p.m. Wheeler KPDR 90.5 FM 1:41 p.m. 11:16 p.m. Wichita Falls KMOC 89.5 FM 1:31 p.m. UTAH _______________________________ Moab KJOL 103.3 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays St. George AFRN 88.7 FM* 2:15 p.m. Vernal KJOL 90.7 FM 10:55 a.m. Saturdays VIRGINIA _______________________________ Amherst WAMV 1420 AM 9:00-11:00 a.m. Arlington WAVA 105.1 FM 8:30 p.m. WABS 780 AM 7:30 p.m. Bristol AFRN 90.5 FM* 1:15 p.m. Cambridge WPEX 90.9 FM 2:43 p.m. Chase City WMEK 980 AM Martinsville WPIM 90.5 FM 2:12 p.m. 4:10 p.m. New River Valley WPIN 91.5 FM 2:12 p.m. 4:10 p.m. Pulaski WPUV 1580 AM 1:30 p.m. Roanoke WPIR 91.3 FM 2:12 p.m. 4:10 p.m. Warrenton WPRZ 1250 AM 4:23 p.m. Winchester WTRM 91.3 FM 2:15 p.m. WASHINGTON _______________________________ Spokane KUDY 1280 AM 5:02 p.m. KTFL 101.9 FM 9:58 a.m. Sunnyside AFRN 91.1 FM* 1:15 p.m. WEST VIRGINIA _______________________________ Bluefield WPIB 90.9 FM 2:12 p.m. 4:10 p.m. Huntington WEMM 108 FM 5:06 p.m. Charleston WJYP 100.9 FM 10:55 a.m. WISCONSIN _______________________________ Appleton WRVM 95.3 FM 3:03 p.m. Eagle River WRVM 107.1 FM 3:03 p.m. Iron Mountain WRVM 105.5 FM 3:03 p.m. Lancaster WJTY 88.1 FM 12:30 p.m. Land O'Lakes WRVM 106.3 FM 3:03 p.m. Merrill WRVM 92.1 FM 3:03 p.m. Miladore WGNV 88.5 FM 12:20 p.m. Milwaukee WVCY 107.7 FM 12:30 p.m. Oshkosh WRVM 92.1 FM 3:03 p.m. Phelps WRVM 103.9 FM 3:03 p.m. Plymouth WJUB 1420 AM 2:33 p.m. Ripon WRVM 92.1 FM 3:03 p.m. Stoughton WVCY 92.7 FM 12:30 p.m. Suring WRVM 102.7 FM 3:03 p.m. Tomah WVCX 98.9 FM 12:30 p.m. Wausau WRVM 100.1 FM 3:03 p.m. WYOMING _______________________________ Casper KCEB 91.1 FM 8:20 a.m. * AFRN= American Family Radio Network Main station: WAFR, Tupelo, MS Translator station Back to top of the page. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-13IA057-000942-B023-108http://www.learnathome.com:80/2266_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215925 text/html 24221HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:54:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  Resources:  Home Schooling Your Special Needs Child: Questions and Answers, Recommendations and Resources Dear Friend: Currently in America, hundreds of families are home schooling children with special needs ranging from attention deficit disorder to severe multiple handicaps. Parents often find that when they bring these children home to be educated, they come out of the "deep freeze" that has kept them from making significant progress. Gone are the comparisons, labels, social pressures, and distractions that a regular classroom can bring. Parents can offer their children individualized education, flexibility, encouragement, and support. For learning disabled children who function best with "real-life problems" rather than artificial worksheet tasks, home schooling is ideal. For medically sensitive children, learning at home provides the opportunity for careful monitoring. And for attention deficit children who function best with less structured time and fewer distractions, home schooling is the answer. The decision to home school a child with special learning needs is a weighty one. Parents may meet pressure from the school district, or even the state, to enroll their child in the system. Many encounter criticism from well-meaning family and friends, and most must deal with their own fears of inadequacy. Nevertheless, in record numbers, parents of special needs children are choosing to home educate, and most are finding that the rewards far outweigh the costs. Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) exists to defend the right of all families to home school. This includes families who are home schooling a special needs child. HSLDA will provide the aid of an attorney should your home school encounter any legal problems. Additionally, HSLDA can supply you with a list of professionals who are qualified to assist you in testing and setting up a plan for teaching your child. We also offer a list of resources for interested parents who need help in selecting their curriculum. Of course, you will have to decide whether home schooling is best for you, your child, and the rest of your family. HSLDA is here to assist and encourage you. Please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions. Sincerely, Janet Wayne HSLDA Special Needs Coordinator Two Steps You Can Take to Protect Your Special Needs Home School HSLDA is convinced that home schooling is the best way to meet most special learning needs, and we are delighted to assist dedicated parents in this endeavor. Our experience in defending home schoolers and in monitoring legislation causes us to believe that the battlefront for home schooling children with special learning needs is rapidly heating up. There are two steps that we recommend our members take to help us defend their home schools. You may also find it beneficial to take these steps. As you read through these suggestions, remember that it is best to choose a course of action that fits the severity of your child's special learning needs. 1. Arrange for regular evaluations and document your child's progress. Whatever the severity of your child's special learning needs, it is important to keep accurate records demonstrating how you met these needs and how your child has progressed. Much of your success in defending your home school against any legal challenges may hinge upon your personal determination of what is best for your child and upon your keeping of accurate records. One of the most important elements of your record keeping should be documentation of periodic evaluations of educational progress. HSLDA recommends that all families with children who have special learning needs perform such evaluations. As a general guide, the more severe the special learning need, the more frequent and thorough the evaluations should be. There are several options for performing evaluations. Form C - a sample evaluation form to help you picture the kind of information that would be valuable to document. (This form is available by calling HSLDA and will be downloadable in the future). It is best to keep all of your records concerning each special needs child for a minimum of three years or until the child is beyond compulsory school age. 2. Obtain assistance in meeting your child's special needs. If any of the following are true of your child, we suggest that you obtain some form of assistance. Your child: a) has received special education services in this current school year, b) has been enrolled in special education services for the coming school year, c) has been evaluated and diagnosed as having a special learning need, d) is functioning substantially below grade level, e) has a physical disability that significantly hinders his or her ability to learn, or f) has severe educational difficulties that have been observed but not professionally diagnosed. If, after reading this list, you determine that you do need assistance, you will next need to determine what kind of assistance to obtain. As parents, you are intimately acquainted with your child's needs and are best able to determine what specific help will be most beneficial. In general, the more severe your child's special learning needs, the more assistance you should obtain to help meet these needs. We have provided the following options for your consideration. A. EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANTS. Because of the legal complexities involved in dealing with schools and government agencies, one of the safest things you can do to protect your home school is to obtain the services of a special needs educational consultant. This consultant would be someone who could, in the event you were called upon to defend your home school, serve as an objective expert witness in defense of your home-schooling program. This consultant can be anyone who has either credentials or experience in the same area as your child's special need. Preferably, this person should not be directly related to the child (i.e. parent, grandparent, aunt, uncle, etc.). The consultant should be in contact with your family a minimum of four times during the school year to document your child's progress. To find a consultant, there are several different sources you can contact: FRIENDS. It is best to first contact personal friends who might themselves be able to assist you or who might know of someone who can. SUPPORT GROUPS. Contact your local or state support group for the names of individuals who work with families with special needs children. SPECIALISTS. Families who have children with special needs have often used the services of a number of specialists. You may want to contact the same individuals who provide their services to public schools; some will also provide their services privately. COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES. Some colleges and universities have programs available to help families with special needs children. Please be aware, however, that they commonly will want your permission to use the results of their work with your child in research-related projects. B. PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS. The next most beneficial thing you can do to protect your home school is to secure regularly scheduled assistance and/or evaluation for your child through a private program (e.g. Hewitt Research or the National Association for Child Development) that provides services to children who have the same area of special need as your child. C. PUBLIC SCHOOL PROGRAMS. In general, we have found that it is better if families do not use the services offered through their local public school. We have seen many families end up with legal difficulties because of their involvement with the public school. If your family is currently receiving public special education services, you may want to establish a goal to eventually meet all of your child's special education needs through private sources. We are aware that many families have previously enrolled their child in their local public school's special education program and, now that they are home schooling, they would like to retain these free public services. We understand that as a matter of economics and ease of access, free public school services are very attractive. We also understand, however, that strings of regulation come attached to these programs. Generally, we find that the longer a family uses these programs, the tighter the strings of control become. D. OTHER. Of course, there are other steps you can take that may involve combinations of these suggestions or yet other alternatives. HSLDA will do everything we can to protect a family's right to home school a child who has special learning needs. Members of Home School Legal Defense Association are welcome to call our Special Needs Coordinator, Janet Wayne, for assistance with any of the above-described steps, including finding a consultant and giving advice to families who want to withdraw their child from receiving public school services. The information provided is designed to assist families in establishing the safest legal environment possible for their home schools. These recommendations do not constitute legal advice. The forms found on the following page are samples. HSLDA members who indicate on their application or renewal form that they are home schooling a special needs child will be sent HSLDA's "Recommendations for Home Schooling Children with Special Needs," which includes these forms along with instructions for filling them out. (Sample forms and instructions are available by calling HSLDA and will be downloadable in the future). For further information and guidance, read through the questions and answers. Questions and Answers for Parents of Special Needs Children What does Home School Legal Defense Association consider a special need? Generally, we define a special needs child as one who is working two or more years behind grade level in the majority of his subjects, a child who has been receiving special education services, or a child with any other disability that seriously affects his/her ability to learn. Do I have the right to home school my special needs child? Parents who wish to home school a special needs child have the right to do so under the protection of the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the Constitution. This includes parents who presently have their child in an Individual Educational Plan (IEP) set up by their public school's special education department. Parents may feel intimidated by school officials and teachers and are often led to believe that they have fewer constitutional rights to home school a special needs child than a normal child. Even though the Constitution protects the right of parents to home school, most state legislatures have passed statutes regarding home schooling. These laws typically come under the compulsory school attendance statutes for the state, and often contain stricter provisions for families home schooling special needs children. For example, in Iowa, the family of a special needs child must get prior approval from the Area Education Agency (AEA). In Arkansas, children who have been identified as needing special education services must receive these services from a state-certified special education teacher. Do I have a right to therapeutic services offered through the public school? It depends on the state you live in, your family's financial need, and the severity of your child's need. Please be aware, however, that HSLDA discourages families from pursuing services through the public schools. Instead, we recommend obtaining services provided by private organizations or individuals. Please note that HSLDA does not assist members in obtaining public school services. What if our family cannot afford to have related services done privately? Call us. The most important consideration is that the special needs of your child are being met. HSLDA members who cannot afford private services are encouraged to contact our Special Needs Coordinator for assistance and counsel. Does HSLDA require families to use a consultant? No. However, HSLDA does recommend at least quarterly contact with a consultant if the child's needs are severe enough to warrant assistance. How long should families retain the assistance of a consultant or educational program? It depends. In general, if the special learning need is remediable through home schooling, you should maintain this assistance until your child is functioning close to grade level. If the special learning need is such that it cannot be corrected, you should probably continue to receive assistance throughout your home-schooling experience or until your child is no longer of compulsory school age. The answer to this question may also vary depending upon the specific statutes and regulations in your particular state. Must my consultant be currently certified? No. Parents should not be concerned about whether the consultant is currently certified or certified in their state only that they have credentials and/or experience in the area of their child's special need. What if my consultant is making too little or too many recommendations for me to follow? It is important to communicate your expectations to your consultant at your initial meeting. If you are a beginning home schooler, you might want a significant amount of oversight and recommendations from your consultant. If you are an experienced home schooler, however, you might want a consultant who has a hands-off philosophy. If you find that you are not compatible with the consultant you have chosen, you can locate someone else. Can I obtain the services of a consultant from another state? Yes. However, it is best to have a consultant who has met you and your child and is able to meet with you in person. If you choose a person in another state, consider sending samples of your child's work to them and then consulting with them over the phone. What kind of quarterly evaluations are necessary? We do not specify what the evaluation should involve but only that there is a review of the child's progress. The most important component of the evaluation is that the parent and consultant are aware of the special needs child's skill levels and how he is progressing with them. There are many ways to do this other than administering a standardized test. For instance, if you have written down some domestic goals for your child, such as putting away clean clothes, have a checklist to evaluate whether he is doing this independently. If he is not, make notes of what he is unable to accomplish and what steps he is failing to understand. You can share this information with your consultant when you meet quarterly. The two of you can brainstorm ways to facilitate his progress through these steps. Should I send the evaluations to HSLDA? No. Just keep copies in your files at home. If your home school is ever in jeopardy, we will request these records from you. Are evaluations required by the state? No. HSLDA requests evaluations for the benefit of the family should they encounter any legal problems as a result of home schooling their special needs child. PLEASE REMEMBER: Each state has its own requirements that are separate from these recommendations. Am I legally required to have an Individualized Education Plan (IEP) for home schooling? The public school system uses IEPs to set up individual teaching plans, obtain related therapeutic services, and make transportation arrangements if necessary. Home schooling is a different educational arena. Children no longer have to be transported to class, therapeutic services are done privately, and home schooling offers individualized education for all students not just special needs children. We suggest that parents exercise responsible home schooling by planning and evaluating each child's progress. For clarification purposes we designate IEPs for home educators as Student Education Plans (SEPs). In addition to legal representation, what services does HSLDA provide for member families who have children with special needs? HSLDA provides: A list of professionals in the member family's area who have experience and credentials in the area of special needs. Available resource guides in the area of your child's special needs. The Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery-Revised, an untimed, individually administered test used for children who do not test well in a lengthy, timed group test with other children. It must be administered by a special education teacher. The Brigance Inventory of Basic Skills, a test that helps parents inventory their child's skills. The purpose of the test is to help parents determine what skills their child has and has not mastered. The Brigance Inventory of Early Development is for parents of developmentally delayed children from birth to eight years to assess eleven major skill areas. A special needs coordinator is available should any questions arise concerning home schooling your special needs child. For more information on home schooling your special needs child, contact Home School Legal Defense Association at (540) 338-5600. National Organizations/Newsletters Helpful to Families Home Schooling Special Needs Children The following is a list of some of the available national organizations/newsletters that home educators with special needs children might find beneficial. This list is not meant to be exhaustive. If there are additional organizations that home educators have found to be helpful, information concerning them would be greatly appreciated. Inclusion in this list is not meant as an endorsement, and the views and opinions held by the organizations are not necessarily those of HSLDA. ORGANIZATIONS Awana Club Awana Club has a Friends Ministry that offers story time, activity time, and Bible memorization. For more information call (708) 213-2000 ext. #219. Christian Cottage Schools Mike and Terry Spray 3560 West Dawson Road Sedalia, CO 80135 (303)688-6626 Mike and Terry Spray offer a national education service that includes testing, curriculum design, lesson planning, unit lessons, workshops and ongoing counseling. Direct Link P.O. Box 1036 Solvang, CA 93464 (805)688-1603. This is a Christian organization in California that links people and resources together. They would be helpful in obtaining information concerning doctors, specialists, psychologists, wheelchair donors, special handicapped van sources, etc. Family & Education Consulting Service 6900 Park Circle Knoxville, TN 37909 (615)584-6144 Bob Beninger offers families testing, curriculum consulting, and counseling for home schooling a special needs child. Hearing Hearts Mrs. Beverly Cox 4 Silo Court Sterling, VA 20164 This is a quarterly gospel magazine for the deaf from the American Ministries to the Deaf. Hewitt Research P.O. Box 9 Washougal, WA 98671-0009 (800)348-1750 Hewitt offers testing, curriculum design, and counseling for families home schooling a special needs child. Homemade Schooling RR1 Box 188 Atwood, IL 61913 This is an informative newsletter for families home schooling a child under challenging conditions. One issue included a free lesson planner, the author's recipe for lessons plans, an article on bringing home your labeled child, and a section on product review. Joni and Friends P.O. Box 3333 Agoura Hills, CA 90301 This organization offers a free monthly newsletter and sponsors family camps in the summer. Attendant care is provided for the physically disabled. National Challenged Homeschoolers Associated Network (NATHHAN) 5383 Alpine Road SE Olalla, Washington 98359 (206)857-4257 This is a national organization of parents home schooling their special needs children. Tom and Sherry Bushnell, coordinators of NATHHAN, publish a quarterly informative newsletter the NATHHAN NEWS. National Academy for Child Development (NACD) P.O. Box 1001 Layton, UT 84041 (801)451-0942 NACD is a national organization comprised of independent chapters throughout the United States. Robert Doman designs home-based child development programs for families. National Information Center for Children & Youth with Disabilities (NICHCY) P.O. Box 1492 Washington, DC 20013 (800) 695-0285 This is an organization that provides free information for all families who have a child with a disability. National Institute for Learning Disabilities (NILD) 107 Seekel Street Norfolk, VA 23505 NILD provides workshops and educational therapy through Christian schools in the country for learning disabled children. The contact person is Lillian Snider at (804)721-7129. Parents Instructing Challenged Children (PICC) c/o Mulvey 615 Utica, NY 13069-1954 This organization is for parents of special needs children in New York. The Orton Dyslexia Society Chester Building/Suite 382 8600 LaSalle Road Baltimore, MD 21286-2044 (410)296-0232 The Society is a source of helpful information for children with reading difficulties. Wayside Language Center 12721 NE 101st Place Kirkland, WA 98033 John Blanchard publishes a national newsletter, Light Along the Pathway, for parents of special needs children. Write for a free sample newsletter. Dr. Blanchard also does consulting and writing plans for parents. Janet Wayne has a BS in elementary education and a minor in special education from the University of Texas at Austin. She received her M.Ed with an emphasis in Reading Disabilities from Southwest Texas University in San Marcos, Texas. She has worked for a number of years with a wide range of special needs children and teenagers in various educational settings. For the past six years, Janet has been working with home-schooling families as an educational consultant. For the past three years she has worked as HSLDA's Special Needs Coordinator. THE HOME SCHOOL LEGAL DEFENSE ASSOCIATION P.O. Box 159 Paeonian Springs, VA 22129 Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-14IA057-000942-B023-118http://www.learnathome.com:80/226a_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215939 text/html 3800HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:54:32 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  Resources:  Sixteen Reasons to Home School During the High School Years Consider these advantages for extending your young person's education at home. If you home school your teens: You get to see the completion of your earlier home-school efforts. You can customize your teen's education to provide motivation and development for their gifts and abilities. No one else will be able to provide the consistent and loving support in weak areas that you can. You can start higher education early. You can continue the family building process. Teen continue to be in their impressionable and formative years. This is an invaluable time to cement all your family relationships. You can be sure your teens are learning if they are at home. Studies have revealed that public high school students average only two hours and 13 minutes of academic work a day. You can continue to have influence over their peer relationships. Teen rebellion is not in God's plan for the family. You can protect them from pressure to conform to what the other kids are doing. You won't need to spend time de-programming. Home school is the best preparation for higher education. The home education "style" is closer to college type instruction. There is greater flexibility for work/study opportunities. Home educators have the best available curriculum and greater selection. If you send your teens to high school: Public schools offer revisionist history and science that promote a humanist perspective. The godly commitment of many great Americans has been deleted from public textbooks. The institutional method of public education is designed around "crowd control" not learning. If and when they learn it will be a by-product of other priorities to maintain class room order. There will be a diversion away from your academic focus as well as spiritual priorities. Be aware of the many distractions that won't parallel your home life. Your young people will be thrown into things like preoccupation with boy/girl relationships, focus on clothes, and pressure to conform in appearance and music. Vast amounts of time separated from the family will affect their relationship with you. We have all put great amounts of our heart and time into our home-school years, and we want those efforts preserved. Age/grade isolation or segregation inhibits normal socialization. Public school children are behind their home-school counterparts in maturity, socialization, and vocabulary development, as demonstrated by available research. 1991 Home School Legal Defense Association, Compiled by Elizabeth Smith Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-15IA057-000942-B023-130http://www.learnathome.com:80/226e_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109215948 text/html 22204HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:54:47 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  Resources:  The Myth of Teacher Qualifications By Christopher J. Klicka, Esq. Many education officials publicly claim that teachers need special "qualifications" in order to be effective. As a result, public education organizations sometimes target home schoolers with legislation or an interpretation of the law which would require parents to have one of three qualifications: (1) teacher certification, (2) a college degree, or (3) passage of a "teacher's exam." Although this seems reasonable on the surface, such requirements not only violate the right of parents to teach their children as guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments, but virtually all academic research documents that there is no positive correlation between teacher qualifications and student performance. Academic Research on Teacher Qualifications The following summary includes several research projects and opinions of professional educators, confirming the absence of a positive correlation between teacher qualifications and student performance: One of the most significant studies was performed by Dr. Eric Hanushek of the University of Rochester, who surveyed the results of 113 studies on teacher education and qualifications. Eighty-five percent of the studies found no positive correlation between the educational performance of the students and the teacher's educational background. Although 7% of the studies did find a positive correlation, 5% found a negative impact. Dr. Sam Peavey, Professor Emeritus of the School of Education at the University of Louisville, earned advance education degrees from Harvard (Master of Arts) and Columbia (Doctor of Education) and was involved in the preparation of thousands of prospective teachers for state certification. He has served on numerous committees and commissions dealing with the accreditation of schools and colleges. On September 30, 1988, Dr. Peavey testified before the Compulsory Education Study Committee of the Iowa Legislature on the subject of teacher qualifications, citing numerous studies. He stated: May I say that I have spent a long career in developing and administering programs for teacher certification. I wish I could tell you that those thousands of certificates contributed significantly to the quality of children's learning, but I cannot. . . . After fifty years of research, we have found no significant correlation between the requirements for teacher certification and the quality of student achievement. Later in his testimony, Dr. Peavey explains that he has found one valid way of identifying a good teacher: However, in spite of years of frustration, I am pleased to report to you there has been discovered one valid, legal, honest, professional, common-sense way to identify a good teacher. As far as I know there is only one way, and it is about time for legislators to recognize it and write it into school law. It involves a simple process. Step one is to stop looking at the teachers and start looking at the students. Step two is to determine how well students are learning what they are supposed to be learning. The quality of learning provides the only valid measure of the quality of teaching we have yet discovered. Dr. Peavey concluded his testimony with practical examples of excellent student achievement by students who were being taught by their parents, most without degrees or certificates. He explained that many studies demonstrate that home-schooled children "commonly score a year or more above their peers in regular schools on standard measures of achievement." Dr. Donald Ericksen, professor of education for the University of California at Los Angeles, stated in a recent interview: Some of the worst teachers I've ever seen are highly certified. Look at our public schools. They're full of certified teachers. What kind of magic is that accomplishing? But I can take you to the best teachers I've ever seen, and most of them are uncertified . . . . We don't have evidence at all that what we do in schools of education makes much difference in teacher competence. In a well-known case before the Michigan Supreme Court, concerning a Christian school's challenge to the state's teacher certification requirement, Dr. Ericksen testified as an expert witness on teacher certification. There he explained that extensive research has established that no significant correlation exists between certification (or teacher qualifications) and student learning and that student testing is a far superior method of determining teacher effectiveness. Dr. Lanier, an expert who testified on the side of the state in favor of teacher certification, admitted under oath that she was unaware of any empirical evidence establishing any correlation between teacher certification requirements and student learning or teacher competence. Two education researchers, R.W. Heath and M.A. Nielson surveyed 42 studies of "competency-based" teacher education. Their findings were that no empirical evidence exists to establish a positive relation between those programs and student achievement. L.D. Freeman, R.E. Flodan, R. Howsan, and D.C. Corrigan did separate studies in the effectiveness of teacher certification requirements. They all concluded that there is no significant relation between teacher certification and teacher performance in the classroom. C. Emily Feistritzer, Director of the private National Center for Education Information, claimed in a recent interview that she does not know "of a single study that says because a teacher has gone through this or that program, he or she is a better teacher." Supporters of teacher training programs "argue eloquently that teachers need to be grounded in all of these things, but there has yet to be a study that shows that in fact this is the case." John Chubb, a fellow at the Brookings Institute (a liberal think tank), extensively studied various popular reforms including the push to professionalize teaching, the toughening of teacher certification standards, and the implementation of more extensive teacher evaluation systems. As a result, he authored a book with Terry Moe, Politics, Markets, and America's Schools, on the subject of educational reform. Mr. Chubb found "no correlation between student achievement and any of the variables on which school reformers have been concentrating so much time, effort, and money." He continues, "There is little reason to believe" that these actions will improve student achievement and "there is considerable reason to believe they will fail." Dr. Brian Ray of the National Home Education Research Institute released a report entitled, A Nationwide Study of Home Education: Family Characteristics, Legal Matters, and Student Achievement. This was a study of over 2000 home school families in all 50 states. The research revealed that there was no positive correlation between state regulation of home schools and the performance of home-schooled students. The study compared home schoolers in three groups of states representing various levels of regulation. Group 1 represented the most restrictive states such as Michigan; Group 2 represented slightly less restrictive states including North Dakota; and Group 3 represented unregulated states such as Texas and California. Dr. Ray concluded: . . . no difference was found in the achievement scores of students between the three groups which represent various degrees of state regulation of home education . . . . It was found that students in all three regulation groups scored on the average at or above the 76th percentile in the three areas examined: total reading, total math, and total language. These findings in conjunction with others described in this section, do not support the idea that state regulation and compliance on the part of home education families assures successful student achievement. Furthermore, this same study demonstrated that only 13.9 percent of the mothers (who are the primary teachers), had ever been certified teachers. The study found that there was no difference in students' total reading, total math, and total language scores based on the teacher certification status of their parents: The findings of this study do not support the idea that parents need to be trained and certified teachers to assure successful academic achievement of their children. This study has been confirmed by two other studies. Dr. J.F. Jakestraw surveyed the student performance of home schoolers in Alabama and reported: This finding suggests that those children in Alabama whose parent-teachers are not certified to teach perform on standardized achievement tests as well as those whose parent-teachers are certified to teach. Therefore, it is concluded that there is no relationship between the certification status of the parent-teacher and the home-schooled children's performance on standardized achievement tests. Jon Wartes also performed a similar study on home schoolers over three years in the state of Washington and reached the same conclusion. On the whole, home schoolers' achievements are ranked above average on standardized achievement tests as demonstrated by Dr. Ray's findings in the study cited above (see #8) and in The Right Choice: Home Schooling, which summarizes approximately 35 more studies documenting the success of home schooling. Dr. Ray and others have found that only 35% of teaching mothers have a college degree or higher and yet their children score no higher on standardized achievement tests than those being taught by mothers without a college degree. Conclusion of Academic Research In conclusion, nearly all existing research on teacher qualifications or state regulations demonstrates that they have no significant relation to student performance. In fact, teacher qualification requirements have no positive correlation with even teacher performance. In the end, as the Coleman Report (U.S. Office of Education, 1964) pointed out, families are the most important factors in determining a student's academic performance. Statutory Trend Lessening Teacher Qualification Requirements The trend across the United States is not to apply any teacher qualifications standards to home schoolers. The emphasis seems to be on protecting parental rights and in several states, focusing on student performance through an annual test or portfolio evaluation. As of April 1994, forty states do not require home school parents to have any specific qualifications. Home schoolers in these states can home school without proof of any particular educational qualifications. In fact, of the ten states that do have qualification requirements, eight of them require only a GED or high school diploma. The states in this category are North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Georgia, South Carolina, Tennessee, Arizona, and New Mexico. Of the remaining two states, only North Dakota requires the passage of a "teacher's test," and West Virginia requires the parent's education to be at least four years higher than his child's. New Mexico required a bachelor's degree, but this requirement was repealed in 1992, leaving a high school diploma or GED as the standard. South Carolina also previously required a college degree or a teacher's examination, but this was struck down by the South Carolina Supreme Court in Home School Legal Defense Association's (HSLDA) case Lawrence v. South Carolina Board of Education, 412 S.E.2d 394 (1991). South Carolina now only requires a GED or high school diploma. Tennessee used to require that parents who were teaching children in high school have a college degree. In 1994, this was amended to allow parents to teach their high school-aged children with only a high school diploma or a GED as long as they were under the supervision of a "church-related school." Michigan was the last state to require home school parents to have teaching certificates. Many states formerly had a law like Michigan's, but such teacher qualifications requirements were abandoned. On May 25, 1993, the Michigan Supreme Court struck down the teacher certification requirement as unconstitutional in HSLDA's case, People v. DeJonge, 501 N.W.2d 127 (1993). Under DeJonge, religious home schoolers have no qualification requirements. Major Cases on Teacher Qualifications for Home Schools and Private Schools The list below contains several cases in various states which dealt with the issue of teacher qualifications and found teacher certification requirements or college degree requirements to be excessive or unconstitutional. New York: In New York, instruction "elsewhere" must be given by a "competent" teacher. 3204. The court has interpreted competent not to mean certified. In re Franz, 55 A 2d 424, 427 (1977). Furthermore, home school regulations adopted in June 1988 do not require home school parents to have any qualifications. Home school parents are "competent" as long as they file a notice of intent, quarterly reports of progress, and test results every other year beginning in third grade. New Jersey: New Jersey allows "equivalent instruction elsewhere than at school." 18A:38-25. Regarding the interpretation of the word "equivalent," the New Jersey Supreme Court stated: ". . . perhaps the New Jersey Legislature intended the word equivalent to mean taught by a certified teacher elsewhere than at school. However, I believe there are teachers today teaching in various schools in New Jersey who are not certified . . . . Had the legislature intended such a requirement, it would have said so." New Jersey v. Massa, 231 A.2d 252, 256 (1967). Ohio: Ohio law [Ohio Rev. Code Ann. 3321.04(A)(2)] requires home school teachers to be "qualified." State Board of Education regulations define "qualified" as a GED or high school diploma. (See Ohio State Board of Education Administrative Code Chapter 3301-34.) Prior to these regulations, in Ohio v. Whisner, 47 Ohio St.2d 181, 214 (1976), the Ohio Supreme Court struck down Ohio's Minimum Standards which required teacher certification, stating "And equally difficult to imagine, is a state interest sufficiently substantial to sanction abrogation of appellants' [parents'] liberty to direct the education of their children." The Court also pointed out that the state "did not attempt to justify (prove) its interest in enforcing the minimum standards (which included teacher certification requirements) as applied to non-public religious schools." Id. at 217. Michigan: On May 25, 1993, Michigan's teacher certification requirement for home school parents was struck down by the highest court in the state. The Michigan Supreme Court declared: In summary, we conclude that the historical underpinnings of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the case law in support of it compels the conclusion that the imposition of the certification requirement upon the DeJonges violates the Free Exercise Clause. We so conclude because we find that the certification requirement is not essential to nor is it the least restrictive means of achieving the State's claimed interest. Thus, we reaffirm that sphere of inviolable conscience and belief which is the mark of a free people. We hold that the teacher certification requirement is an unconstitutional violation of the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment as applied to families whose religious convictions prohibit the use of certified teachers. Such families, therefore, are exempt from the dictates of the teacher certification requirements. This decision vindicates the dissent in a three to three split of the Michigan Supreme Court in 1986 in a private school case involving the requirement of teacher certification. In this case, Sheridan Road Baptist Church, three justices found: ...enforcement of the teacher certification requirement, as applied, is not essential to achieve the objective. Unless and until the state can show otherwise, the enforcement of the statutory teacher certification requirement, as applied, would be violative of the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Indiana: Indiana allows home schools under their law which exempts children from compulsory attendance if they are "provided with instruction equivalent to that given in public schools." 20-8.1-3-34. A federal court when trying to interpret the word "equivalent" stated ". . . it is now doubtful that the requirements of a formally licensed or certified teacher . . . would pass constitutional muster." Mazenac v. North Judson-San Pierre School Corporation, 614 F.Supp. 1152, 1160 (1985). The Court would not interpret "equivalent instruction" as requiring certified teachers because of the constitutional problems involved. Massachusetts: In this state, "a child who is otherwise instructed in a manner approved in advance by the superintendent . . ." is exempted. ch. 76, 1. When establishing guidelines for approving home schools, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court stated that the superintendents or school committees could not require the parents to be certified or have college degrees. The Court said: "While we recognize that teachers in public schools must be certified, certification would not be appropriately required for parents under a home school proposal. . . . Nor must parents have college or advanced academic degrees." Care and Protection of Charles, 504 N.E.2d 592, 602 (Mass. 1987). In fact, the home school mother in this case, in whose favor the Court ruled, did not even have a high school diploma. 504 N.E.2d at 594, fn. 2. Kentucky: In Kentucky, home schools operate as private schools. When private schools were required to use certified teachers even though the statute was unclear, the Kentucky Supreme Court ruled that teacher certification did not apply to private schools and could not be mandated. See Kentucky State Board v. Rudasill, 589 S.W.2d 877, 884 (1977). Hawaii: In Hawaii, "parents teaching their children at home shall be deemed qualified instructors." Dept. of Ed. Regs. 4140.2(D)(2). In other words, parents are qualified because they are parents. South Dakota: In South Dakota, a child formerly was allowed to be "otherwise provided with competent instruction." However, in 1993, that statute was amended specifically to delete the term "competent" thereby removing all qualification requirements on parents who teach their own children. Nonetheless, a safeguard remains in the statute which states "the individuals [who give instruction] are not required to be certified." North Dakota, Nebraska, and Iowa: In all three of these states, teacher certification requirements were upheld by the courts. See North Dakota v. Shaver 294 N.W. 2d 883 (1980), Nebraska v. Faith Baptist Church, 301 N.W. 2d 571 (1981), and Fellowship Baptist Church v. Benton, 815 F.2d 485 (1987). In each of these cases no expert testimony or evidence was given to prove teacher certification was necessary or essential for children to be educated. In fact, the state could also not prove, with evidence, that teacher certification was the "least restrictive means" for children to be educated. Furthermore, the legislatures in all three of these states have mooted these cases and vindicated home schooling parents by repealing the teacher certification requirements. Nebraska and Iowa have created an option in their compulsory attendance statutes to allow parents to home school without any qualifications. North Dakota allows parents to pass a "teacher' test" in order to opt out of teacher certification. [See Revised Stat. of Nebraska 79-1701(3); N.D. Century Code 15-34.1-03; and Iowa H.F. 455(1991)] Conclusion Educational research does not indicate any positive correlation between teacher qualifications and student performance. Many courts have found teacher qualification requirements on home schoolers to be too excessive or not appropriate. The trend in state legislatures across the country indicates an abandonment of teacher qualification requirements for home school teachers. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-16IA057-000942-B023-144http://www.learnathome.com:80/2272_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220003 text/html 89162HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:54:54 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:   About HSLDA:  Marking the Milestones: 1983-1993 Marking the Milestones: 1983-1993: A Ten Year Perspective Remembering HSLDA At the Crossroads Hard Times in North Dakota Home Schooling Spells Success Highlighting Milestones Remember Today On the anniversary of Home School Legal Defense Association's tenth year of service to the home school community, we want to take time to reflect on the past decade remembering the joys and sorrows, the bitterness of defeat and the sweet celebration of victories. Anniversaries are also times to look ahead, to chart our course, and to prepare for the future. Marking the Milestones is our tribute to the pioneers of the home-schooling movement who blazed the trail for those who have followed. It is our monument to the courage, vision, and steadfastness of the parents who stood firm in the face of adversity. It is our vision for the future. And it is our testimony to the greatness of our God. He truly is our protector! I will remember the deeds of the Lord; yes, I will remember your miracles of long ago. I will meditate on all your works and consider all your mighty deeds. Psalm 77:11-12 Home School Legal Defense Association: A Ten Year Perspective Ten years ago, when Michael Farris and Michael Smith founded Home School Legal Defense Association in March of 1983, home schooling was just a tiny blip on the education radar screen. The concept of parents teaching their children at home was relatively obscure at that time. The families who chose to follow this non-traditional education route were fairly certain to face opposition from the educational bureaucracy and following legal entanglements, as well as from their own friends and family. Looking back over the years it is amazing to see how Home School Legal Defense Association has grown and developed, and how God has led us to where we are today. HSLDA started with a handful of member families, Michael Farris working from his home in Olympia, Washington, and Michael Smith from his law office in Santa Monica, California. Shortly thereafter, Michael Farris was hired to head up the legal department for Concerned Women for America in Washington, DC. He moved his family east, and the HSLDA "office" relocated in Fort Worth, Texas. In 1984, Attorney Jordan Lorence was hired to work two part-time jobs; one half of his time was devoted to HSLDA, the other half to CWA. At that time the membership records were transferred from Fort Worth to Washington, DC. Within a year, Home School Legal Defense Association's membership had grown to the point that a real office and a full time staff were needed. Melinda Allen was HSLDA's first full-time employee, followed by Christopher Klicka who was hired as HSLDA's executive director to handle membership services and legal contacts. Michael Farris was full-time by the fall of 1986, and Michael Smith by March of 1987. Today, Home School Legal Defense Association employs over thirty staff in both full-time and part-time positions. Our office is now in Purcellville, Virginia, about 50 miles west of Washington, DC. All six of HSLDA's attorneys are home-schooling dads. Among our current staff, we are home schooling, or have finished home schooling, 32 children. Four home school graduates work for us in various staff positions, as well as several others who work for us part time. Defending home schoolers is not just a job for us it is our very way of life and our heartfelt conviction. Although HSLDA has changed in the past ten years in terms of the size of our membership, the number of staff, and our physical location our original vision and purpose remains unchanged. HSLDA exists expressly for the purpose of defending the rights of home-schooling parents. During the last decade home schooling has been recognized as "legal" in every state. Each state varies, however, as to the manner in which it restricts the right of parents to teach their children at home. Because of vague or overly-restrictive laws, many parents still face criminal prosecution every year. Today, just as ten years ago, the enormous expense of legal defense in such situations can intimidate families into moving, or even abandoning home schooling. HSLDA, by bringing together a large number of home-schooling families, enables each family to have a low-cost method of obtaining quality legal defense. The cost of membership in Home School Legal Defense Association, $100.00 annually per family, has not increased in eight years. Although our costs of operation have risen dramatically, the number of families who have joined makes it possible for us to maintain the $100.00 cost of membership per family. The National Center for Home Education was founded by HSLDA in February 1990, to serve state leaders by providing information about state and federal legislation of concern to home schoolers. The National Center also works on special public relations projects related to home schooling and functions as a "clearing house" of major home school research and other news and resources regarding home schooling. In January 1993, the National Center launched the Congressional Action Program (CAP) in response to the concern raised by many home school families over the direction of the Clinton Administration's policy regarding parental rights and education reform. The mission of CAP is to target action for federal measures which have a direct impact on home schooling. In the fall of 1991, HSLDA of Canada was launched in response to repeated calls for assistance from Canadian home schoolers. Americans and Canadians share common legal traditions. Many of the constitutional principles relevant to home schooling are well established in Canadian constitutional law. We are greatly encouraged to be able to begin helping home schoolers in Canada, who have many similar problems to the ones we experience here in the United States. HSLDA of Canada is a separate, sister organization to HSLDA, USA, and our goal is for it to become entirely self-sufficient. Home School Legal Defense Association's original vision was to help home schoolers and only home schoolers, and we have remained faithful to that vision. We are committed to the overall success and advancement of home education in the arenas of the courts, education, the media, Congress, state legislatures, churches, families, and neighborhoods. And we are committed to providing you with our very best efforts to enable you to home school your children in peace and freedom for the years to come! Back to top of the page. Remembering HSLDA: the Good, the Bad, the Inspiring Recently, we spent time reminiscing about the history of the Home School Legal Defense Association with "old-timers" Michael P. Farris, J. Michael Smith, and Christopher J. Klicka. We discussed the early years of HSLDA, the way home schooling has changed, and some of their most memorable cases. We found their stories quite interesting . . . What are some of the events that led up to HSLDA's founding? Farris: Vickie and I decided to home school our daughter Christy. We had independently heard messages about home schooling, and we talked about it and decided that we would try it for a year. When the word got out that we were home schooling our children, I started getting a lot of phone calls. Smith: I'd been working with CHEA of California for some time, ever since I started home schooling in 1981. I had a meeting with Mike Farris in Sacramento at a home school conference. He was looking for someone to found the organization with him, and one of the founders of CHEA recommended me. Mike explained the concept, and I said I thought it would work. That must have been in 1982. I was representing mostly California families at that time, by writing letters and making phone calls. I'd hate to go back and look at some of those letters today, but they worked then miraculously. What were some of the cases that HSLDA handled in 1983? Farris: Our first actual case was when we filed a constitutional challenge against the Washington state law. That was a test case. While the case was pending, the Washington legislature changed the law and passed the current home school law there. I do remember another really early case. The child had been in the public school around Vancouver, Washington, for kindergarten and first grade and had come out of public school testing below grade level. The mom home schooled for two years and the child was then scoring around the 8th or 9th grade level about four grades above grade level in almost all subjects. The prosecutor was initiating a case of criminal prosecution for truancy against the family because home schooling if you weren't a certified teacher was illegal in Washington state at the time at least according to government officials. So I told the prosecutor, "Good, go ahead and file the case. We are looking for a test case. If you do file it, we'll give this nine year old the GED and once he passes, what are you going to do then?" I never heard from the prosecutor again. So that case is still technically pending. (I don't think they're going to pursue it because by now the child would be nineteen or twenty years old.) How many families were members that first year? Farris: At the end of the first year there were about 200 member families. We got the word out by going to a few home school conferences in Dallas, Sacramento, and Portland. The main problem to overcome the first year was that we didn't have any staff to speak of. It was basically all volunteer efforts. I remember running the first year's problems out of our house in Olympia before we moved to Washington, DC. I did a whole lot of phoning: "Hello, this is Home School Legal Defense Association . . . " Smith: One of the early challenges was that we didn't have any paid lawyers the first year or two. Jordan came in 1984 part time, then we hired Melinda Allen as our first full time employee, and Chris came in June of 1985 as the first time full time legal staff member. We didn't have too many members at that time. Mike Farris and I had divided up the states to address legal contacts. He had east of the Mississippi and I had west of the Mississippi. Board meetings were held over the telephone. At what point did your "part time" project overtake your full time life? Farris: I frankly thought that the organization was going to take off. I thought HSLDA would get to be an organization of about 10,000 people the first year, year and a half, because I thought all the home schoolers would join. Instead, we had slow growth rather than rapid growth. The reality was that if the organization had grown as rapidly as I thought it was going to grow, I would never have left Washington state. Because it failed to grow rapidly, we moved to Virginia so that I could work with Concerned Women for America and have a paying job. But I am absolutely confident that that was a way for us to get direction. I am confident that's where we're supposed to be and that would not have happened if we'd had the initial rapid growth that I anticipated. Smith: When we started the organization, I never thought about working full time for HSLDA. But I moved to Virginia in March of '87, because I was interested in doing this kind of work and in getting out of California with my little ones. In spring of '87, I recall having 3,600 members. I think 30-40% were California members. What brought you to HSLDA? Klicka: My general goal was always to go into just constitutional law, like Concerned Women for America or the Rutherford Institute. In the summer of 1984 I had worked as an intern for John Whitehead, and my project was doing an analysis of all the state laws and court decisions regarding home schooling. I started sending out resumes the second half of 1985, and I sent one to Mike Farris for a job at CWA for religious freedom issues. I got a response within three days. Mike said, "I'd like to interview you, I've started this organization called Home School Legal Defense Association. You know more about home-schooling laws than I do." Mike and Jordan were coming down to Tulsa within the next month to speak at an education seminar. I met them and was interviewed. I liked them; they liked me. The following week they flew me down to meet Jim Carden in Texas. They hired me. As soon as I graduated in May, I went straight to DC and started working part time while I studied for the bar examination. I came on full time in August after the bar. I've worked here full time ever since. What do you remember most about the early days? Klicka: Fear. People were afraid. Families wanted to know if it was legal. Many times I couldn't say it was legal, except from a constitutional perspective that they had the right to do it. So we would just assert that regardless of whether the state made it legal or not, parents have the right to home school. The state is simply wrong, and the excessive restrictions on home schooling are unconstitutional. It was at that point that I put together the chart of the 50 states to give people some basis as to how they could legally home school. It forced me to look at each state to figure out, "Can they be a private school?" "Is there a home school law?" "How do we get around approval?" And that was what we were trying to do in those summaries. We'd send them out to folks who called. When did you begin to sense that the fear was alleviated? Was it a gradual process or was there a definite break point? Klicka: Well, from '85 on, we saw a pretty steady gain in the legislatures. Up until 1990, three to four states per year were changing their laws. By 1990, people were feeling pretty confident. There were only a very few states that were giving us problems as far as the very right to exist. I'd say about 1990 it shifted. Now the issue is how far can they regulate us, rather than do we have the right to exist. Then the DeJonge case this year probably put to rest the last really bitter attack on home schooling in any state. And we've had so many victories in the courts and legislatures, it's phenomenal. The fear has gone away and confidence has set in. What do you see as the major battles of the last ten years? Klicka: Discretionary approval was a major battle. In many states the school districts had the authority to determine any type of rules and regulations on home schoolers. Smith: And we still have that battle in three or four states Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Utah. South Carolina is technically an approval state, but there are some loopholes. Klicka: Another major fight was over teacher qualifications. We had to slug that out in Iowa, North Dakota, and Michigan for years and years. In Alabama, it still is an issue because the state's position is that a parent has to be a certified tutor in order to home school. However, we have figured a way around it through the church school exemption route. I would say that we have the most problems each year in the private school states. There is no uniform home school law. It continues to be a problem, but in a lesser degree, because we've probably written to most every school district in California, Kansas, Indiana, Alabama, Texas, and the seven other private school states. Essentially we were creating policy in those states without the legislature, just by our interpretation of the laws and winning some cases. We've said the same thing over and over and over until it just became the general way of interpreting the law. In Alabama the department of education says you can't home school unless you're a certified tutor, but talk to any school district, and they'll say that you can if you do it under the church school exemption. Home visits, that was another big one. We've reduced that to primarily Massachusetts and we're still slugging it out in court there. Let's talk about cases: the worst, the best, the most inspiring. Farris: All of the cases in North Dakota were bad cases. We were very frustrated trying to get justice there. Prosecutors were able to file briefs, arguing that the reason you need to have certified teachers in the public schools was that kids need to have the experience of being beat up by bullies on playgrounds. It was so ridiculous in one case they argued that you have to have certified teachers so you could get eye examinations in the public schools. The father was an eye surgeon and the mother a nurse. Certified teachers don't do eye examinations and if they do, they don't do them nearly as well as a nurse or an eye surgeon. It was just nuts! Smith: A case that hurt Chris was one we don't like to talk about because we lost. You recall that one, Chris, because we got jacked around on that one badly. That was an injustice. That was the Schmidt case in Ohio. Klicka: That was one that started at the same time as DeJonge. I'd put so much effort into that, in the appeal process, getting it up to the Ohio Supreme Court. The issue in Ohio was one of approval whether the state had the right to approve or disapprove home schoolers. We said they didn't. And all the facts were in our favor, the law was in our favor, but we had this prosecutor who was very antagonistic. She was very dilatory. Farris: We had a brief-filing deadline that we were having a difficult time meeting. So that we wouldn't miss the deadline (this was in the early days of Federal Express), we put my secretary Lois Ventsias on an airplane and flew her to Columbus, Ohio, from Washington National to file the brief on time. The prosecutor filed every brief in the appellate process 20-30 days late. There was a court rule in Ohio that if you didn't file the brief on time you didn't get to argue. And that if they had any legitimate plausibility to their case at all, the side filing on time would win over the side that didn't file on time. But they totally ignored that. Klicka: Finally the ruling came down from the Ohio Supreme Court, which was the same court, Mike, that ruled in the Whisner decision, which was a tremendous victory for Christians. So we anticipated a victory, and they totally nailed us. Farris: The Christian community had rallied behind this judge who was professing to be a Christian to elect him as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Ohio, replacing a judge who was philosophically alleged to be aligned with the ACLU. And the Christian judge made the ruling against us in Schmidt and so we really took a beating on that case both in terms of the fairness of the procedure and the ultimate outcome. Klicka: It was devastating because the court wrote up a statement of facts that was totally inaccurate. It fit what the prosecutor had been essentially misleading the court on. They didn't look back and see what the real record was. They ruled that they had to be approved, that this was a constitutional right and authority of the state. This opened up the potential for untold litigation in Ohio, because each school district did what was right in their own eyes and every district had a different policy and interpretation. We lost and I just couldn't believe it. But God worked it out. We set the Schmidts up under the cover of a private school, so they could continue home schooling. Then shortly after that the regulations came down. And that's the way God always worked. If we didn't win the case, we won it through the legislature or regulations. Or vice versa, sometimes a case was used to get the law passed. I would say the two best cases we've had were the Jeffery case in Pennsylvania, and the DeJonge case from the Michigan Supreme Court. Jeffery was tremendous because we had over thirty families being prosecuted for home schooling, and 501 school districts that had different interpretations of the law. It was endless work. The federal court just swept down after two years and said, "this law is completely void for vagueness and unconstitutional." It was nice to go back to all of those 501 school districts and say, "see that's what we've been trying to tell you. You didn't have to take these people to court, you didn't have to harass them like you did." That was a thrilling decision. And of course the DeJonge decision was even more significant, because it brought relief to a state that had been one of the most heavily persecuted states over the last ten years. It knocked out the teacher certification requirement for both religious home schools and private schools. In addition, it ended up being one of the best religious freedom cases that has come down since probably Yoder in 1972. It accurately defined the original intent of the Constitution's framers. The 38th page of the opinion could have been written by James Madison himself! And DeJonge was especially rewarding because it took so long to get there 8 years. Farris: That's a case that we longed for, prayed for, worked for, for such a long time. It was the most significant victory not just for HSLDA, but for home schoolers ever, anywhere, anytime, anyplace. But the Robin Diegel case in Ohio is the most inspiring case ever. The day before the trial I flew out there and went to Mrs. Diegel's home. I went out in her backyard, and we sat at the picnic table. I was getting her prepared for trial and was talking to her about her religious beliefs. It was obvious to me that she really didn't know the Lord even though she had a high respect for the Word of God and was oriented toward Christian things. So I walked her through the steps of salvation, and she prayed to receive Christ that afternoon. The next day I walked into the trial. The judge called us into his chambers and said, "Mr. Farris, I just read the Schmidt decision from the Supreme Court of Ohio. You lost that case. You're going to lose this case, again today." You know, I've been in courts where I thought the judge had made up his mind before we started, but I never had one openly tell me. I went out, but I did not tell Robin what the judge said. I had told her the night before that I thought that God was going to do something really powerful in her case to welcome her to His family, and to go home and read the Bible. (I thought maybe she'd read the part in Deuteronomy about stoning false prophets.) The prosecutor put his case on first. He called the superintendent. My turn to cross examine came up, and I asked a question I've never asked before and I never have asked since. It's a dumb question. It's objectionable really. I asked, "Did you get any legal advice before you decided to turn this lady down in her right to home school?" The superintendent should have said, "no." What could I have said? Rather than do that he tried to justify himself. He said, "Well, I didn't talk to any lawyers or anything like that but I talked to some government officials." I said, "Well, like who?" He said, "Well, like the judge here." I said, "You talked to this judge about this lady's case before this thing ever came to court?" He said, "Yeah." You should have seen the judge's face. There was a newspaper reporter in the courtroom. The judge called recess, and he took us back into the chambers. This time he was talking to the prosecutor. He said, "You find a way to approve this lady." We had some pow-wows in the hall, and she got approved. We went out and announced that in court. The judge was very concerned that the newspaper reporter be informed that this case had been approved and none of this discussion business made it into the press. It turns out the judge just made a good faith mistake. He wasn't being a bad guy. He was just a brand new judge and didn't know what the rules were. It worked out. The one question that was the chink in their armor jumped into my head out of the blue. That illustrates better than anything I know who is really the advocate here. It's not us. It's God. That is the story of HSLDA that God is our advocate, and we're just the conduits. Back to top of the page. At the Crossroads A glance at the decade behind us . . . "Home schooling? Is it legal to do that?" The early days of the home education movement were characterized by parents who possessed bold courage, a rugged pioneering spirit, and deep commitment to providing the best education possible for their children, balanced with the realistic apprehension that authorities might arrive at the door momentarily to challenge their educational choice. With the founding of Home School Legal Defense Association ten years ago, constitutional answers to the legal challenge found a primary voice of articulation. Christopher J. Klicka, HSLDA's longest standing full time employee, recalls, "Families wanted to know if it was legal. Many times I couldn't say it was, except from a constitutional perspective." A decade of experience has crystallized HSLDA's purpose through several vistas many victorious, a few vicious, some discouraging, most invigorating. "There has been a clear shift from the issues we were confronting in March of 1983," explains Michael P. Farris, HSLDA's president and founder. "Back then, officials in most states would tell you that home schooling was simply not legal. But there has been a legislative and legal avalanche which has changed the landscape forever." The most clear-cut victory of the past ten years is that the legality of home education is recognized in every state of the union. In fact, "parental choice in education" has become such a prevalent theme in our society that U.S. Education Department official Michelle Easton in 1992 cited home schooling as "the ultimate expression of parental choice" in American families. No longer is the U.S. Constitution our sole means of defense for a parent's right to exercise the viable alternative of home schooling. From 1985 on, we saw a steady gain in the state legislatures with three to four states each year changing their laws. In 1993, though some controversy remains in the eyes of a few states, no state statute actually requires certification as a means of qualifying the home-educating parent. A few "brush fires" remain, like the problems created by Tennessee's and West Virginia's restriction of home schooling to parents who have college degrees. A decade's track record on the legal landscape of the home education movement proves that God has been our true advocate and protector. By God's grace, the fear has gone away and a new sense of confidence has set in. Klicka comments, "We know the states inside and out because we were involved in the process of implementing so many of the changes in the laws. We know exactly what the new laws mean because we were involved in writing them. We also know what the precedents mean because we were involved in the case being won." A look into the decade ahead . . . It seems that after the "age of enlightenment" comes the "age of regulation." The freedom to home educate rests upon two founda-tional principles: the unencumbered right to practice one's religious beliefs and the reinforcement of elements which strengthen the family unit and maintain the structure and productivity of the home. The foundations of these fundamental tenets in our Constitution are beginning to come under serious and devastating attack. As society continues to move in the direction of increased government services for the family, regulated with politically correct definitions of family relationships and social causes home educators can expect more and more efforts to regulate our freedoms rather than the simple denial of them altogether. Home visits, written reports, day and hour requirements, curriculum reviews, and more are the tools regulators may employ in this struggle to determine who is really in charge of the children. The National Education Association (NEA) and many other groups serving the interests of public education (such as the PTA) have openly declared their opposition to "unqualified" and "unregu-lated" parents teaching their children at home. These are powerful political lobbying organizations whose attitudes are clearly expressed in the words of Keith Geiger, NEA's president, ". . . quit talking about letting kids escape . . . " Educationally, achievement testing is in essence the "back door" to curriculum control. Testing laws requiring home educators to demonstrate the validity of their teaching efforts through standardized tests that do not match their curriculum objectives can become severely burdensome. Adding the anticipated impact of Outcome-Based Education objectives on standardized testing to this equation only compounds the threat. Furthermore, as government continues to consolidate social, educational, and healthcare reforms, parents will experience the steady erosion of their jurisdiction to make decisions for their children. Increasing skirmishes with child welfare agencies magnify this concern. Perhaps the most threatening specter on the horizon is the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, an international treaty which places the rights of the individual paramount to parental concerns and judicious decisions in the child-rearing process. Outcome-Based Education offers another all-encompassing forum for government agencies to decide how each young citizen must think and act, along with the extensive (and intrusive) demands for who may be qualified for college entrance or simple acceptance into the job market as an employee. The challenge of who is ultimately responsible for a child's well-being is nowhere more pronounced than with special needs or handicapped children. It has been HSLDA's experience that home schooling is doubly wonderful for the special needs child. Individualized attention is of utmost benefit to the child with special challenges in life. Parents occasionally coached by an "expert" offer a far better alternative for many children than the route of institutionalization. We foresee many political and legal battles in this arena. Finally, the public outcry for "some measure of accountability" in response to a public education system which is deeply flawed brings the danger that as government responds, monopolistic control will be extended to every educational alternative. "One thing we've learned for sure," says Chris Klicka, "is that although we thought we could work ourselves out of business in four or five years [when the legality of home schooling was recognized everywhere], we'll never be able to do that until home education is no longer under the domain of public school authorities. As long as they are in authority over us, they will always attempt to exceed their authority and look for ways to make it difficult, if not impossible for home schoolers to operate. They'll always try to intimidate us." In spite of regulatory threats, the future of the home education movement is bright! The ranks of home schoolers appear to be increasing by 15-20% annually, and the momentum is no where near its peak! State organizations many of whom are also celebrating their tenth anniversaries this year or have already passed the decade milestone are becoming broader in their scope of service. In addition to providing a network of basic information and sponsoring conventions and curriculum fairs, the state groups are organized to act legislatively, and several are beginning to offer extensive educational services and extracurricular opportunities for older students. A flourishing home school curriculum market reveals the wealth of talent and creativity within the movement. New curricular packages and supplemental materials abound, expanding the possibilities for targeting specific learning needs and enriching the overall learning environment. Technology promises another bright vista, and the possibilities of the "on-line" home school are boundless. Teaching aids, learning games, and the resources of an entire library can be just key-strokes away. Colleges are even beginning to experiment with "at home" course work through computer and video access. Some are going so far as to offer undergraduate and graduate degrees in addition to thought-provoking enrichment experiences. Another promising glow on the horizon is the positive perception that home schooling is gaining in society. Due in large measure to the obvious success of home education as evidenced in the children, favorable media attention has also created a more accepting atmosphere. In addition, the ability to be creative and try new alternatives is also generating a popular swell of interest in home schooling as society recognizes that the education establishment's methods of the last 30 years have miserably failed. Most important of all, however, the time, energy, and loving sacrifice that we are investing in our children is reaping rich rewards. We are witnessing the beginning of a second generation of home-schooling families as children who were taught at home marry and establish families of their own. Unencumbered by many of the educational "traditions" that bound their parents, the potential for achievement for this next generation is unlimited. We are only beginning to see the tremendous impact that our children will have on the world, and we confidently believe that they will be the leaders of tomorrow. Certainly the things in life most worth having are most worthy of our active defense. Yes, there will be battles, but the future is bright! Back to top of the page. Hard Times in North Dakota HSLDA received the following letter in August 1988. It eloquently describes the fears and joys of a home-schooling family living in North Dakota in the early 1980s. Part of my preparation for moving from San Marcos, Texas, to North Dakota, was to try and get in touch with some home-schooling families in the Minot area. That was my first inkling of what the situation would be like in North Dakota. I wrote to several families whose names I had obtained from Hewitt-Moore. Without exception, ALL had either given up home schooling or had moved to a different state. But we had no choice; the United States Air Force had given us irrevocable orders to Minot Air Force Base. One of my letters resulted in a telephone call from the Paden family who had moved to South Dakota where home schooling was legal. They told me who the few individuals were who had been supportive of them in the church in Minot, but did not reveal the names of those who had opposed them except to say that it was the church school teacher and her husband who had turned them in to the authorities. So, in August 1983, the first week that we attended church in Minot, I almost felt as if I should be wearing an overcoat and dark glasses! Somewhat to my alarm, a woman named Iris Severtson, a friend of the Padens, approached us immediately and asked us over for dinner. But Mrs. Severtson, though a public elementary school teacher, was indeed supportive of home schooling, for she had a daughter who was doing it in another state. But we had already decided to NEVER tell anyone else that we were home schooling. Our son Scott was below compulsory attendance age that first year. Still, people seemed to assume that my 6 1/2-year-old son was (or should be) in first grade. So whenever anyone at church asked, "Does Scott go to school on base?" I nodded affirmatively. Our home school was definitely on the base where we lived. On base, we simply "hid" from our neighbors, which wasn't too difficult to do through the North Dakota winter. I had decided that if we should get caught the following year, I would insist that Scott be allowed to attend the elementary school downtown and be placed into Mrs. Severtson's second grade class. But by the end of that next summer, it was evident he was nowhere ready for second grade. He was nearly eight, but had not learned to read with our curriculum's "look-say" method of teaching reading, and was still quite emotionally immature. It was then that God brought phonics into my life, and eventually voila! decoding began to make sense to him. Thus, during the school year of 1984-85, we virtually started over with reading. I felt more strongly than ever that it was absolutely imperative for Scott to continue being taught at home because of what might be considered academic "irregularities." At first, we were nearly too paranoid to have any contact with other North Dakota home schoolers. But eventually we met Gerald and Sheryl Lund and others who were being prosecuted. I attended the 1985 legislative committee hearing in Bismarck and heard the eloquent testimonies, and I watched the proposed home-schooling bill go down in solid defeat. I soon found out about the school census that was taken every other year in North Dakota. It was through that census of 1983 that the Lund family was "caught" and marked for prosecution. So when I read the announcement of the May 1985 census in the base newspaper, I totally panicked to the point of being physically ill, and was even led to fast with my praying. After the Lunds and the others were given guilty verdicts and began the long process of appeals, it seemed that more and more North Dakota home schoolers came out of the woodwork, risking and facing prosecution, court trials and guilty verdicts. It was exciting to see that persecution did not stamp out home schooling, but watered the very seeds for its growth. Near the end, our paranoia about not wanting people to know we even knew home schoolers had changed to a deep friendship with Sheryl and Gerald and assisting them in their battle against the illegal tactics of the prosecutors. But we knew we never could be as brave and open as they were. Randy was not many years away from retirement, and we just couldn't risk his entire career with a civil court prosecution. (Several years before, Randy and I had known a military family in California who had merely wanted to keep their barely six-year-old son out of school an extra year. They were nearly court-martialed over it!) During the next two years, Randy tried very hard to get orders to another base in a different state and was even willing to accept overseas orders, since we had learned that military members overseas were able to home school legally. Finally, shortly after the beginning of the1986-87 school year, Randy got an assignment to Europe to take place the following summer, so we began to relax, yet never really released our vigilant determination to never tell anyone our secret. Even though I had a pianist job at the base chapel for our last two years there, and had also become fairly friendly with some of my own church members, I never talked about my kids' school life. I found that people inevitably were much more willing to talk about their own kids and their own lives, so I always directed the conversation to them, rather than us. And it seemed to work. Of course, as my children grew older, they became more socially outgoing. Naturally, other kids would ask, "Who's your teacher?" or "What room are you in?" or "Which school do you go to?" To the kids on the base, they said, "We go to a private school," and that seemed to suffice except for the one church family who lived on base. The two youngest were Scott's and Lisa's ages and became best friends with them. I even became good friends with their mother a social worker who confronted me directly only once. I couldn't lie. I just told her I couldn't talk about it and that I would tell her "someday." Then a friendly neighbor let us know that they knew of our home schooling. She was neutral and casual, but did say that all the neighbors knew. While Randy had had the assignment to Europe for several months, he did not get the official orders until just days before we had to face the ordeal of another school census (May 1987). However, God had plans for us that we didn't know about. Randy's orders to Europe were canceled in July, and it seemed as if our whole world had crumpled. Then God gave us an assignment in Texas instead a state that had had home-schooling trouble brewing for several years, but had just won a major court victory for home schoolers in April of 1986 praise the Lord! God taught us some major lessons in patience and trust during the months between the canceled orders and the new orders to Texas. Because we had not moved to Europe during the summer, as anticipated, a new school year (1987-88) was well under way, bringing its usual rash of prosecutions of home schoolers and "unapproved" Christian schools throughout the state. So our actual physical move felt something like deliverance from Egypt and entering into the borders of Canaan. As with the Israelites' wandering in the wilderness, the entire North Dakota home-schooling experience had a direct effect on our spiritual life, as a family, and as individual persons. God gave me an increased understanding of my children's own unique needs. His answers to prayer were very practical and at just the right time. And through visits to other states, He gave us optimism and confidence that my children were progressing quite "normally," while still confirming the wisdom of our decision to home school. God rewarded my tearful struggles with the joys of watching my son reach his "Integrated Maturity Level," a point when suddenly everything seems to fit together. For Scott it happened near the end of the third year when, at age 9 1/2, he decided he wanted to read on his own. By the end of the next school year, he scored three grade levels above his grade level in reading! Throughout, God taught me to overcome fear (II Timothy 1:7), but not to abandon caution (Proverbs 22:3). But it was only after we were safely in Texas (January 1988) that God revealed to us what else He had done for us in North Dakota a situation which He in His mercy had totally hidden from us at the time. In spite of what I initially had told people about Scott "going to school on base," one of the church members told another inquiring church member that "Scott doesn't go to any school, as far as I know." Then one of the "good brethren" of the church apparently felt it was their God-given duty to report to the authorities that the McDonalds were not sending their child to school. And this all happened that first year before Scott had even reached the minimum compulsory attendance age! So, that very first school year, a public school attendance officer called the church school to inquire about Scott. God saw to it that the phone was not answered by the church school teacher (whom I was sure would have turned us in), but by an individual who "just happened" to be at the church and answered the school phone when the teacher and students were out on the playground for recess! This happened, not only once, but also during our second school year that crucial year of teaching Scott phonics. When asked, "Do you know of a Scott McDonald?," this person said, "Oh, yes, he's such an asset to any school. You're not trying to 'steal' him, are you?" When they didn't seem quite satisfied, the respondent continued, describing him as "bright, intelligent, and well-behaved." And, in answer to prayer, the public school official never once asked directly, "Is Scott McDonald enrolled in your church school?" Every day in North Dakota, we prayed for God to protect our home school, to send angels to surround our apartment. Now I know truly just how, as with Daniel, my God sent His angel to "shut the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me." To this day I have not stopped praising God for this miracle! Jacqueline McDonald Today, the McDonalds are living in Fort Worth, Texas. Randy is now retired from the Air Force. Scott, 17 and a junior in high school, is experiencing his first year of "traditional" education at a Christian boarding school. Jacqueline reports that he is excelling academically and socially. Lisa is in the ninth grade of the McDonald family's home school. Back to top of the page. Home Schooling Spells Success by Michael Farris Home School Legal Defense Association's tenth anniversary gives me a unique opportunity to reflect on the many blessings and challenges of a full decade. It also gives me a chance to look ahead with vision for this organization specifically, and the movement in general. Our family has experienced our own version of growth over the past ten years. In 1983 we had three children two of school age. We were finishing our first year of home schooling when I was prompted to start HSLDA. We now have nine children and have graduated our oldest two children. My motivation to start Home School Legal Defense Association came from a three-fold analysis: (1) the home-schooling movement had a great potential for growth; (2) the education establishment would vigorously fight this movement; (3) and traditional fund-raising methods would not provide the solid basis needed for long-range effective defense of home schooling. Home schooling is a different approach to education, and I wanted a different approach to building a legal defense organization. Each of these points has been validated over the years. Home schooling is growing by leaps and bounds as parents are increasingly looking for alternatives that promote good academics, common sense morality, and family unity. Home-schooled children are the great advertisement for each of these qualities. School officials have lived up to my original expectations. Some have been fierce opponents of home education. Some have been more or less neutral ("just doing my job"). Others have been friendly and hospitable. Challenges tend to be remembered more than friendly interactions because of the nature of our business. But for every nasty, difficult situation, we have six or seven that are resolved amicably. We are constantly amazed at our successes in peaceful negotiations. This is the principal reason (from a human perspective) that we have been able to maintain the cost of HSLDA membership at $100.00 without a price increase in over eight years. However, thousands of families have faced situations which are far from pleasant. Hundreds have ended up in court or administrative hearings. Our battlegrounds have shifted around the nation. We have faced fierce or multiple legal conflicts in South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Texas, Michigan, Virginia, Iowa, Tennessee, New York, Rhode Island, and, of course, North Dakota, just to name a few. One year it's one state that is "the worst." Another year it is some place else. Our success rate in defense can be attributed only to the grace of God. No HSLDA member family has ever been forced to stop home schooling by a final court order (a few have given up after initial losses). No child has ever been taken from their parents. No parent has ever been sentenced to jail. We have had a few families pay fines, but then just keep on home schooling. Our sweetest victories were the declaration of Pennsylvania and Michigan's laws to be unconstitutional. Michigan was especially pleasing. Legislative successes have been even more important. While HSLDA has played a supportive role in this process, the real heroes of legislative victories are the state organizations which battle so effectively for the rights of home schoolers in each state capital. Legislative battles have been fought on Capitol Hill as well. And we anticipate more of these in the future. Each time we speak up for home schoolers on Capitol Hill, we build a little more long-range credibility. We have been especially effective in building good relationships on Capitol Hill by our leadership on the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Given the aggressiveness of the child's rights advocates, we can expect more intense battles in the days ahead. All of our activities: court cases, legislative battles, publications, and our radio program are made possible (again, humanly speaking) by our faithful member families. We are very, very grateful for the 37,500 families who are current members as well as those who have ever been members of HSLDA. Let me also give credit to all our great staff. J. Michael Smith was the first person I approached with the idea of HSLDA and he co-founded the organization with me. Christopher Klicka has been with us longer than anyone else and is our top expert on home school statutes. Dewitt Black, Jordan Lorence, and Scott Somerville are stalwarts for our members. All our attorneys are home-schooling dads. Douglas Phillips and Inge Cannon in the National Center for Home Education also have visibility in the home-schooling community for their great service. Inge is our primary liaison to state organizations. Doug is our man on Capitol Hill. Each of the other members of our staff do a great work on your behalf although they do not get as much opportunity for public recognition. Our legal assistants are Pat Ramirez, Sally Cowan, Kimberly Wray, Wanda Hebert, and Angela Yerovsek. The membership department is directed by Charles Hurst, and includes Aaron Fessler, Janet Wayne, Linda Meloy, Cora Prather, Cynthia Clapp, Katherine Polansky, Katey Ritchie, Barbara Hindman, David Gilstrap, Dennise Bly, Shari Donaldson, and Polly Gicker. Angel Fessler completes the National Center team, and the communications department consists of Suzanne Stephens, Darby Waters, and Jayme Farris. We are especially proud of the home school graduates on our staff: Aaron and Angel Fessler, Dennise Bly, Jayme Farris, and Polly Gicker. Freedom is a fragile commodity. It must be won. It must be maintained. Freedom is not a guarantee. It is something we earn. Earning freedom starts with doing a good job training our children academically, socially, spiritually, and morally. Home-schooling freedom will continue to advance so long as we continue to pursue excellence in all that we do. No sacrifice is too great for the inestimable reward of children who grow up able, equipped, and spiritually mature. Our kids are worth it. Our children receive the most precious commodity our society has to offer our time. Second generation home-schooling is beginning to become more of a reality. As our children grow up and marry others committed to home education, and as they are blessed with children, we finally see the real fruit for which we strive. My goal is to produce children committed to godliness, excellence, and a generational commitment to home education. Education reform is a major political issue in our nation. Building up the family is another matter of grave importance to our nation. Drug prevention, avoidance of premarital sex, and prevention of crime all occupy the political spotlight. We may not have total solutions to all these ills, but home education offers one sure fire method of making a positive contribution on each of these fronts. Home education offers us an opportunity to be good parents, good citizens, and good servants of our God. Let's excel at each task and build a legacy for the future. Back to top of the page. Highlighting Milestones: 1983-1993 Non-HSLDA cases are marked with an asterisk (*). 1983 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Wisconsin and Montana. March 26 Washington: Michael Farris and J. Michael Smith founded the Home School Legal Defense Association. April 26 Wisconsin: Monumental changes were made in the Wisconsin law relating to home education. The state court of appeals declared the state's compulsory attendance law uncon-stitutional in Wisconsin v. Popanz.* May 18 Washington: Because they were being denied the right to educate their children, home schoolers, led by HSLDA, challenged the constitutionality of the Washington statute when they filed the Caproni case. This contributed to the passage of a new home school law in 1985. 1984 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Georgia, Louisiana, Rhode Island, and Virginia. February 23 Nebraska: Exactly three months after they had been jailed for having their children enrolled in a Christian school, six courageous Christian men walked out of jail free. Michael Farris handled this case for Concerned Women for America.* August 16 Nebraska: The State Department of Education announced that parents with a sincerely-held religious conviction against state educational standards can privately educate their children as long as the children are taught equivalent branches of learning and are submitted to periodic state testing. November 15 Louisiana: The State Board of Education adopted "Home Study Guidelines." The legislation stipulated that for the 1984-85 school year, all applications for home schooling will be automatically accepted. In 1985-86, however, home school parents must meet one of three requirements. December 19 Indiana: The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit ruled in favor of the Mazanec family and upheld the right of home schools to operate as private schools saying, "it is now doubtful that the requirements of a formally licensed or certified teacher . . . would pass constitutional muster."* 1985 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Arkansas, Florida, New Mexico, Oregon, Tennessee, Washington, and Wyoming. January Kansas: A Kansas state court dismissed all charges against Kim and Constance Jost, who had been criminally charged with truancy for operating their home school as a private school. The court ruled that the law was somewhat vague, but that the Josts had a legitimate school. February 18 Texas: Three of the five families from Katy, Texas, were found guilty of violating the compulsory attendance law. Several days later, the fourth family was found guilty. However, all these cases were put on hold due to the pending Leeper case, and the fifth family was victorious in May. March 12 Texas: Leeper, et al v. Texas Education Agency, et al was filed, suing the Texas Education Agency (TEA) and the state's 1,060 school districts in response to the continued violation of home schoolers' civil rights. Fort Worth attorney Shelby Sharpe handled the case. HSLDA joined as a plaintiff.* April 23 Michigan: Warrants for the arrests of Mark and Chris DeJonge, charged with criminal truancy for home schooling without a certified teacher, were issued. Attorney David Kallman was retained to assist with their case. May 7 North Carolina: In Delconte v. North Carolina, the North Carolina Supreme Court unanimously ended prosecution of home schoolers by holding that home schools qualify as private schools under the law and thus fulfill the compulsory attendance law.* 1986 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Missouri. February 20 North Dakota: In the Larsen case, the State Supreme Court ruled against the Patzer, Larsen, Reimche, and Lund families, who had been charged with violating the state's compulsory attendance law.* March 10 California: In People v. Darrah and Black, et al, the municipal court ruled that because 48222 fails to provide fair notice or establish guidelines as to what constitutes a "person capable of teaching" and what constitutes a "private full-time day school," it is unconstitutionally vague and unenforceable. June 17 Michigan: The court ruled in Haines, Smolls, Gibson v. Runkle that home schoolers do not need to seek approval and that the state must exhaust their administrative remedies before bringing criminal charges against families for home schooling. David Kallman represented the HSLDA families involved. October 22 Iowa: The Iowa Supreme Court agreed to hear HSLDA's appeal in Iowa v. Trucke. The Trucke family was charged with violating the state's compulsory attendance law because they were not using a certified teacher for at least 120 days of the school year. October 31 New York: HSLDA filed Blackwelder v. Safnauer, a civil rights complaint, in federal court against several school districts who were attempting to enforce unconstitutional requirements. October 31 Pennsylvania: HSLDA filed a federal civil rights action, Jeffery, et al v. O'Donnell, et al, on behalf of nine home-schooling families against 11 oppressive school districts. December 4 Ohio: Judge Joseph J. Nahra of the Court of Appeals of Ohio Eighth District ruled in favor of home schoolers Darryl and Karen Svoboda, saying that the Svobodas had been denied their due process rights. The case was remanded for further proceedings, and the family's right to home school was finally recognized by the lower magistrate. 1987 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Maryland, Minnesota, Vermont, and West Virginia. February 4 South Carolina: South Carolina home schoolers and HSLDA were able to convince the legislature to kill the South Carolina Department of Education regulations, which would have required all home schoolers to have a bachelor's degree. February 16 Maryland: Maryland home schoolers convinced the Maryland Legislature to remove the home visit requirement from the Department of Education's regulations. March 5 Maine: The Maine Commissioner of Education reversed a local school board's denial for the Dionne family, thereby allowing them to home school. The family earlier had a truant officer enter the home insisting on taking the children to public school until HSLDA warned him they would bring kidnapping charges. March 17 Nebraska: Nebraska home schoolers defeated L.B. 682, which would have repealed the religious exemption provision and restored the teacher certification requirement. March 25 Ohio: The Ohio Supreme Court upheld the conviction of the Schmidt family in Ohio v. Schmidt. The Court relied on the prosecutor's version of the facts, which asserted that the family did not exhaust their administrative remedies. The facts presented at trial, however, showed that the Schmidts had met with the superintendent several times. Since the record of the trial was destroyed by the Court of Common Pleas' defective recording equipment, the Court could not compare the prosecutor's version with the actual record. March 26 North Dakota: Gerald and Sheryl Lund and Richard and Kathy Reimche were put on trial again for the crime of home schooling their children. Both were again declared guilty. HSLDA appealed their case to the North Dakota Supreme Court. April 13 Texas: Leeper, et al v. Arlington Independent School District, et al, round one Judge Charles Murray ruled that home schools were to be considered private schools and allowed to operate freely. This case resulted in the dismissal of approximately 20 criminal prosecutions of HSLDA families throughout Texas. April Washington, DC: A three-tier policy for predicting attrition and determining enlistment desirability was adopted by the joint military services. Home school graduates were arbitrarily placed in Tier II. May 6 Colorado: The district court in Gunmson County ruled in favor of an HSLDA family in Hinsdale County School Board v. Main. The court granted the family a religious exemption from the approval requirement based on their First Amendment rights. June 27 Massachusetts: The federal court found that in the case of New Life Baptist Church Academy v. East Longmeadow School District that the district's approval process was not the least restrictive means for ensuring the state's interest in the children's education.* August 7 Ohio: As a result of a dramatic turn of events in the middle of trial, in which the superintendent testified that he had conferred with the trial judge prior to filing the complaint for truancy, the judge ruled that Robin Diegel had not been given an opportunity for a hearing before the superintendent, and granted HSLDA's motion for dismissal. August 7 Rhode Island: In Kinstead v. East Greenwich School Committee, home visits were declared unconstitutional and removed as a requirement for approval. August 19 Iowa: The State Supreme Court remanded Iowa v. Trucke to the district court for dismissal, because charges against the family had been filed prematurely. The statute requires parents to send their children to school 120 days each year. The Truckes were charged with truancy 30 days into the school year, when no parent could possibly have been in compliance with the law. September 3 North Dakota: In North Dakota v. Melin, the judge ruled that the teacher certification requirement was unduly burdening the Melins' religious freedom, was not necessarily fulfilling the state's interest, and was not the least restrictive means available to the state to preserve its interest. Although this decision was later reversed by the State Supreme Court, it was a surprising victory in a hostile state. September 29 Pennsylvania: The 11 school district superintendents in Jeffery, et al v. O'Donnell, et al entered a motion requesting the appointment of guardians for the home-schooled children in the case. Federal Judge Kosik denied the motion and protected the parents' rights. 1988 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Colorado, New York, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Pennsylvania. February 12 Kansas: A case was dismissed against the Wilms family, HSLDA members who were operating as a "satellite" of a local private school board. April 27 New York: In an educational neglect case against the Blackwelder family, one of the families involved in HSLDA's federal civil rights action, the judge ruled in favor of the family and dismissed the case, saying that there were no grounds for an educational neglect verdict. May 2 Michigan: The circuit court's ruling in Sheridan Road Baptist Church v. State, provided the legal alternative for non-public schools (and home schools) to use the third party reporting procedure and thereby avoid the teacher certification requirement.* May 10 Colorado: A new home school bill, S.B. 56, was signed into law by the governor. The new law repealed the former arbitrary approval process. May 31 North Dakota: In State v. Lund/Reimche, the North Dakota Supreme Court ruled in favor of the families and reversed their truancy convictions, since the prosecutor could not prove the age of the children. June 17 New York: The Board of Regents passed new home school regulations which set forth a clearly defined process for notification. June 17 New York: In the federal case Blackwelder v. Safnauer, District Court Judge Munson ruled that the old law was constitutional. However, because the new regulations were passed on the same day, the negative ruling had no adverse affect on the families. June 28 North Dakota: State v. Anderson July 19 North Dakota: State v. Dagley In both cases the North Dakota Supreme Court ruled against the families, and the teacher certific-ation requirement remained intact. July Hawaii: New home school regulations, which eliminated all teacher qualification and approval requirements, were adopted by the Hawaii Department of Education. August 24 Pennsylvania: U.S. District Court Judge Edwin M. Kosik ruled in Jeffery, et al v. O'Donnell, et al that "the tutorial provision of Pennsylvania Compulsory Attendance Law . . . is unconstitutionally vague" and therefore, unenforceable. As a result of this victory, over twenty cases in court against HSLDA families were won or dismissed. October 26 Oregon: The first National Christian Home Education Leadership Conference was held, as a part of The Teaching Home's National Home School Convention. December 1 Colorado: The Court of Appeals affirmed the lower court's ruling in People In Interest of D.B. that children enrolled in an independent or parochial school can be allowed by the school to be taught at home. HSLDA wrote an amicus brief in this case supporting attorney Bill Moritz.* 1989 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in North Dakota, Hawaii, Maine, and Ohio. February 20 North Dakota: As part of a rally at the State Capitol, 150 home schoolers from 11 states celebrated a "Bismarck Tea Party," flooding the offices of legislators with hundreds of tea bags with the attached message: "The consent of the governed for home schooling, too!" February 27 North Dakota: Judge Dennis A. Schneider dismissed the child neglect charge of HSLDA members Barry and Kim Fischer, and in a five-page decision ruled that simply proving that a child is not receiving an education as required by law is not sufficient to sustain such charges. April 7 North Dakota: Governor George A. Sinner signed into law H.B. 1421, North Dakota's new home-schooling law, which repeals the state's former teacher certification requirement for all teachers. May 24 South Carolina: Michael Farris filed Lawrence v. State Board of Education in state court to suspend the Educational Entrance Exam (EEE) requirement for home school parents. HSLDA contends that the examination was improperly validated and the requirement is an unconstitutional infringement upon the rights of parents to direct the education of their children. August 9 Michigan: The Court of Appeals rendered its decision against the DeJonge family. HSLDA appealed the case to the Michigan Supreme Court. November 6 Augsburg, West Germany: The Commander of an Army base instituted a policy prohibiting parents from home teaching. In response to letters, The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense stated that "a dependent may choose not to enroll in our program and to elect, instead . . . a home schooling program." 1990 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in New Hampshire and Connecticut. February 5 Virginia: The National Center for Home Education began operation. March 1 Connecticut: The state department of education voted to move forward with its Home School Study Committee. The apparent goal of the board is to develop new guidelines (non-binding) and a state board policy on home schooling. April 28 New Hampshire: The governor's signature gave New Hampshire its first home school law, which is favorable to home education. June 19 Washington, DC: Michael P. Farris and Inge P. Cannon met with Lt. General Donald Jones, Deputy for Military Manpower and Personnel Policy, and Dr. W.S. Sellman, Director of Accession Policy, to discuss the closed enlistment door home school graduates were finding due to their arbitrary assignment to Tier II status. This was the first of many meetings and several years of correspondence regarding this issue. June 22 Alabama: HSLDA succeeded in getting a case dismissed against a home school family in Fort Payne City v. Johnson, when HSLDA proved that the family was about 1,000 feet outside the school district's jurisdiction. July 2 Rhode Island: In three separate decisions, the Commissioner of Education ruled that the school district's demand that students participate in the school's testing program violated the religious freedom of three home-schooling families. August 3 New York: The National Center for Home Education's first Regional Support Group Leaders' Symposium was held in Syracuse. September 4 Massachusetts: The District Court of Amesbury Division ruled in favor of a home school family in the Searles case. The Court agreed with HSLDA that the family could home school even though they had not been officially approved. September 6 Pennsylvania: HSLDA's civil rights suit, Stobaugh v. Wallace, was heard. Pittsburgh Superintendent Richard Wallace had issued orders requiring home-schooling families to participate in the district's own testing program, and when they refused, retaliated by issuing a portfolio demand. The judge dismissed the suit for prematurity, but blasted Superintendent Wallace for choosing to "arbitrarily flout state law." The heart of the ruling was a clear home-schooling victory. November 16 Washington: The National Home Education Research Institute (NHERI) released its first report of A Nationwide Study of Home Education. December 5 South Carolina: The South Carolina Board of Education won the first round in Lawrence, HSLDA's challenge to the law requiring parents without a bachelor's degree to pass a teacher's examination before being allowed to teach their own children. 1991 This year, home school statutes or regulations were adopted in Iowa. February Kansas: Kansas home schoolers defeated H.B. 2392, which would have required home school children to be taught by certified teachers. April 16 Pennsylvania: HSLDA filed a civil rights lawsuit in federal court against Richard Wallace, Superintendent of the Pittsburgh School District. In February, Superintendent Wallace had refused to allow Daniel and Kathleen Deely to begin home schooling and had filed criminal truancy charges against Mrs. Deely. April 19 Virginia: The Supreme Court of Virginia in Johnson v. Prince William County ruled unanimously in favor of a home school family on the legal issues, thereby setting precedent across the state to streamline religious exemption requests. However, the Court ruled 4-3 against the Johnson's religious beliefs. HSLDA immediately filed for a new religious exemption for the family, which was subsequently granted. May 3 Iowa: The Iowa Legislature passed House File 455 into law, allowing parents to home school without having a certified teacher involved in the teaching or supervision of the children's education. The bill was signed by Governor Terry Branstad shortly thereafter. May 6 Virginia: Home School Heartbeat, HSLDA's daily, two-minute radio program, began airing. June 17 Michigan: A Motion to Dismiss was granted in People v. Pebler, supporting HSLDA's position that home schoolers do not have to file the "Nonpublic School Membership Report" and that the compulsory attendance law is vague and basically unenforceable. This same year, a total of twelve other Michigan familes were criminally prosecuted for not having teaching certificates. Every case was won or dismissed. August 3 Alberta: Home School Legal Defense Association of Canada, Ltd. was established. August 7 Oregon: Governor Barbara Roberts signed into law a bill allowing home schoolers to participate with public school students in interscholastic activities. August 30 District of Columbia: The District of Columbia School District revoked its restrictive policy of unannounced home visits and teacher certification requirements. November 25 Massachusetts: HSLDA filed a federal civil rights lawsuit on behalf of Steve and Jeannie Pustell, challenging the Lynn, Massachusetts, school district's requirement that all home schoolers submit to warrantless home visits by public school officials. November 27 Texas: The Court of Appeals of Texas issued a landmark decision in Texas Education Agency, et al v. Leeper, et al, protecting the rights of parents to home school their children throughout the state. The TEA appealed this ruling. December 9 South Carolina: South Carolina's requirement that parents without a college degree take a "basic skills" qualification test was overturned. The State Supreme Court unanimously ruled in favor of home schoolers and HSLDA in Lawrence v. State Board of Education. 1992 January Michigan: HSLDA filed a civil rights case against a prosecutor, Arnett v. Middleton, to protect seven home school families targeting for prosecution. HSLDA dropped the suit when the prosecutor quickly prepared an opinion stating that home schooling was presently legal and that law in Michigan was vague. March 10 Michigan: Police officers arrived on the Loudon family's doorstep with a warrant for the arrest of their six-year-old daughter. She had been below compulsory attendance age the previous year, when a case charging the family with criminal truancy was dismissed. The court canceled the warrant after HSLDA intervened. March 12-14 Texas: The first annual National Home School Basketball Tournament, drawing 26 teams from four states, marked a milestone in home-schooling sports history! April 2 South Carolina: The General Assembly passed legislation naming the South Carolina Association of Independent Home Schools as a legal, alternate source of approval for home-schooling parents. April 6 Pennsylvania: The Pittsburgh School District agreed to settle HSLDA's federal lawsuit, dropping all criminal charges against Mrs. Deely, expunging her criminal record, clarifying their notification requirement, and paying damages and attorney fees. May 15 Alabama: A home-schooling father's criminal truancy conviction was reversed by the Alabama Court of Civil Appeals in Maas v. State based on the violation of his statutory due process rights. April 24 North Dakota: The state district court in Bismarck ruled in favor of HSLDA and the Birst family, saying that families can qualify to home school under either the private school exemption or the home-based education exemption. However, the court also required all home schools applying to be private schools to comply with all fire, health, and safety regulations pertaining to private schools. HSLDA filed a motion with the trial court to clarify this opinion and to attempt to reverse this reading of the private school law. August 28 Alabama: HSLDA member Helene Richards, a mother of four children, had been the subject of an anonymous child abuse hotline tip and had refused to let a social worker into her home without a search warrant. The Court of Civil Appeals held that an invasion of a parent's home was a violation of the family's legal right to privacy. August 31 Tennessee: HSLDA filed a civil rights suit challenging the college degree requirement for parents home schooling high schoolers in Floyd v. Smith. This case is still pending. (The name of this case has since been changed to Goggins v. Smith.) September 25 Ohio: The NCAA announced that it was reinstating home school graduate Jason Taylor's football scholarship to the University of Akron. The organization had earlier pulled his scholarship because of a rule involving the calculation of grade point averages. October 15 Oregon: The National Home Education Research Institute released Marching to the Beat of Their Own Drum: A Profile of Home Education Research. November 3 Illinois: HSLDA worked with Illinois home schoolers to narrowly defeat a statewide referendum that would have made public education a "fundamental right." November 10 Michigan: Michael Farris presented oral arguments for the DeJonge family before the Michigan Supreme Court. December 14 North Dakota: HSLDA won a major victory in Birst v. Sanstead before the North Dakota Supreme Court, which ruled that under state law home schoolers may choose whether they wish to operate under the home school law or the private school law. 1993 January 25 South Dakota: HSLDA filed Davis v. Newell School District, challenging the state's unconstitutional home visit requirement. January 26 Texas: The Texas Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case of the Texas Education Agency, et al v. Leeper, et al. On the same day, a home school rally of 5,000 people was held at the state capitol in Austin. January Virginia: The Congressional Action Program (CAP) was established by the National Center for Home Education to target federal measures that will have a direct impact on home schooling. February 20 Washington, DC: President Clinton made favorable comments about home schooling in response to a question asked by Katie Farris, a Virginia home-schooler, on a nationwide television broadcast. March 5 South Dakota: After making it through the Senate Education Committee with the help of an amendment, H.B. 1260 passed, repealing the South Dakota home visit law. As a result, HSLDA's previously filed Davis v. Newell School District was dismissed. March 15 Virginia: HSLDA established its Special Education Department. Janet Wayne began work as the Special Needs Coordinator. March 19 New Mexico: Senate Bill 202 was signed into law by the governor, striking the requirement for the parent-teacher to possess "at least a baccalaureate degree" and in its place requiring the parent to have a "high school diploma or its equivalent." April 11 Arizona: Governor Fife Symington signed Arizona's new home school law. Parents no longer have to pass a proficiency exam (ATPE) in order to teach their children at home. One must only be the "parent" in order to teach a child at home. April 19 Colorado: Home schoolers were successful in the passage of a bill allowing home school students to participate in various interscholastic activities at the public schools. April 26 Virginia: Cumberland County Circuit Court reversed a school board's denial of a home school family's religious exemption request in Dusan v. Cumberland County School Board, stating that the school board does not have the right to determine if home schooling is in the child's best interest. April Virginia: Virginia home schoolers and HSLDA worked to successfully override the governor's line item veto and defeat a mandatory kindergarten provision by a huge margin. Home schoolers also passed a bill to lower the cut-off score from the 40th to the 23rd percentile. May 18 Oklahoma: A home school father regained custody of his children after a lower court ruled home schooling was harmful. The Court of Appeals stated that the "Oklahoma Department of Education has no jurisdiction over home schooling." HSLDA had filed an amicus brief. May 25 Michigan: In Michigan v. DeJonge, the Michigan Supreme Court in a 4-3 vote transformed Michigan from the worst home school state in the nation to one of the best. Michigan became the final state in the country to strike the teacher certification requirement for religious home schoolers. Additionally, the Court ruled in People v. Bennett that home schoolers are entitled to an administrative hearing before any criminal charges can be brought against them. The criminal convictions of both families were reversed. June 10 Massachusetts: The federal district court in Boston ruled against the Pustell family, upholding the constitutionality of the Lynn, Massachusetts, school district's home visit requirement. HSLDA appealed the case to the federal appeals court in Boston. June 29 Washington, DC: Michael Farris and J. Michael Smith co-hosted Home School Heartbeat Live!, a live nationwide satellite broadcast featuring distinguished guests, discussion of current legal and legislative battles, and call-in questions from viewers. July 7 Washington, DC: A letter from Dr. Sellman announced that the United States Navy has developed "a compensatory screening model" which will allow individuals with alternative high school diplomas (includes home school graduates) to become eligible for enlistment. Dr. Sellman's letter indicated that the Army is considering a similar program. July 27 North Dakota: HSLDA signed a "Stipulated Order of Dismissal" in its civil rights case Conklin v. Sanstead, after the department of education agreed to stop mandating "mental aptitude testing" on home schoolers. Back to top of the page. Remember today that your children were not the ones who saw and experienced the discipline of the Lord your God: his majesty, his mighty hand, his outstretched arm; the signs he performed and the things he did . . . Observe therefore, all the commands I am giving you today, so that you may have the strength to go in and take over the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess, and so that you may live long in the land that the Lord swore to your forefathers to give them and their descendants . . . Fix these words of mine in your hearts and minds; tie them as symbols on your hands and bind them on your foreheads. Teach them to your children, talking about them when you sit at home and when you walk along the road, when you lie down, and when you get up. Write them on the door frames of your houses and on your gates, so that your days and the days of your children may be many in the land that the Lord swore to give your forefathers, as many as the days that the heavens are above the earth." Deuteronomy 11:2-3; 8-9; 18-21 Back to top of the page. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-17IA057-000942-B023-156http://www.learnathome.com:80/2276_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220012 text/html 3708HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:55:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  About HSLDA:  About the Home School Legal Defense Association President & Founder: Michael P. Farris, Esq. Vice President: J. Michael Smith, Esq. Attorneys on Staff: 6 Total staff: 35 Location: Purcellville, VA (Northern Virginia in Loudoun County) Mailing Address: P.O. Box 159, Paeonian Springs, VA 22129 Phone number: 540-338-5600 Membership: 50,000+ families Purpose: To defend and protect the constitutional right of parents to direct the education of their children. Explanation of Services: HSLDA was founded in 1983 to bring together a large number of home schooling families so that each can have a low-cost method of obtaining quality legal defense. We give families the freedom to home school without the fear of facing legal threats alone. The vast majority of the legal threats member families face are successfully resolved through our early intervention. For those families who do end up in court, HSLDA provides full representation at every state of legal proceedings at no cost to the family. HSLDA's efforts on behalf of home schoolers go beyond defensive actions. We have taken offensive action in prosecuting a number of federal civil rights actions for members at no additional charge. HSLDA has also been able to assist a number of state organizations, upon their request, with legislative battles within their home states. Additionally, our presence in the Washington, D.C. area has enabled us to track and become involved in federal legal developments of concern to home schoolers. Each year thousands of member families received legal consultation by letter and phone, hundreds more are represented through negotiations with local officials, and dozens are represented in court proceedings. ** For more information about how your family can join HSLDA, please call or write, and we will be happy to send out an application. HSLDA also provides a number of resources and materials, including books on home schooling, synopses of state laws, home education studies and statistics, high school diplomas, and more. You do not have to be a member to order these items or to subscribe to HSLDA's bi-monthly publication, The Home School Court Report, which tracks state and federal legislative developments, new studies and statistics, and other home education-related news. The National Center for Home Education is a sister branch of HSLDA and serves as an information clearinghouse on heom education statistics, educational choice, educational legislation, state leadership, and more. You can reach the National Center at 540-338-7600. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-18IA057-000942-B023-166http://www.learnathome.com:80/227e_136.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220020 text/html 5859HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:55:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Official Learn At Home Web Site:  About HSLDA:  HSLDA: Benefits of Membership * Quality Legal Representation. At a cost of $100 per year, HSLDA provides experienced legal counsel and representation by qualified attorneys to every member family who is challenged in the area of home schooling. All attorneys fees and costs are paid in full directly by the Association. Legal representation as a member means tremendous savings for a family who is prosecuted for home schooling. Attorneys fees vary widely from state to state and situation to situation, but these estimated attorneys fees illustrate the significant savings our member families enjoy when legal action is taken against them: Response to threats by local official $ 100 Initial court hearings $1,000 Trial in court of record $5,000 Representation at appellate level $3,000 The legal representation HSLDA offers its members extends to the appellate level. That is, if a negative decision is issued in a trial court, we will appeal the members case to the appropriate higher court at our expense. However, we reserve the right to disapprove an appeal if the particular facts of the case make it likely that a negative precedent will damage the rights of other home schoolers. HSLDAs service covers all defense costs as well. Typical defense costs include expert witness fees, travel costs, filing fees, and deposition costs. Member families are responsible for the payment of any fines. HSLDA's guarantee of free legal representation does not extend to matters involving divorce, child custody, or related domestic affairs. However, HSLDA will make resources available that provide assistance in these legal matters. * Court Report Subscription. Every member family receives a subscription to The Home School Court Report, a magazine focusing on legal news and other matters of concern to home schoolers. The Court Report is published six times per year. * Satisfaction of Helping Others. Each member receives not only the guarantee of legal protection for his own family, but also the satisfaction of knowing that his membership is helping others establish their right to home school in difficult areas. Because legal precedents cross state lines, we must together maintain a national perspective in our defense of the rights of home schoolers. * National Center for Home Education. To complement our work in providing legal protection for our members, HSLDA has established the National Center for Home Education. The National Center is designed to assist state home schooling organizations and their leaders by providing services that are difficult for many organizations to provide for themselves: a network for cooperation and communication between state-wide organizations; a source of information on state and federal legislation, noting proposed bills which would impact the home schooling community; and a presence in both the state and federal capitals, promoting legislation favorable to home schoolers. Armed with these resources, state organizations are better able to assist home schooling families in their own states. Organization leaders are invited to contact the National Center for more information on the services offered. Another function of the National Center is to lobby in Washington, DC, on legislation that would affect home education and parental rights. When we appear before legislators and legislative bodies, we represent the members of HSLDA. Comments from Members HSLDA spent over $20,000 defending our family. If you dont think you can afford $100, where will you get $20,000? Columbiana, OH Thank you so much for offering this service at such a reasonable rate. We feel so much more peaceful knowing we have Godly lawyers on our side! Nypomo, CA Thank you for your help and assurances. We feel shaky treading on new ground, and its comforting to talk with those whove been there and know the territory. Chicago, IL We definitely want to renew our membership but pray that we wont have to use it. We really feel from our hearts that this money is well spent to support those who do have to use your services. Hewitt, TX Thank you for sticking up for the little guys who want to do Gods will with their children. Columbus OH We want to thank you for the prompt, kind, and helpful attitude HSLDA has displayed in our situation. It is good to know we have dedicated, qualified, and concerned people to go to bat for us. HSLDA helps make it easier for us parents to carry out our responsibilities and conviction we feel God has given us. Inyokern, CA We are glad to be a part of HSLDA and we'll do our part to encourage others to join, too! Bangor, ME Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM) WT01-B02-19IA057-000942-B023-178http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/210e_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220030 text/html 5747HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:55:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Fact Sheet Ib - 1996 Home Education Research FACT SHEET Ib by NHERI General Characteristics About 700,000 to 1,150,000 United States students (grades K through 12) are home educated, and the number appears to be growing (Lines, 1991; Ray, 1992). Teaching specific philosophical or religious values, controlling social interactions, developing close families, and high level academics are the most common reasons for home schooling. One researcher (Knowles, 1988) has linked the life histories (e.g, positive or negative experiences) of parents to their rationales for home educating their own children. Home educators are able to be flexible and tailor the curriculum to the needs of their children. Academics A nationwide study (Ray, 1990), using a random sample of 1,516 families from one organization's membership, found home educated students to be scoring, on average, at or above the 80th percentile in all areas on standardized achievement tests. Note: The national average on standardized achievement tests is the 50th percentile. Wartes (1989) found that home school students in Washington consistently score at the 66th percentile on the Stanford Achievement Test, with their strongest scores in science, listening, vocabulary, and word reading. Home education students in Montana scored at the 72nd percentile on standardized achievement tests (Ray, 1990). The State of Tennessee (1988) reported that the home educated in that state averaged about the 83rd percentile in reading and about the 77th percentile in math on standardized achievement tests. The state of Oregon (1988) found that 73% of the home school students who were tested scored above average. Note: The national average is for 50% to score above average. The research findings are consistent that the home educated do equal to or better than conventional school students on achievement tests. Social and Emotional Adjustment Dr. Johnson (1991) concluded that home educators carefully address the socialization needs of their children in every area studied (i.e., personal identity, personal destiny, values and moral development, autonomy, relationships, sexuality, and social skills). Studying actual observed behavior, Dr. Shyers (1992) found the home educated had significantly lower problem behavior scores than do their conventional school agemates. And the home educated have positive self-concepts. Dr. Taylor (1986) found that the home educated have significantly higher self concepts than those in public schools. The home schooled are well adjusted socially and emotionally like their private school comparison group. The home educated, however, are less peer dependent than the private school students (Delahooke, 1986). Dr. Montgomery (1989) found that home schooled students are just as involved in out-of-school and extracurricular activities that predict leadership in adulthood as are those in the comparison private school (that was comprised of students more involved than those in public schools). FOR MORE INFORMATION: A wealth of information like the above is gathered and distributed by the National Home Education Research Institute, and NHERI is actively engaged in collecting and analyzing original research data. This type of information could be invaluable in helping you educate legislators, friends, media, grandparents, and others. A subscription to the journal Home School Researcher will keep you abreast of the ever-growing body of research in the area of home education. A subscription to this quarterly journal is $25 for an individual or $40 for an organization or library. An extensive bibliography (including the above references) and various research papers are also available from NHERI. Donations assist greatly in the essential work of the non-profit, 501(c)(3), NHERI. NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE attn: Brian D. Ray, Ph.D., President PO Box 13939, Salem, Oregon 97309, (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Web: www.nheri.org Copyright (C) 1996 by Brian D. Ray To order multiple copies of this fact sheet, contact NHERI. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-20IA057-000942-B023-196http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2112_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220038 text/html 6062HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:55:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Fact Sheet IIb - 1996 Home Education Research FACT SHEET IIb by NHERI General Characteristics Continued growth in the home education movement parallels a simultaneous decline in the enrollment in other forms of education.(1) About 700,000 to 1.15 million grades K-12 children are home educated during 1996-1997.(2) Key reasons for home educating are the transmission of a distinct set of beliefs and values to children, close family relationships, controlled and positive peer social interactions, quality academics, alternative approaches to teaching and learning, and the physical safety of children.(3) Social Responsibility and Mutual Respect Patricia Lines of the U.S. Dept. of Education concluded that home education families "... have not turned their backs on the broader social contract as understood at the time of the Founding [of America]. [They are] ... asserting their historic individual rights so that they may form more meaningful bonds with family and community. In doing so, they are not abdicating from the American agreement. To the contrary, they are affirming it."(4) Home educators and their families are not dependent on public, tax-funded resources. (In Oregon, they appear to be saving taxpayers at least $31 million per year.(5)) Neither do they, in general, have a strong desire for access to tax-funded resources. Their children are learning well, they do not need or want more state regulation and will strongly oppose it, and the parents will not likely be coaxed into more regulation by the lure of offered services. They want to be understood and treated as people and educators of integrity.(6) Academic Achievement Dr. Howard Richman and his colleagues have found that the home educated in Pennsylvania score, on average, at the 86th percentile in reading and the 73rd percentile in math(7) (The national average is the 50th percentile.) Repeatedly, across the nation, the home educated score as well as or better than those in conventional schools. Social and Emotional Adjustment Dr. Larry Shyers observed children in free play and group interaction activities. Conventionally schooled children had significantly more problem behaviors than did the home educated. This is probably because the primary models of behavior for the home educated are their parents.(8) Home educated children are more mature and better socialized than are those sent to school, according to Thomas Smedley's personal interaction and communications approach to understanding socialization.(9) Dr. Gary Knowles, of the University of Michigan, explored adults who were home educated. None were unemployed and none were on welfare, 94% said home education prepared them to be independent persons, 79% said it helped them interact with individuals from different levels of society, and they strongly supported the home education method.(10) FOR MORE INFORMATION: A wealth of information is gathered and distributed by the National Home Education Research Institute, and NHERI is actively engaged in collecting and analyzing original research data. This type of information could be invaluable in helping you educate legislators, friends, media, grandparents, and others. A subscription to the journal Home School Researcher will keep you abreast of the ever-growing body of research in the area of home education ($25/year individual, $40/year organization or library). An extensive bibliography (including the references below) and various research papers are also available. Tax-deductible donations greatly assist the essential work of the non-profit, 501(c)(3), NHERI. NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE attn: Brian D. Ray, Ph.D., President PO Box 13939, Salem, Oregon 97309, (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Web: www.nheri.org Copyright (C) 1996 by Brian D. Ray To order multiple copies of this fact sheet, contact NHERI. Endnotes: 1. Thomas Toch, 1991. 2. Patricia M. Lines, 1991; Brian D. Ray, 1992. 3. Lesley A. Taylor, 1993. 4. Patricia M. Lines, 1993. 5. Brian D. Ray, 1993. 6. Brian D. Ray, Maralee Mayberry, & J. Gary Knowles, 1992; Phillip Adams, 1992. 7. Howard B. Richman, William Girten, & Jay Snyder, 1992. 8. Larry E. Shyers, 1992. 9. Thomas C. Smedley, 1992. 10. J. Gary Knowles, 1991. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-21IA057-000942-B023-204http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2116_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220049 text/html 7269HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:55:47 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Fact Sheet IIIb - 1996 Home Education Research FACT SHEET IIIb by NHERI Active and Visible in American Life Growing at the rate of 15% to 40% per year, there are 700,000 to 1,150,000 children (grades K-12) home educated during 1996-1997.(1) "Not once but twice yesterday, the House corrected a problem in an education bill that had home schoolers in an uproar and congressional switchboards swamped for a week." The House voted with home educators, 424-1.(2) Patricia Lines of the U.S. Dept. of Education concludes: home education families "... have not turned their backs on the broader social contract as understood at the time of the Founding [of America]. Like the Antifederalists, these homeschoolers are asserting their historic individual rights so that they may form more meaningful bonds with family and community. In doing so, they are not abdicating from the American agreement. To the contrary, they are affirming it."(3) Home education families are not dependent on public, tax-funded resources they save taxpayers many millions of dollars.(4) Academic Achievement The largest data set on the academic success of the home educated reveals positive things. 16,311 students from across the country were tested with the nationally normed Iowa Test of Basic Skills. The nationwide average for the home schooled on the Basic Battery (i.e., reading, language, and math) was the 77th percentile. They were at the 79th percentile in reading, the 73rd in language, and the 73rd in math. (The national average is the 50th percentile.) See the table on this sheet.(5) Reading Language Math Conventional Schools 50 50 50 Home Education 79 73 73 Canada's largest study of its kind revealed similar findings on the academic success of the home educated. Dr. Brian Ray found the students scoring, on average, at the 80th percentile in reading, the 76th in language, and the 79th in math. Students whose parents were certified teachers did no better than the other students.(6) Dr. Steven Duvall compared the academic engaged time (AET) and basic skill development of learning disabled students who were home educated to those in public school special education programs. Higher rates of AET and greater academic gains were made by the home educated. "... parents, even without special education training, provided powerful instructional environments at home..." (p. 11).(7) Repeatedly, across North America, the home educated score as well as or better, on average, than those in conventional schools.(8) The Home Educated as Adults Drs. Paulo de Oliveiro, Timothy Watson, and Joe Sutton studied Christian college-age students at a large liberal arts, Christian university. They compared three groups those who had graduated from two types of private schools and those from home schools. There were no statistically significant differences in various critical thinking skills among the student groups. That is, the home educated did as well as the others.(9) Public school, conventional Christian school, and home school graduates at a large, Christian liberal arts university were examined and compared for their college academic preparedness and college academic achievement. Dr. Rhonda Galloway found that the home educated performed as well or better than the others on these measures.(10) Dr. Gary Knowles, of the University of Michigan, explored adults who were home educated. None were unemployed and none were on welfare, 94% said home education prepared them to be independent persons, 79% said it helped them interact with individuals from different levels of society, and they strongly supported the home education method.(11) FOR MORE INFORMATION: National Home Education Research Institute gathers and distributes a wealth of information is, and NHERI is actively engaged in collecting and analyzing original research data. Such information may be invaluable in educating legislators, friends, media, grandparents, and others. The academic journal Home School Researcher ($25/yr.) or the Home Education Research Report ($10/yr.) will keep you abreast of the ever-growing body of research. A bibliography (including the endnote references) and various research papers are available. Tax-deductible donations greatly assist the essential work of the non-profit, 501(c)(3), NHERI. NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE attn: Brian D. Ray, Ph.D., President PO Box 13939, Salem, Oregon 97309, (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Web: www.nheri.org Copyright (C) 1996 by Brian D. Ray To order multiple copies of this fact sheet, contact NHERI. Endnotes: 1. Patricia M. Lines, 1991; Brian D. Ray, 1992, 1995. 2. Carol Innerst, The Washington Times, 2/25/94. 3. Patricia M. Lines, 1994. 4. Brian D. Ray, 1995. 5. Home School Legal Defense Association, 1994. 6. Brian D. Ray, 1994. 7. Steven F. Duvall, 1994. 8. Brian D. Ray, 1992. 9. Paulo Oliveiro, Timothy G. Watson, & Joe P. Sutton, 1994. 10. Rhonda A. Galloway, 1994 11. J. Gary Knowles, 1991. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-22IA057-000942-B023-221http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/215a_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220059 text/html 4529HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:55:56 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  NHERI Frequently Asked Questions WHAT IS THE NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE, AND WHAT CAN IT DO FOR YOU? NHERI is the National Home Education Research Institute. The institute has offices in Salem, Oregon and in Washington, DC. Dr. Brian Ray founded the institute in 1990 as a 501(c)3 non-profit research organization, and is the president of the institute. He lives in Salem, Oregon and heads up the West Coast Home Office of NHERI. Dr. Ray is responsible for doing and collecting research about home schooling, publishing the research journal called the Home School Researcher, and coordinating the day-to-day activities of the institute. William (Bill) Lloyd is a researcher and branch manager of NHERI's Washington DC office. Mr. Lloyd is also a statistician at the US Bureau of the Census in Suitland, MD; his duties with NHERI include working with the media on articles concerning home schooling, speaking to national and state legislators about home schooling research, and assisting Dr. Ray with his research duties. Dr. Brian Ray is perhaps the foremost expert in the country with regard to home schooling research. The institute he founded has hundreds of research works documented and catalogued on home schooling, many of which were done by NHERI. The Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) was the sponsor for our 1990 study on home schooling students and their families, which is the single-most quoted research work of it's kind on this subject. We are now in the process of updating this nationwide study, and we should have a report available for public consumption by the end of 1996. NHERI exists to do the following things: To research those who teach their children at home; To publish the research journal called the Home School Researcher, which chronicles the current research being done about home schooling; To speak to the media, legislators, and national organizations about the home schooling movement, showing factual research about those who teach their children at home; To serve as conference speakers and teachers for groups interested in home schooling; and To work with legislators on Capitol Hill, and with state/local legislators, on issues related to parental rights, the freedom we have to teach our children at home, and home schoolers coordinating with local school officials. Services we provide on a regular basis include: Speaking to home schooling and other types of conferences about home schooling research; Giving seminars and lectures on how to teach your children at home; Doing state- and national-level research about the home schooling community; and Speaking to the media (television, radio, newspaper, etc.) about home schooling issues. For more information about NHERI's services, to subscribe to the Home School Researcher, to get started in your own home schooling, or if you would like to obtain information about home schooling research, you can contact the institute at the following addresses: Salem, OR Home Office Dr. Brian D. Ray, President National Home Education Research Institute PO Box 13939 Salem, OR 97309 phone (503) 364-1490 fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Washington, DC Branch Office Mr. William A. Lloyd National Home Education Research Institute 6205 Elmhurst Street District Heights, MD 20747-1205 301/568-9735 301/967-7459 FAX E-mail: wlloyd@nheri.org Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-23IA057-000942-B023-232http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2166_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220106 text/html 8044HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:56:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Purpose and History of the National Home Education Research Institute Purpose and History of the National Home Education Research Institute NHERI'S PURPOSE The mission of NHERI is three-fold: To produce high-quality research on home education. To serve as a clearinghouse of research for home educators, researchers, policy makers, and the media. To educate the public concerning the findings of all such research. The non-profit National Home Education Research Institute was founded by Dr. Brian Ray, who has been the editor of the journal Home School Researcher since 1985. In fulfilling its mission, NHERI engages in professional research for various clients throughout the nation. In addition, Dr. Ray serves as a consultant to the growing number of those presently engaged in research on home education topics. NHERI, a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization, also makes available for public purchase many print, audio, and video productions ranging from basic bottom-line fact sheets about home schooling to more technically sophisticated academic reports. NHERI IMPACTS - Education NHERI impacts the world of education worldwide. Primary and secondary school educators, undergraduate and graduate school educators, education reformers and administrators, and government officials to local board members to parents all are interested in the most current and accurate research findings concerning the resurgence of the home education of children. Without doubt, the positive track record of successful home education has made an impact upon the American educational establishment. It has also brought attention from other countries around the world. By being the leading center for research in home education, NHERI has been able to provide necessary leadership in this crucial arena of the education of future generations. Dr. Brian Ray is a noted author of many scholarly publications in the realm of education. His works have been published or cited in such periodicals as The Congressional Quarterly Researcher, The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, The American School Board Journal, Education and Urban Society journal, Library Journal, and Newsweek. He is the editor of the refereed journal Home School Researcher. He is a conference and seminar speaker on topics such as education research, science education, and family issues. NHERI IMPACTS - The Courts "Ongoing quality home-schooling research is essential for success in both courts and legislatures. Your participation with NHERI is vital." Michael Farris, President, Home School Legal Defense Assoc. The work of NHERI is valued by those engaged in court cases across America regarding the home education of children. The parties involved must have solid, verifiable statistics to present a true picture of home schooling. Dr. Ray also appears as an expert witness in courtroom and legislative testimony concerning home education issues. NHERI IMPACTS - Government Policymaking "Whoever has the data controls the policy." Kay Coles James, Virginia State Cabinetmember Whether in state or national legislative matters, research data are relied upon heavily by both lobbyists, for the persuasion of legislators, and by legislators, for the promotion of bills. The work of NHERI in this important arena provides state-specific, national, and international research information to various educational organizations. NHERI also offers more general materials to the citizen public for them to forward to their various state and national representatives. NHERI IMPACTS - Home School Families "Truly objective quality research will be essential in defending home schoolers from the attack to come." J. Richard Fugate, Author/Lecturer Home educators desire that their children receive a superior education. They are willing to shoulder the corresponding responsibility to pursue excellence in their own teaching methods. NHERI provides research insights into the teaching of specific academic disciplines for the ease of teaching and the enhancement of learning. The work of NHERI in offering print, audio, and video materials in non-technical language is also of great benefit to home schooling families who give these materials to relatives, friends, officials, or anyone else who may be either concerned about the decision or possibly interested in beginning a home school of their own. Solid, verifiable data goes a long way toward informing those who are unfamiliar with home education. NHERI IMPACTS - Public and Private School Families Families with children in institutional school settings are concerned about the quality of education that their tax dollars fund. Research showing the common characteristics and methods of successful home education can impact public and private school methodology and assist in the needed educational reform. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-24IA057-000942-B023-250http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/216e_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220122 text/html 7216HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:56:21 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  NHERI Dear Friends November 1996 NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE Doing research to enhance the use of home and family in educating children P.O. Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 e-mail: mail@nheri.org November 01, 1996 Dear Friends, My favorite season of the year is upon us and manifesting the Lord's magnificence. Colors and nuances of colors stream forth from tree and herb. The radiance of crisp sunshine cuts through the dense, cold air. Rain fills the dry creek bed and snow begins to replenish the reserve of water for next summer. I relish autumn days. Early October saw Betsy and me in Dallas, Texas for the Ninth Annual National Christian Home Educators Leadership Conference. Bill Lloyd, NHERI's research associate in Washington DC, and one of NHERI's board members were also there on behalf of NHERI. It was a time of refreshment, encouragement, challenge, and exhortation. It renewed and reconfirmed to me that home education is the most excellent way to train and educate children to have minds and hearts that are as great as is possible -- and to be the nation's great, and biblical, leaders of tomorrow. Thank you for your support and the opportunity to attend this conference. The activities of the conference and, more importantly, the state and national home education leaders with whom we conversed, thought, and laughed were most precious to me. They validated, repeatedly, that the work of NHERI is crucial to their work in their home states and in their roles as national leaders. They reminded me that the nationwide studies, the state-specific studies, the fact sheets, and the media interviews that we provide are constant supports to their hands-on work. It is their work with legislators, in the courts, with new home schoolers, with the relatives of home schoolers, and with the media that is bolstered and made strong by NHERI's research and presentations. You are a part of this. NHERI has been engaged in many works since I last wrote to you. Here are some of the activities in which NHERI has been and is engaged, most of which are done on a gratis basis in order to serve home educators and the public in general. Following is just part of NHERI's journal from the past few months: 8/1/96 Lapinski, articles editor of Child Magazine, interviewed Dr. Ray. 8/8/96 Tom Hess of Focus on the Family's Citizen magazine interviews Dr. Ray for home education story. 8/21/96 Sabine Guez, a French journalist, interviewed Dr. Ray for Mikado (a French children's magazine). 8/29/96 Taigi Smith of CBS News contacts NHERI for statistics. 8/30/96 Ken & Mary Jo Patterson of Georgia Home Education Association get research from NHERI on performance of home educated in college in order to educate state Board of Regents for policy making. 9/12/96 NHERI provides research to Stevan Rosenlind of Fresno (CA) Bee newspaper. 9/17/96 Jeff Archer of Education Week interviews Dr. Ray. 9/16/96 Patricia Smith of Philadelphia Inquirer interviews Bill Lloyd. 9/17/96 Jaimee Rojas of Channel 31 KPWB Cable Television interviews Dr. Ray for tonight's story on trends in home education. 9/23/96 Focus on the Family Citizen quotes Dr. Ray and cites NHERI's research. 9/25/96 David Sharp for USA Weekend interviews Dr. Ray. 9/26/96 Kate Mewhinney of Valley Morning News (Harlingen TX) interviews Bill Lloyd. 9/26/96 Steve Richards of Christian Action Research and Education from England sends e-mail: "Congratulations on the superb web site which you've established. I have no doubt that it will prove invaluable to those of us on this side of the water, as well as the large army of home schoolers in the US and Canada." 9/96 Roger A. Richards, Jr., in Business Korea, heavily cites NHERI/Ray's research and explains home education to Koreans. 10/4/96 US News & World Report interviews Bill Lloyd about computers and home schoolers. 10/96 Dr. Shirley M. Breshears' dissertation (University of Idaho) recognizes influential work of NHERI and Dr. Ray. 10/23/96 Dr. Ray was expert witness in State of Maryland v. Cheryl Anne Battles; home schooling mother found "not guilty." 10/24/96 Baltimore Sun, on Cheryl Battles' case, quotes Dr. Ray: "My opinion is that (Battles is) providing regular and thorough instruction, . . . It's excellent when you compare it to what children get, on average, in the American public schools." 8/96 Currently helping several graduate students and professors in their research. We released a preliminary report on the new nationwide study while at the leadership conference in Dallas. People all over America are waiting with anticipation for the final report. I will be sure to let you know when it is ready. Our projects in Indiana and Massachusetts continue. And I am talking with folks in some other states about new research projects. As you can see, we are busy and your support is going a long way. Please remember that another tangible way that you can help is by signing up with the LifeLine long distance telephone program. It is painless and costs you nothing. (LifeLine says it is best and easiest if you just call their toll-free number and be sure to say that you are signing upunder NHERI. Call 800/800-7550 and tell them you want to sign up under NHERI, their nonprofit account # 41656. It is a simple process and 10% of your monthly bill goes to NHERI). Remember, many long-distance carriers like AT&T are supporting causes and organizations that are antithetical to Judeo-Christian ethics and morality. Remember, our World Wide Web site is now active. Go check it out if you are on-line: www.nheri.org. Please let me know if there is some way that we might help you and consider how you might help us. May you be blessed with a warm autumn. Sincerely, Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. President Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-25IA057-000942-B023-260http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2162_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220130 text/html 10531HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:56:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  NHERI Dear Friends August 1996 NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE Doing research to enhance the use of home and family in educating children P.O. Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 e-mail: mail@nheri.org August 20, 1996 Dear Friends, "By wisdom a house is built, and through understanding it is established; through knowledge its rooms are filled with rare and beautiful treasures. A wise man has great power, and a man of knowledge increases strength; for waging war you need guidance, and for victory many advisers" (Proverbs 24: 36, NIV). It is a time in America when many are looking for advice, knowledge, and, ultimately, power. We know, however, that we must seek wisdom and that we will receive wisdom only by fearing and intimately knowing the Lord God. At the National Home Education Research Institute, we are striving to gain knowledge that can be used in the proper way for power and strength to advance the work of home schooling families according to the ways of God. As we do this, we are enthused to see many good things happening. There is enthusiasm and excitement in the air at NHERI. We have just moved our office within Salem and now we can operate most of our activities from one building. (Mike Tindall, in Salem OR, and Bill Lloyd, near Washington DC, will continue doing some work from their homes for now.) A church has graciously given us the use of the upstairs of its office (which was once a parsonage). We have two large rooms and one smaller one. It is great. All during the move this summer, queries from people all over the United States and other countries have continued to pour in to NHERI. Many are parents who want hard facts about home education before they make the commitment to do so with their children. Others are reporters from many media outlets (see the listing below). Some are parents in court cases related to home schooling. And others are, of course, researchers professors and graduate students doing academic research, home schooling adults taking a course at a local college, and home educated students writing letters to the editor. Much is happening and I can sense the activity rise as the conventional school year draws closer. NHERI has been engaged in many works since I last wrote to you. Here are some of the activities in which NHERI has been and is engaged, most of which are done on a gratis basis in order to serve home educators and the public in general. Following is just part of NHERI's journal from the past few months: 3/5/96 The Coral Springs Forum (FL) interviewed Bill Lloyd. 3/7/96 Marguerite Kelly, syndicated columnist in The Washington Post, interviewed Dr. Ray. 3/1516/96 Dr. Ray was one of the keynote speakers at the Indiana Association of Home Educators 11th Annual Home Educators' Convention in Indianapolis IN. 3/19/96 Joanna Natale Executive Educator (National School Board Association) interviewed Dr. Ray. 3/2527/96 The Third Annual Global Village Schools Conference in San Francisco had Dr. Ray as part of the plenary session panel entitled "Shaking the Foundations: The Rise of Alternative Educational Structures" [ Home Schooling]. 3/26/96 Lynn Schnaiberg of Education Week interviewed Dr. Ray. 4/18/96 Alison Hashimoto of CNN News interviewed Dr. Ray for "Parenting Today" show. 5/7/96 WJHU Radio (Johns Hopkins University) interviewed Bill Lloyd. 5/9/96 Melissa Hoagland, Freelance Writer for Space Coast Parent interviewed Dr. Ray. 5/14/96 Dr. Ray consulted a man about starting a home education research center in Australia. 5/20/96 Kevin Kilbane of News Sentinel, Fort Worth IN, interviewed Bill Lloyd. 5/23/96 Kim Bell of the St. Louis Post Dispatch newspaper interviewed Bill Lloyd. 5/28/96 Maryland Public TV filmed and interviewed the Bill Lloyd family at their home. 6/4/96 Woman's Day article "Living God's way" by Paula Spencer quotes Dr. Ray on home education. 6/3/96 Donna Bowling, recent doctoral graduate of John Brown University, acknowledge NHERI's help in her dissertation research. 6/10/96 letter from Lynn Schnaiberg of Education Week thanks NHERI for all the help in her feature article on home schooling. 7/11/96 Allan Weis of Advanced Network and Services, Inc.'s ThinkQuest Contest consults with Dr. Ray in order to include home education in their rapidly growing contest. 7/1214/96 Dr. Ray and Betsy, his wife, are invited workshop speakers at Christian Home Educators Association of CA conference. 7/13/96 Kahlenberg, Los Angeles Times columnist, interviewed Dr. Ray. 7/16/96 Richard Whitmire of USA Today interviewed Bill Lloyd. 7/18/96 A. B. Sidibe, education reporter of Tulsa World (Oklahoma), interviewed Dr. Ray. 7/23/96 Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) brings Dr. Ray to Maryland to testify as expert witness in court case; case continued. 7/24/96 "Revolution in home education" OpEd piece by Roger Richards (tentmaking missionary in Korea) in Bangor Daily News (Maine, USA) cites Dr. Ray and NHERI statistics. 8/1/96 Lapinski, articles editor of Child Magazine, interviewed Dr. Ray. 8/8/96 Tom Hess of Focus on the Family's Citizen magazine interviews Dr. Ray for home education story. 8/21/96 Sabine Guez, a French journalist, interviewed Dr. Ray for Mikado (a French children's magazine). 8/96 Currently helping several graduate students and professors in their research. On another note, we have completed the data-entry phase for the large nationwide study that should be published by the first of next year. We continue to move along on the Massachusetts, Indiana, and Texas studies. NHERI has a few specific needs and you might be interested in laboring with us in these. We recently moved our office to a different location in Salem, Oregon. Some of our immediate needs are as follow: 1. Filing cabinet, four-drawer with hanging file hardware ($107). 2. A tape backup system for the computer systems (several hundred dollars) data are crucial to NHERI's operation. 3. Set-up fees for an Internet domain and domain name, e-mail services, and Internet access ($600). 4. One or two new office desks/computer workstations (about $200 each). 5. Set-up fees for phone line installation and telephones ($235). 6. Call detector device for routing different types of phone calls (e.g., voice, fax, data) ($100). 7. Materials for home-built bookshelves in Dr. Ray's office ($250). 8. Office suite software for three computer systems ($330). 9. Paint for the office ($25). 10. Shelving for stock (e.g., research reports, books, videos) in the order-filling room (about $400). 11. Funding for a full-time business manager. NHERI cannot keep abreast of all of the requests for information and services due to our lack of personnel. 12. Funding for part-time or full-time secretarial staff. 13. Prayer regarding the LifeLine fund-raising program. And, you could help in a tangible way by signing up. It is painless and costs you nothing. (LifeLine says it is best and easiest if you just call their toll-free number and be sure to say that you are signing up under NHERI.) Remember, many long-distance carriers like AT&T are supporting causes and organizations that are antithetical to Judeo-Christian ethics and morality. 14. Prayer regarding some request-for-funding proposals and contacts that are being made by friends of NHERI. Be sure to note (below) our new mailing address and phone numbers. And keep watching because NHERI's World Wide Web site will soon go live! National Home Education Research Institute P.O. Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490 fax (503) 364-2827 e-mail: mail@nheri.org World Wide Web: www.nheri.org Please pray for us in the work of NHERI as we try to honor the principle that we should gain knowledge in order to use it in the proper way for power and strength power and strength to advance the work of home schooling families according to the ways of the Lord. Thank you for your continuing support and encouragement. Sincerely, Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. President Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-26IA057-000942-B023-274http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/214a_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220137 text/html 5795HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:56:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Recent Contacts NHERI Has Had With the Media NHERI In the News: Recent Contacts NHERI Has Had With the Media Recently, the NHERI researchers (Dr. Brian Ray in Oregon, and Bill Lloyd in Washington DC) have had a number of contacts with local and national media concerning home schooling. Here is a list of whom we have spoken to in the past few months. Interviews/Events with Dr. Brian Ray 3/96: NHERI supplied information to a parent in California who is in a court case. 3/96: NHERI supplied information to a parent in Massachusetts who is in a court case. 3/7/96: Marguerite Kelly, a syndicated reporter with the Washington Post, interviewed Dr. Brian Ray. 3/15/96: Dr. Brian Ray was one of keynote speakers at Indiana Association of Home Educators' 11th Annual Home Educators' Convention in Indianapolis IN. 3/19/96: Joanna Natale interviewed Dr. Brian Ray for Executive Educator magazine (published by National School Board Association) regarding home education & wants/needs of home educators. 3/25/96: Dr. Brian Ray was invited speaker at Third Annual Global Village Schools Conference in San Francisco on March 25-27, gave a presentation as part of the plenary session panel entitled "Shaking the Foundations: The Rise of Alternative Educational Structures - Home Schooling" and Dr. Ray was organizer/presiding panelist of the breakout panel entitled "The Home Schooling Phenomenon and Traditional Schools: Adversaries or Partners?" 3/26/96: Lynn Schnaiberg of "Education Week", a weekly publication interviewed Dr. Brian Ray. 4/96: NHERI supplied information to a parent in Minnesota who is in a court case. 4/18/96: Kathy Prentice, a freelance writer, interviewed Dr. Brian Ray for story that will be in August issue "React" weekly insert in newspapers and is published by Parade Magazine. 4/18/96: Alison Hashimoto of CNN News interviewed Dr. Brian Ray for "Parenting Today" Saturday show. 5/96: NHERI supplied information to a parent in Washington who is in a court case. 5/2/96: Marko C. Leavitt of Associated Press in Salt Lake City, UT interviewed Dr. Brian Ray on home education. 5/9/96: Kathy Prentice, a freelance writer, interviewed Dr. Brian Ray again for story that will be in August issue "React" weekly insert in newspapers published by Parade Magazine. Interviews/Events with Bill Lloyd 2/20/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Walter Jones, a newspaper writer for the Griffin, GA Daily News concerning home schooling. 2/21/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Brian Barber, a newspaper writer for the Waterloo, IA Courier concerning home schooling. 3/4/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Kate Confair, a newspaper writer for the Coral Springs, FL Forum concerning home schooling high-school-aged students. 3/8/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Jason Method, a newspaper writer for the Asbury Park, NJ Press concerning home schooling. 3/15/96: Bill Lloyd appeared on Lifestyle Magazine, a nationally-syndicated talk show program, as the research expert on home schooling issues. 4/1/96: Bill Lloyd was contacted by Maria Fitzpatrick of Zoobooks, an educational magazine for children, about distributing thematic curriculums for the Zoobooks series to home-schooling parents. 4/1/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Pam Ramsey, a freelance reporter, concerning home schooling; her article will appear in the magazine Family Life later this year. 5/96: Bill Lloyd is scheduled to speak at the following home schooling conferences: the Home Educators Association of Virginia (HEAV) in June 1996 the Christian Home Educators Network of Maryland (CHEN) conference in June 1996 5/1/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Lisa Applegate, a newspaper writer in Lynchburg, VA concerning home schooling. 5/7/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed on WJHU Radio in Baltimore, MD for a program about home schooling. 5/21/96: Bill Lloyd was interviewed by Kevin Kilbane, a newspaper writer for the Fort Wayne, IN News-Sentinel concerning home schooling. 5/28/96: Bill Lloyd and his home-schooling family were the subject of a program to be aired by Maryland Public Television on home schooling. Bill was interviewed concerning his knowledge of home-schooling research, and his wife and children were asked about their experiencesas a home schooling family. Ongoing events NHERI continues its nationwide and longitudinal study of home education across the United States. NHERI continues its study of home education in Illinois. NHERI continues its study of home education in Massachusetts. If you know of reporters in your area who are doing articles on home schooling, let them know about NHERI, and have them contact Brian Ray at the Oregon home office, or Bill Lloyd in the Washington DC NHERI branch office. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-27IA057-000942-B023-290http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/214e_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220149 text/html 8736HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:56:47 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  The NHERI NEWSletter: August 1996 The NHERI NEWSletter: August 1996 WE'RE ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB! NHERI goes global! As of the beginning of September, the National Home Education Research Institute (NHERI) will have a "home page" on the Internet's World Wide Web. This web page will allow us to provide the following things for you: o General information about home schooling o Abstracts from major home schooling research works o Information on how to purchase selected home school research papers o Access to the NHERI newsletter o Information on how to become a regular supporter of NHERI (Becoming a NHERI Partner) o Connections to other home schooling resources, like: - Curriculum providers - Other home schooling web sites - Discussion groups on the Internet concerning home schooling o misc.education.home-school.christian (USENET link) o misc.education.home-school.misc (USENET link) o alt.education.home-school.christian (USENET link) o An opportunity to send electronic mail to: - NHERI mail@nheri.org - Dr. Brian Ray in Salem, OR bray@nheri.org - William Lloyd in Washington, DC wlloyd@nheri.org This represents a major improvement in the way we distribute home schooling research information to the public. Please pray for us as we begin this new venture. The internet address for the NHERI home page is: HTTP://www.nheri.org Come visit our new home on the World Wide Web. BECOME A NHERI PARTNER! NHERI is growing by leaps and bounds ... in fact, it's hard to keep up with all of the things that are happening here at the institute. We are getting hundreds of calls a month from individuals, organizations, legislators, and the media, all wanting information about home schooling. We are now at the point where we will need to hire on several new staffers to answer the phones, assist with the research, and travel throughout the country to speak at home schooling events. So ... what are we leading up to? We need you to join us as a "NHERI Partner." What's a NHERI Partner, you ask? Well, here's the story: NHERI Partners are a mainstay of our non-profit research institute. Those individuals who commit to being NHERI Partners do the following things to support our ministry: o Pray for the research institute and it's people on a regular basis (this includes the Ray and Tindall families in Oregon, and the Lloyd family in Washington DC) o Make a minimum 1-year commitment to donate $10 per month for the ongoing support of NHERI and its research In return, we will provide NHERI Partners with the following: o A 1-year subscription to the Home School Researcher, our research journal o A 1-year subscription to the quarterly NHERI NEWS Newsletter (what you're reading now) o Advance information about upcoming research o Reduced pricing when obtaining copies of research works o Our commitment to pray for you and your needs By becoming a NHERI Partner, you enable us to do more research on home schooling, and help us to meet the ever-growing needs of the general public for information and research findings about home schooling. Please consider becoming a NHERI Partner. For more information on becoming a NHERI Partner, contact the NHERI Home Office (in Salem, OR) at 503/364-1490, or the NHERI Branch Office in Washington DC at 301/568-9735. You can also write us at: The National Home Education Research Institute ATTN: Dr. Brian Ray PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 NHERI PEOPLE The Ray Family Brian is busy doing research work and serving as the President of NHERI. There have been literally hundreds of calls coming to Brian each month from state home schooling organizations and media reporters wanting information on home schoolers. Betsy and the seven children are busy with the work of raising a family, home schooling, and operating a small farm. The older girls are helping to key data on computers for the new nationwide study (which is an update to the 1990 study which NHERI did for HSLDA) currently in progress. The Tindall family The Tindalls are helping Brian do some of the data keying work, and Mike has been helping Brian to plan some of the upcoming research projects. Mike has been a tireless assistant, and has contributed greatly to the recent growth and development of NHERI. We are extremely grateful for his hard work and his prayerful commitment to NHERI. The Lloyd family The Lloyds has been busy teaching their three children at home. Bill works during the day as a researcher at the Census Bureau, and works for NHERI part-time as the Washington DC Branch Manager. Bill, as NHERI Research Associate, has had several interviews with various television and radio stations, newspaper columnists, writers, and other media journalists. The Lloyd family was featured in a television show on Maryland Public TV that focused on home schooling. Bill recently received a videotape from the producers of Lifestyle Magazine, a nationally-syndicated talk show. Bill appeared on Lifestyle Magazine in May 1996, and was the home school research expert in that show, representing NHERI. Bill also was on a radio program on WJHU in Baltimore as a spokesman for NHERI and home schooling research. Copies of these audio and videotapes are available from NHERI's Washington DC Branch Office. UPCOMING NHERI RESEARCH NHERI is in the process of conducting a nationwide follow-up to the 1990 study which Brian did. The questionnaires have been mailed out to and returned from the sample households. The questionnaires are being keyed into a data file, from which the results will be tabulated. We'll keep you posted as to when the results will be available. NHERI is also doing research for several state home schooling associations. The results are available for a fee from NHERI. If you are interested in finding state-level data about home schoolers, or if you would like to help sponsor a research project for your state, contact Dr. Brian Ray at the NHERI home office as soon as possible. SUBSCRIPTION If you would like to subscribe to the quarterly NHERI Newsletter in paper format ($10/year, or FREE to NHERI Partners), send your name, address, ZIP code and telephone number to: The National Home Education Research Institute ATTN: Dr. Brian Ray PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org The latest version of the NHERI Newsletter will always be available on the NHERI Web Site on the World Wide Web [HTTP://www.nheri.org]. Back issues of the NHERI Newsletter are available at $3.00 a copy. If you would like to subscribe to the quarterly Home School Researcher ($25/year for individuals, $40/year for institutions, or FREE to NHERI Partners), send your name, address, ZIP code and telephone number to the address listed above. Abstracts from the latest version of the Home School Researcher will always be available on the NHERI Web Site on the World Wide Web [HTTP://www.nheri.org]. Back issues of the Home School Researcher are available at $5.00 a copy. You can also contact the Washington DC Branch Office for NHERI at the following address: The National Home Education Research Institute ATTN: Bill Lloyd 6205 Elmhurst Street District Heights, MD 20747-1205 phone (301) 568-9735, fax (301) 967-7459 To email William Lloyd personally: wlloyd@nheri.org Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-28IA057-000942-B023-305http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/211e_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220158 text/html 8383HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:56:56 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  December 7, 1995 Newsletter NATIONAL HOME EDUCATION RESEARCH INSTITUTE Doing research to enhance the use of home and family in educating children PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org December 7, 1995 Dear Friends, You have heard of the rain in Oregon in the winter it is true, and it is happening. This moisture, however, is what keeps it verdant here all year round and I thank our sovereign God for that. We like it that way. I would like you to know a little about what NHERI is doing these days, and apprise you of what may lie ahead. The nationwide study is progressing well; the questionnaire should be mailed out within three weeks to thousands of home education families. The Massachusetts study is progressing well. A large, home education membership organization has contracted NHERI to help them in a member survey, and NHERI will begin receiving those questionnaires this week in order to begin data entry. In addition, in terms of research projects, several statewide organizations or groups thereof are talking with NHERI about doing studies. This is all very good, and it is helpful to families and to the United States in general. In fact, the research that we do here ends up helping people all over the world. I know, because they contact NHERI on a regular basis to obtain research findings and then they tell me about what good it has done for them in their countries. Here are some of the activities in which NHERI is engaged, most of which are done on a volunteer, gratis basis in order to serve home educators and the public in general. Following is part of NHERI's journal from the past few months: 9/11/95 Abby Goodnough of New York Times newspaper interviews Dr. Ray 9/12/95 Wendy Kaufman of National Public Radio (NPR) Morning Edition interviews Dr. Ray; piece aired October 23 & 24, 1995 9/14/95 Dawn Yoshitake of Los Angeles Daily News interviews Dr. Ray about home education and technology and distance learning 9/18/95 Carl Jensen of the Curriculum Section, Utah State Office of Education, contacts and consults with NHERI 9/18/95 Attorney from Home School Legal Defense Association consults with NHERI about good-driver insurance discounts for home educated students 9/19/95 Steven Power of Dallas Morning News newspaper interviews Dr. Ray 9/21/95 Dr. Ray in New Orleans as expert witness in a court case 9/28/95 Dana Miller of ABC News Nightline contacts and receives data from NHERI 9/29/95 Dr. Ray submits affidavit in Racobs v. Perry (Secretary of Defense, Deputy General Counsel, Pentagon) case on behalf of the home educated 9/29/95 Tom Scales, Assistant News Editor, Opelika-Auburn News faxed for info & sent him 3 fact sheets. 10/19/95 Dawn Yoshitake of The Denver Post cites NHERI and Dr. Ray 10/25/95 Mary Lou Gibson, Information Specialist, of the Research Division, Controller of Public Accounts of State of Texas, contacts and receives facts from Dr. Ray 10/26/95 Karen Kutz of Chicago Daily Herald newspaper interviews Mr. William Lloyd, NHERI Research Associate and manager of NHERI's DC-Area branch office (the "office" is Mr. Lloyd on a volunteer, part-time basis) 10/27/95 Dr. Ray serves as an expert witness in court case in Jackson CA Autumn 1995 issue of Education Now in United Kingdom quotes NHERI's publication Home School Researcher 11/1/95 NHERI was solicited by ERIC (a federally-funded education database) to have NHERI included in the ERIC Directory of Education-Related Information Centers (6th ed.) 11/8/95 Legal firm in Burlington, VT orders research reports for help in a court case 11/16/95 Heidi Fleischer of ABC News PrimeTime Live interviews Dr. Ray 12/95 Currently helping several graduate students in their research If you have any questions or comments about the activities that I have just mentioned, let me know. I would like you to know about some of the clear blessings that have been recently bestowed upon NHERI: Mr. William Lloyd, better known as Bill (and mentioned above), has enthusiastically jumped into volunteer service for NHERI. I met Bill about seven years ago in Seattle where he was my neighbor. There is a lot to the story; suffice it to say, Bill has a great grasp of research methodology, a love for the Lord and home education, has a graduate degree, works for the United States Bureau of the Census, and has many talents. Bill Lloyd and Clark Greer, a friend in California, are creating a home page for NHERI on the World Wide Web on the Internet. Bill Lloyd is taking on many media interviews for NHERI and me. A statewide home education organization just contributed enough money for NHERI to purchase a needed new computer monitor. A large home education organization just contributed a needed new HP LaserJet 4 Plus printer to NHERI. Here are some of NHERI's current needs: Funding for a full-time business manager. NHERI has many opportunities to serve home educators, do research, and inform the public. NHERI has had to turn away many requests for information and services due to our lack of personnel. You might know that NHERI has no full-time employees and we sorely need at least one to keep NHERI's many activities streamlined and the services flowing to home educators, researchers, and the public. Mike Tindall, a home schooling father, continues to work for NHERI on a part-time, sometimes-paid basis. We would truly like to fund a full-time position for him. Funding for a part-time or full-time secretary (see situation in #1 above). Prayer regarding the development of an internship position at NHERI. Prayer regarding a "perpetual" fund-raising program that NHERI is pursuing. Prayer regarding some request-for-funding proposals that a friend of NHERI plans to distribute for NHERI to potential benefactors. If you believe that you should help NHERI in any way, please do. I thank the Lord God continually for your personal encouragement, your tangible help in the form of financial contributions, and for your prayerful intercession on behalf of what we are trying to do through NHERI. May the Lord bless you and your family and friends at this very special time of the year. Most Warmly, Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-29IA057-000942-B023-325http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/215e_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220215 text/html 28022HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:57:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Catalog and Order Information Materials Available from the National Home Education Research Institute and Order Form Periodicals: * Home School Researcher (1985 to present) This quarterly, refereed, scholarly journal presents basic research on home education in areas such as socialization, academic achievement, history, and law. This unique periodical keeps home educators, researchers, and others abreast of the most current factual and theoretical research information available on home education. All back issues are available. Subscription price is $25/yr. for an individual, $40/yr. for organization/library. Back issues $5 each. * Index to Home School Researcher This index provides a listing of all back issues (founded 1985) of the journal with the titles and authors of all articles. $2 Research Reports: * Marching to the Beat of Their Own Drum: A Profile of Home Education Research by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This thorough booklet provides an explanation and summary of the majority of the research available on home education to date. Dr. Ray uses laymen's terms, while furnishing all of the technical citations, to answer many of the questions asked about home education and the people who engage in this "unusual" activity. (18 pages, 1993) $7+ * Home Centered Learning Annotated Bibliography, 4th Edition by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This invaluable tool lists over 900 references that relate to education that is centered around the home and family. Many of the entries include a careful summary or comment on the entry, including descriptor words, which make this a perfect reference for anyone doing research or looking for in-depth information on home education and related topics. (73 pages, 1994) (Also available on disk, ask for price excellent for researchers.) $10 * A Nationwide Study of Home Education: Family Characteristics, Legal Matters, and Student Achievement by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This report presents the most extensive study of its kind on home education families and students from across the United States. Academic achievement data, family demographics, and other findings reveal positive things about home education. (58 pages, 1990) $10 * At Home in School: A Qualitative Inquiry into Three Christian Home Schools by Dr. Lesley Taylor. "On the surface Christian home schooling appears a radical departure from the compulsory, institutional, mass schooling that has become the norm in America. But is it?" Dr. Taylor spends many hours as an educational connoisseur with the three families (The School Built at Home, Oatmeal for Supper, and Not Running a Little School at Home), writes her research findings in an engaging prose, and challenges home educators to evaluate whether their practices are truly the best way to help children learn and become godly adults. (261 pages, 1993) $15 * A Nationwide Study of Home Education in Canada: Family Characteristics, Student Achievement, and Other Topics by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This report presents the findings and analyses from the most extensive study of its kind in Canada. Academic achievement data, family demographics, and other findings reveal positive things about the growing home education movement in Canada. (107 pages, 1994) $12 * A Nationwide Study of Home Education in Canada: Family Characteristics, Student Achievement, and Other Topics (a Synopsis) by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This is a professionally written summary, in laymen's terms, of the report by the same title listed above. Two-color graphics and a very appealing format make this an excellent piece for the person with more limited time for reading research. (11 pages, 1994) $8 * Home Education Across Canada and Comparisons to the Home Education Phenomenon in the United States , by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This paper compares the demographic characteristics of home education families in Canada, some of their most significant educational characteristics, and their students' descriptive academic achievement data to the same in the United States. (67 pages, 1995) $9 * Learning at Home in Montana: Student Achievement and Family Characteristics, by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This new study finds that the home educated perform well above average and their academic achievement is related to only a few select variables (e.g., years home educated was not significant; structure in teaching sometimes significant). (65 pages, 1995) $9 * Home Education in Oklahoma: Family Characteristics, Student Achievement, and Policy Matters by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This document provides data and insights in the areas of demographics, student learning, and public policy issues regarding 509 children and their families. Test scores indicate that the home educated are successful learners, and much other data suggest positive things about home education. (54 pages, 1992) $5 * Learning at Home in North Dakota: Family Attributes and Student Achievement by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This report presents and analyzes basic information on academic achievement and family characteristics from 195 students and their families in North Dakota. Students' test scores are high and other helpful, detailed information is offered. (53 pages, 1993) $5 * Home Education in Montana: Family Characteristics and Student Achievement by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This report furnishes data on the academic achievement of 323 students and the demographics of 170 families in Montana. The findings about the children's high test scores and other factors provide information very helpful to informing the development of public policy and theory regarding home education. (36 pages, 1990) $5 * A Brief Statistical Analysis of Academic Achievement Test Data from Home Educated Students Operating Under the Virginia Religious Exemption Statute by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This statistical report gathers and summarizes the academic achievement test scores of 213 home educated students who are under the religious exemption statute. Their academic achievement is quite high. (9 pages, 1994) $3 * A Brief Statistical Analysis of Academic Achievement Test Data from Home Educated Students in Florida by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This report gathers and summarizes the academic achievement test scores of 1,499 home educated students in Florida. Their academic achievement is quite high. (6 pages, 1994) $3 * A Brief Statistical Analysis of Academic Achievement Test Data from Students in Maine's Home-Based Non-Approved Private Schools by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This brief report gathers and summarizes the academic achievement test scores of 45 home educated students in one of Maine's schooling categories. Their academic achievement is relatively high. (8 pages, 1994) $3 * Oregon Home School Research Report: A Researcher's Analysis of Oregon Home Education, by Dr. Brian D. Ray. The growing number of home education students in Oregon and their strong academic achievement, research on socialization, and the potential financial savings to Oregon taxpayers due to home schoolers are reviewed in this succinct, but well-documented, piece. (4 pages, 1995). $3 * Oregon Home Education by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Similar to Oregon Home School Research Report but with academic achievement data and financial information pertinent to 1993. (4 pages, 1993) $3 * Home Education in North Dakota: Family Characteristics and Student Achievement by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Two hundred five students and their families provide data on academic achievement and family demographics. The children are learning well and information is provided that is helpful for informing public policy. (43 pages, 1991) $5 * Home Education Science Learning in the Context of Family, Neighborhood, and Society by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This study examines the science academic achievement of the home educated and selected social (and other) factors (e.g., close family ties) that may contribute to their high science academic achievement. Dr. Ray presented this report, which deals with a subject area that some say is too difficult for the average parent to teach, to a professional research organization. (41 pages, 1995) $5 * On the Propriety of Education Professionals Instructing Home Educators, by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This study evaluates whether professional educators should direct the activities of home educators and whether home educators should desire such direction. In this paper presented to a professional organization, Dr. Ray cautions all parties regarding the danger of the cooptation of home educators versus the benign concept of cooperation. (36 pages, 1992) $5 * Religious Orthodoxy and Student Achievement in Home Education by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Presented to a professional research association, this paper explores and attempts to determine whether there exists a relationship between Christian religious belief of the parents and the academic achievement of their children. Uncommon findings and detailed data are provided. (33 pages, 1991) $5 * Home Schooling, Science Achievement, and Parents' Beliefs About God and the Origin of Species and Life by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Dr. Ray analyzes data to determine whether home educators' beliefs about God and origins are related to their children's academic achievement, particularly in science. This scholarly paper presents an intriguing mix of factors related to home education. (32 pages, 1991) $5 * A Review of Home School Research: Characteristics of the Families and Learner Outcomes by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This scholarly paper gives a comprehensive review of research on the learning success of home educated students and the general demographic and other characteristics of their families. (22 pages, 1990) $5 * A Comparison of Home Schooling and Conventional Schooling: With a Focus on Learner Outcomes by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This scholarly, comprehensive review of literature focuses on comparing the learning success of the home educated with students in conventional, mainly public, schools. Although the research base is limited (in 1986) and cause and effect are not established, home education appears to be a favorable learning environment. (57 pages, 1986) $5 * An Overview of Home Schooling in the United States: Its Growth and Development and Future Challenges by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Presented to a professional research association, this piece presents an historical context for home education and gives a sketch of the characteristics of home education families. Dr. Ray predicts that academics from many disciplines will show increased interest in home education, contemplates potential responses of conventional school advocates, and then posits, based on current research findings, that home education is a valid form of education that should be supported by the public and policy makers. (26 pps, 1989) $5 * Setting the Context for State Regulation of Home-Schooling Parents by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Dr. Ray succinctly presents a general description of home educators and their families, the children's academic achievement, and current state statutes and regulations. He then implies ways to construct sound statutes and regulations that are valid, clear, and practical in this paper that was presented to a professional research association. (19 pages, 1989) $5 * Social Capital, Value Consistency, and the Learner Outcomes of Home Education by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This paper explores whether the constructs of value consistency and social capital might explain the relatively high academic achievement outcomes of home education. Dr. Ray proposes an Educational Resource Niche model that explains why a home educated student whose family may be low in both physical and human capital might still be a very successful learner. (16 pages, 1990) $5 * Beliefs, Attitudes, and Intentions of Science Learners in Public, Private, and Home Schools by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This exploratory study generates baseline information using the Theory of Reasoned Action. The analysis reveals that the home educated have beliefs that comprise a more positive attitude toward doing laboratory science than do other students. (25 pages, 1990) $5 * Review of Home Education Research by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This succinct, one-page summary offers research findings on academic achievement, socialization, and other topics in a style for the general public. It is a reprint from a magazine article. (1 page, 1990) $1 * Home schools: A Synthesis of Research on Characteristics and Learner Outcomes by Dr. Brian D. Ray. This reprint from a scholarly journal documents the basic characteristics of home educators and their children, and the reviewed studies, as a whole, suggest that the learner outcomes of home education are quite positive. Especially for those who need a concise summary in the academic format. (16 pages, 1988) Offered free of charge except for $3 postage & handling. * What Home Educators Need, Want, and Use from Various Institutions: Results from an Ongoing Study in Four Western States by Dr. Brian D. Ray. Dr. Ray uses findings from a federally-funded study to ascertain what home educators say that they need, want, and use from other public and private institutions. He reports that home educators have need of services, but they want to maintain liberty and choice for their families as they work with others, whether from the private or public sector. (38 pages, 1991) $5 Fact Sheets: * Home Education Research Fact Sheet I . This one-page summary of studies makes about 15 statements regarding general characteristics of families, academics, and children's social and emotional adjustment. It's perfect to purchase multiple copies for wide distribution to legislators, friends, or new home schoolers. (1993) $1 * Home Education Research Fact Sheet IIb . This one-page summary is a perfect complementary piece to Fact Sheet I. This one includes several topics and a graph of the stunning growthof home education since the 1970s. (1994) $1 * Home Education Research Fact Sheet IIIb . This one-page summary is an excellent complement to fact sheets I and II, and includes a data table on the largest collection of home education academic achievement scores to date. (1995) $1 Information Packets: * Getting Started Packet includes (a) the booklet Off to a Great Start in Home Education by Dr. Brian Ray, (b) Marching to the Beat of Their Own Drum (see page 1), how to find support groups in your state and community, (d) help in choosing curriculum and finding suppliers, (e) philosophies of home education, (f) finding magazines and legal help, and (g) other helpful materials. $10 * Compact NHERI Packet includes (a) three Research Fact Sheets (see above), (b) our catalog of resources, and (c) a NHERI brochure. Great for educating your legislators, local school board members, relatives, neighbors, etc. $4 Books: * Home Schooling: Parents as Educators by Drs. Maralee Mayberry, J. Gary Knowles, Brian Ray, and Stacey Marlow. This distinguished group of experts on home education provide an unbiased, thorough presentation of this growing phenomenon and its effect on the people involved. Based on a large study, case studies, and interviews, this scholarly book offers a careful examination of social contexts and the relevant legal issues needed for a well-rounded understanding of the home education movement. (120 pages, paperback, 1995) $19 * Home Schooling: Political, Historical, and Pedagogical Perspectives edited by Drs. Jane A. Van Galen & Mary A. Pitman. "While differing in their perspectives, the authors of the following chapters agree that the home-schooling movement offers an intriguing critique of traditional education" (Introduction). This is the first scholarly book of its kind on home education, and it is still one of the few on the topic. (217 pages, paperback, 1991) $24.50 Audio Cassettes: * Ensuring Scientific Literacy Dr. Brian D. Ray, whose Ph.D. is in Science Education, examines the nature of science, defines "scientific literacy," explains what should be done to ensure that children have a variety of true science experiences, offers practical tips about "doing science," and extends encouragement to home education parents that they can in fact be excellent teachers of science. He does all of this with understandable language and a congenial style. $5 * Home Education: Is it Working? Dr. Brian D. Ray uses factual information and subtle humor to engage his audience with a review of research on home education in general, research shows positive outcomes (e.g., academic achievement and social development) from home education. Learn about home schooling and inform others such as grandparents, neighbors, and friends. $5 * What Makes You Think You Can Teach Your Own? Dr. Brian D. Ray first asks "Should you teach your own children?," then proceeds to help his audience answer the question which is the title of this message. He uses Christian thought, his experience as a long-time home education father of six children, ideas from the education profession, and research to stimulate, challenge, and encourage both veteran and novice home educators. $5 Video: * What Research Says About Home Schooling This professionally produced video features an informal interview with Dr. Brian Ray, President of the National Home Education Research Institute, simple graphics that summarize main points about the research findings, and a minimum of technical language. Information about topics such as "who is home schooling and why," the "socialization of the home educated," and "academic achievement" makes this a useful tool for presenting home education to critics, professional educators, or anyone for whom home schooling is a novel concept. (18 minutes, 1993) $22 Need A Suggestion? If you are new to home schooling or are considering this education option for your own children in the near or distant future and are looking for general information to assist you in your decision, then allow us to make a few suggestions that we believe may be most helpful: 1. Getting Started Packet 2. Marching to the Beat of Their Own Drum 3. What Research Says About Home Schooling 4. Home Education: Is It Working? 5. What Makes You Think You Can Teach Your Own? If you are a Researcher, we strongly recommend that you begin with these: 1. Home Centered Learning Annotated Bibliography 2. Home School Researcher 3. Index to Home School Researcher 4. Home Schooling: Parents as Educators 5. A Nationwide Study of Home Education NHERI MATERIALS ORDER FORM Name Street Address City, State Zip Phone(s) home (_____)____________ work (_____)____________ Item Name Price Qty. Total Total Order Shipping/Handling add 10% ($1 min.) (Outside N. America S&H and 25% surface or 35% air) Rush Order (see instructions below, 3 lbs. or less) add $4.00 Contribution (tax-deductible) Total Enclosed (For RUSH orders, see instructions below.) Please check here if you would like information concerning how you can help NHERI through your long-distance phone service? ** NHERI is a 501 (c)(3) non-profit research & education organization ** Please make checks payable to "NHERI" and mail this form to: National Home Education Research Institute P.O. Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 e-mail: mail@nheri.org Please order NHERI's materials (e.g. research reports, fact sheets) via mail or some other carrier until online transaction capability is in place at Learn@Home. Rush Orders: If you have an urgent need, fax to NHERI (fax 503-364-2827) the following: 1. Your detailed order with "Rush" written on it, your name, address, and home and work phone numbers, 2. A copy of your completed check (which covers the cost of the items, 10% shipping, plus a $4 rush fee), and 3. Your promise that you will put your check and original order in the U.S. mail within 24 hours. After we receive a fax with the above three items, you should receive your materials via U.S. priority mail within 2 to 4 business days. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-30IA057-000942-B023-338http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/210a_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220223 text/html 4622HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:57:21 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  A Nationwide Study of Home Education in Canada:  Family Characteristics, Student Achievement, and Other Topics A Nationwide Study of Home Education in Canada: Family Characteristics, Student Achievement, and Other Topics by Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. Copyright 1994 by Brian D. Ray No part of this document may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews or in scholarly works. Published by the National Home Education Research Institute PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Abstract The purpose of this descriptive and correlational study was to collect basic information about home education families and children throughout Canada. The topics addressed were (a) demographics, (b) selected educational characteristics of the families, (c) educational and post-secondary school characteristics of the students, (d) academic achievement of the students, (e) relationships between their academic achievement and factors such as educational attainment of parents, family income, and pedagogical practices, and (f) the relationship between selected physical and mental limitations and pedagogical practices. In general, the parents had somewhat higher educational attainment than the general population in Canada, and their total family income was 83% of that of all husband-wife families in Canada. Fourteen percent of the mothers worked outside the home for an average of 11.9 hours per week. The families had notably more children (3.5) than the national average. Mothers did 88% of the formal instruction of their children, while fathers did 9% of the formal instruction. They used a wide variety of curriculum materials, made regular use of libraries, and engaged their children in numerous social activities. The students scored, on the average, at relatively high percentiles on standardized academic achievement tests: (a) total reading, 80th, (b) total listening, 84th, (c) total language, 76th, (d) total math, 79th, (e) science, 82nd, (f) social studies, 81st, (g) basic battery (reading, language, and mathematics), 79th, and (h) complete battery (all subject areas in which student was tested), 82nd. None of the following variables explained a significant amount of variance in the students' total mathematics, total listening, science, and social studies scores: formal educational attainment of the parents, teacher certification status of the parents, family income, number of years the student was home educated, degree of structure in the home education environment, age of the student, time spent in formal education activities, age at which formal education commenced, gender of the student, extent to which the family uses public libraries, and amount of money spent on the home education of the child. Father's educational attainment was a significant predictor of reading and language scores, and the longer a child had been home educated, the better was his language score. Both variables were only weak to moderately strong predictors. None of the following variables explained a significant amount of variance in the students' farsightedness: degree of structure in the learning environment, time spent in structured learning, and age at which formal instruction commenced. Time in structured learning was a weak predictor of neasightedness, and age at which formal instruction began was a weak predictor of attention deficit disorder. Copyright 1994 by Brian D. Ray Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-31IA057-000942-B023-357http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2122_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220232 text/html 4803HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:57:29 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Learning at Home in Montana:  Student Achievement and Family Characteristics Learning at Home in Montana: Student Achievement and Family Characteristics by Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. Copyright 1995 by Brian D. Ray No part of this document may be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews or in scholarly works. Published by the National Home Education Research Institute PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Abstract The purpose of this descriptive and correlational study was to examine, regarding home education families and their children throughout Montana, (a) demographics, (b) selected educational characteristics of the families and students, (c) academic achievement of the students, and (d) relationships between their academic achievement and various factors. In general, these home educating parents had somewhat higher than average educational attainment. The annual family income (median of $30,000) was similar to (or slightly lower than) that of all married couple families in Montana. These families were much larger than average for Montana, with 3.2 children per family. Families spent $329 per year to home educate each child. The mother did 87% of the formal teaching of the children while the father did 11% of the teaching. The large majority of these children were not being taught by professionally trained and government certified teachers. On average, the children had been taught at home for 4.2 years since age 5, 54% were in grades K through 5, and their parents generally planned to home educate them through their secondary school years. Curriculum materials were hand picked, rather than being purchased complete programs, by parents for 68% of the students. The social activities of these home educated children were quite varied. For example, 56% were involved in group sports, 85% were in Sunday school, 54% were involved in music classes, 55% took other classes with students outside of the home, and 96% engaged in play activities with people outside of the family. These students scored, on the average, at relatively high percentiles on standardized academic achievement tests: (a) total reading, 75th, (b) total listening, 73rd, (c) total language, 63rd, (d) total math, 67th, (e) science, 77nd, (f) social studies, 75th, (g) basic battery (reading, language, and mathematics), 70th, and (h) complete battery (all subject areas in which student was tested), 73rd. Several predictor variables (i.e., father's educational attainment, father's teacher certification status, family income, number of children in the family, years child was home educated, presence of a computer in the home, and amount of money spent on home education) were not significant in explaining variance in any of the testing areas. Mother's educational attainment, structure in the teaching and learning environment, gender of student, mother's teacher certification status, and use of libraries did, in some categories, serve as significant predictors of academic achievement. These variables, however, were generally relatively weak in their ability to explain variation in scores. Very few factors, that at first seem important, appear to be able to predict the academic achievement of the home educated. This and other studies indicate that very few background variables explain the academic achievement of the home educated, and it is possible that the home education environment eliminates the effect, in a positive way, of many variables which could reasonably be expected to affect achievement. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-32IA057-000942-B023-374http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2126_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220239 text/html 5180HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:57:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Learning At Home In North Dakota: Family Attributes and Student Achievement LEARNING AT HOME IN NORTH DAKOTA: FAMILY ATTRIBUTES AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT by Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. National Home Education Research Institute (NHERI) PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Copyright 1993 by Brian D. Ray ABSTRACT The purpose of this study was to collect basic and factual information about home educators and their students in North Dakota in order to build an understanding of them. More specifically, the objectives of this study were to answer questions about (a) demographic characteristics of home education families, (b) selected significant characteristics of North Dakota home schools, (c) student performance on standardized achievement tests, (d) the relationship between student achievement and various factors related to their education, and (e) changes in data from the previous year. One hundred-four home education families and 195 students were examined. The average formal education of the primary parent was 14.5 years; it was 15.3 years for the other parent. The median annual family income was $25,450. The average age of the students was 10.3, with the average grade level being 4.3. Forty-eight percent of the students were male. Students were engaged in formal schooling 19.7 hours per week, and the religious content of the curriculum was relatively strong. The most common ways the parent qualified to teach in North Dakota were by either having a high school degree and being monitored by a certified teacher or having passed the National Teacher Examination (NTE) and not being monitored; the third most common way was by being a certified teacher. The large majority of parents expressed that they neither needed nor wanted their children to be monitored by certified teachers. The students scored, on the average, at the following percentiles on standardized achievement tests: (a) total reading, 86th, (b) total listening, 81st, (c) total language, 85th, (d) total math, 83rd, (e) science, 87th, (f) social studies, 84th, (g) basic battery (reading, language, mathematics), 84th, and (h) complete battery (all areas tested), 87th. The national average is the 50th percentile. There were low statistical relationships between students' basic battery scores and the number of years home educated and the degree of handicap of the student. There were no significant relationships between basic battery achievement and several variables (i.e., parent scores on the NTE, family income, educational attainment of parents, religious content of curriculum, hours formal instruction per week, degree of structure in learning environment, and student's age, mental ability, and birth order). There were significant relationships of varying strengths between complete battery scores and educational attainment of the parents and student's mental ability, degree of handicap, and years home educated. The provision of the law under which the supervising parent qualified to operate a home school had no significant effect on basic battery achievement scores. The only significant gender difference in achievement was that girls outscored boys in language. Further, there were no significant differences in basic battery and complete battery achievement scores between students who were monitored by local public school districts versus students monitored by state-approved private schools. Findings from this research and other investigations indicate that laws and regulations promoted by various organizations and states are not always based on fact and cogent reasoning. Conscientious evaluation of research findings and straightforward consideration of educational philosophies will assist in developing policy that meets the compelling interest of the state as parents work to successfully educate their children. Note: This abstract is protected under copyright law and may not reproduced in any form without express permission from the author or the National Home Education Research Institute. Copyright 1993 by Brian D. Ray Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-33IA057-000942-B023-383http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/212e_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220246 text/html 5681HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:57:45 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  Home Education In Oklahoma: Family Characteristics, Student Achievement, and Policy Matters HOME EDUCATION IN OKLAHOMA: FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS, STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT, AND POLICY MATTERS by Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. National Home Education Research Institute PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org Copyright (C) 1992 by Brian D. Ray Abstract The purpose of this study was to collect basic information about home educators and their students, their children, in the state of Oklahoma. The information might be used to build an accurate understanding of home education in Oklahoma. The study aimed to answer the following questions: What are the demographic characteristics of home education families in Oklahoma? What are some of the pertinent characteristics of Oklahoma home schools? What are the academic learning outcomes (or academic achievement) of students educated at home in Oklahoma? What is the relationship between these students' academic learning outcomes (or academic achievement) and the following variables: (a) parent education level, (b) whether parents had been certified teachers, (c) family income, (d) whether religious beliefs were part of the rationale for participating in home education, (e) age of student, (f) gender of student, (g) race (or ethnic group) of student, (h) number of years student had been home educated, (i) hours of formal education in which the student was involved, (j) frequency of visits to libraries, (k) number of children in the family, and (l) amount of money the family spent on the child's home education. Alpha was set at .05 for tests of significance. Two hundred fourteen families and 509 children were involved in this study. The median family income category in this study was $35,000-$49,999. The formal education attainment of parents in this study was 2 or 3 years of college. At least four years of college were completed by 51.2% of the fathers and by 43.1% of the mothers. The vast majority (96% of the fathers and 99% of the mothers) reported they were "born again" in a Christian sense. Religious beliefs were part of the rationale for home schooling for 98% of these families. Students in this study were similar to those in other home education research. There were approximately equal numbers of males and females. Grades 1 through 8 included 78.4% of the students in this study, while 65% were in grades 1 through 5. The home educated students in this study scored, on the average, at or above the 82nd percentile in all areas tested (i.e., reading, listening, language, math, science, basic battery, and complete battery), with a high at the 89th percentile on the complete battery. These scores are largely consistent with, yet somewhat higher than, scores found in other home education research. Unexpectedly, there was no significant relationship between the formal education level of the parents and the academic achievement scores of their students. On the other hand, and contrary to the hypotheses, whether a student was a male and how long a student had been home educated were significantly and positively related to science achievement scores. These two variables, however, together explained only 3% of the variation in science scores. Also contrary to the hypotheses, the two variables of whether students' families were in the highest income category and whether they were not in one of the most common racial/ethnic categories were significantly and positively related to listening achievement scores. Again, however, these two variables together explained only 2% of the variation in listening scores. As hypothesized, there were no significant relationships between student learning, as measured by standardized achievement tests, and the variables of (b), (d), (e), (i), (j), (k), and (l) listed above. It is noteworthy that none of the examined variables explained significant amounts of variance in basic battery scores. This was not expected. These findings, and those of other research, suggest that states and other political or educational entities need to consider factual information (such as that from this and other studies) on home education and the learning of its students as they develop policy and strive to serve home education families. Note: This abstract is protected under copyright law and may not be reproduced in any form without express permission from the author or the National Home Education Research Institute. Copyright (C) 1992 by Brian D. Ray Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-34IA057-000942-B023-397http://www.learnathome.com:80/nheri/2136_272.htm 204.146.47.82 19970109220253 text/html 2213HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Thu, 09 Jan 1997 21:57:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.4Content-type: text/html  A Nationwide Study of Home Education: Family Characteristics, Legal Matters, and Student Achievement A Nationwide Study of Home Education: Family Characteristics, Legal Matters, and Student Achievement Copyright 1990 by Brian D. Ray by Brian D. Ray, Ph.D. National Home Education Research Institute PO Box 13939 Salem, Oregon 97309 (503) 364-1490, fax (503) 364-2827 email: mail@nheri.org This study analyzes standardized achievement scores of the home educated, and provides extensive demographic data and limited legal information in the largest nationwide study to date. It samples from the membership of the Home School Legal Defense Association. Students score, on average, at or above the 80th percentile in all subject areas; this is well above the national average of conventional school students. Student achievement is not related to whether the parents are certified teachers, in some cases is slightly related to parents' education level and family income, and is above average regardless of the degree of regulation in a given state. Note: This abstract is protected under copyright law and may not be reproduced in any form without the express permission of the author or the National Home Education Research Institute. Learn@Home | Feedback | Christian Community Network (TM)WT01-B02-35IA054-000904-B030-268http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/ 137.79.108.182 19970210184132 text/html 2119HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:40:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS `94 Electronic Digest IGARSS `94 Electronic Digest Electronic Digest About the Conference About the Electronic Digest Making of the IGARSS 94 Proceedings CD-ROM Article Access statistics IEEE1994 IGARSS Annual Conference URL: http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/index.htm Last update: Saturday March 02, 1996 The last visitor was from: macmartin.jpl.nasa.gov You are the 1454th access to this page since Aug 25 1995 JPL Cognizant Official: Mike Martin On-line access brought to you by JPL'sData DistributionLaboratory in Pasadena, California. WT01-B02-36IA054-000904-B030-393http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/ 137.79.108.182 19970210184226 text/html 2137HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:41:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Search Document Information There are 1036 Document titles in the catalog. You may conduct a full-text search, follow a keyword/value search path by selecting a keyword, or you may conduct a structured field search of Document information. Search for Titles Enter a word or words in the search dialog. For best results, use as many words as you think might apply. A maximum of 100 results will be returned, ranked by how well they match your query. You can read more about searching in the Introduction. Document Keywords Author Name Session Date Topic or Subject Type Title Find Papers by Author Find Papers by Session Find Papers with Images Find Papers by Paper Number (94xxxx) Structured Field Search Structured Field Search Query Form The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-37IA054-000904-B031-1http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/confer.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184246 text/html 2326HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:41:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS: About the IGARSS `94 Conference About IGARSS `94 Conference Symposium Information Invitation Registration Rates Maps of the Area Map of GreaterLos Angeles Map ofCalifornia Institute of Technology Map of PasadenaArea Welcome! Welcome from the IGARSS '94 Co-Chairmen Message from the Technical Co-Chairmen Message from the IEEE/GRSS President IGARSS '94 Organizing Committee Members IGARSS '94 Technical Committee Members Plenary Sessions IEEE1994 IGARSS Annual Conference URL: http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/confer.htm Last update: Saturday March 02, 1996 The last visitor was from: pc_alfred.zalf.de You are the 478th access to this page since Aug 25 1995 JPL Cognizant Official: Mike Martin On-line access brought to you by JPL'sData DistributionLaboratory in Pasadena, California. WT01-B02-38IA054-000904-B031-36http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/digest.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184300 text/html 2252HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:41:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS: About the IGARSS `94 Electronic Digest Abou the IGARSS `94 Electronic Digest Instructions and Getting Started Read Me First About the IGARSS '94 CD Instructions for Unix Users Instructions for Mac Users Instructions for PC Users Example Papers IMAGE QUALITY, STATISTICAL ANDTEXTURAL PROPERTIES OF SAREX DATA FROM THE TAPAJOS TEST SITE Space ShuttlePhotography on Laser Disc: A Winning Combination for the Classroom A Computer-AidedGeological Interpretation System for Subsurface Imaging RADARSAT Program IEEE1994 IGARSS Annual Conference URL: http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/digest.htm Last update: Saturday March 02, 1996 The last visitor was from: pc_alfred.zalf.de You are the 307th access to this page since Aug 25 1995 JPL Cognizant Official: Mike Martin On-line access brought to you by JPL'sData DistributionLaboratory in Pasadena, California. WT01-B02-39IA054-000904-B031-101http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/igarss.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184331 text/html 2820HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:42:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS `94 Electronic Digest IGARSS `94 Electronic Digest IGARSS '94 Papers Searching pages Find Papers by Author Find Papers by Session Find Papers by Topic Find Papers with Images Find Papers by Paper Number (94xxxx) Information About the Conference About the Electronic Digest Example Papers IMAGE QUALITY, STATISTICAL ANDTEXTURAL PROPERTIES OF SAREX DATA FROM THE TAPAJOS TEST SITE Space ShuttlePhotography on Laser Disc: A Winning Combination for the Classroom A Computer-AidedGeological Interpretation System for Subsurface Imaging RADARSAT Program              IEEE1994 IGARSS Annual Conference URL: http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/igarss.htm Last update: Saturday March 02, 1996 The last visitor was from: python.cee.hw.ac.uk You are the 794th access to this page since Aug 25 1995 JPL Cognizant Official: Mike Martin On-line access brought to you by JPL'sData DistributionLaboratory in Pasadena, California. WT01-B02-40IA054-000904-B031-172http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_r1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184407 text/html 1753HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:42:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name Document Keyword: Author Name Select a range of Author Name values to find Document titles "(1) Moon S. Kim, (2) Craig S. T. Daughtry, (1) Emmett W. Chappelle, and" through "Boonrat Kitichotpanit and Yasuo Kuga" "Borel" through "David B. Hogan" "David Cuddy, Tom Bicknell, Mike Tankenson" through "G. W. Schwaab, U. Klein, K. Kunzi, U. Raffalski" "G.C.Toon, J.-F.Blavier, B.Sen, and J.T.Szeto" through "J.A. Johannessen1, R.A. Shuchman2, G. Digranes1," "J.A. Reagan and W.H. Erxleben" through "K.S. Chen, W.L. Kao and C.F. Chen" "K.S. Chen" through "Magdy F. Attia, Ph.D, Senior Member IEEE" "Mahta Moghaddam and Sasan Saatchi" through "Peter J. van Oevelen" "Peter J.F. Swart and Paul Snoeij" through "S. Baronti (*), S. Luciani(**), S. Paloscia(*), G. Schiavon (**)," "S. Chercali and G. Flouzat," through "Tore Guneriussen*, Harald Johnsen* and Knut Sand**" "Toshiaki Kozu, Toneo Kawanishi" through "acob R. Longacre and Mark A. Landry" "by Scott Hensley and Frank Webb" through "van Leeuwen" The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-41IA054-000904-B031-211http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc2_r1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184426 text/html 641HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:43:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Session Date Document Keyword: Session Date Select a range of Session Date values to find Document titles "F.I1" through "WP.T" "WP.V" through "WP.Z" The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-42IA054-000904-B031-247http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc3_r1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184458 text/html 781HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:43:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Subject Type Document Keyword: Subject Type Select a range of Subject Type values to find Document titles "Sea Ice Remote Sensing and Modeling" through "Subsurface Sensing and Inversion" "Synthetic Aperture Radiometry for Remote Sensing" through "Vegetation Scattering and Remote Sensing" The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-43IA054-000904-B031-278http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_r1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184510 text/html 2999HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:43:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title Document Keyword: Title Select a range of Title values to find Document titles "1993 LABORATORY AND FLIGHT TEST RESULTS FOR AN AIRBORNE ASTER SIMULATOR" through "ABSOLUTE-RADIO CALIBRATION OF LANDSAT-5 THEMATIC MAPPER AND THE PROPOSED CALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER" "ACCESSING PORTIONS OF LOSSLESSLY COMPRESSED MULTIBAND DATA" through "ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR PROFILES USING A RAMAN LIDAR" "AUTOMATED MULTI-SENSOR IMAGE MAPPING SYSTEM(1)" through "DESAMPLING FIR FILTERS IN REAL-TIME IMAGING TECHNIQUES" "DESCRIPTION OF A RADAR/RADIOMETER METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION TO AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS OVER- STRATIFORM RAIN IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC" through "EVALUATION OF REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES FOR MEASURING CLOUD WATER AND DRIZZLE IN MARINE STRATOCUMULUS CLOUDS" "EVALUATION OF THE MULTICHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ALGORITHM ALONG THE BRAZILIAN COAST" through "INGARA: THE AUSTRALIAN AIRBORNE IMAGING RADAR SYSTEM" "INITIAL RESULTS FROM THE DEPLOYMENT OF AN ULTRA-WIDEBAND SCATTEROMETER" through "MODELING INTERPRETATION OF SCATTERING FROM SNOW-COVERED SEA ICE" "MODELING SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN SATELLITE-BASED ESTIMATES OF LEAF AREA INDEX USING A SCENE SIMULATION MODEL" through "Operational Atmospheric Correction of AVHRR Visible and Near Infrared Data" "P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA" through "RETRIEVAL OF SURFACE REFLECTANCE AND ATMOSPHERIC PROPERTIES USING ASAS IMAGERY" "RETRIEVAL OF TROPOSPHERIC OZONE FROM SIMULATIONS OF SPECTRAL RADIANCES AS OBSERVED FROM SPACE" through "STEREO RADAR METEOROLOGY: A NEW APPROACH TO PROCESS DATA FROM AIRBORNE OR GROUND BASED WEATHER RADARS" "STRATOSPHERIC AND MESOSPlHERIC WATER VAPOR DISTRIBUIION OVER NORTHERN EUROPE MEASURED WITH AN AIRBORNE A-WAVE SENSOR" through "USING A GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (ARC/INFO) AS A TOOL FOR INTEGRATION OF REMOTE SENSED AND IN-SITU-DATA IN AN ANALYSIS OF THE AIR POLLUTION EFFECTS ON TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS IN VARANGER (NORWAY) AND NIKEL-PECHENGA (RUSSIA)" "USING AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE DATA FOR MULTITEMPORAL STUDIES OF LAND DEGRADATION" through "mm-WAVE SPECTROSCOPY OF STRATOSPHERIC TRACE GASES AT THE SOUTH POLE OVER AN 11-MONTH CYCLE O3, N20, HNO3, ClO and NO2." The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-44IA054-000904-B031-330http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/author.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184537 text/html 836HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:44:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Principal Author Find Papers by Principal Author Author Last Name Begins With A-B C D-F G H-J K L M N-O P-Q R S T U-V W X-Z WT01-B02-45IA054-000904-B031-363http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/session.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184551 text/html 7943HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:44:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS '94 Sessions IGARSS '94 Sessions Monday, August 8 Interactive Area 1: Atmospheric Sounding and Monitoring Area 2: Radar Meteorology and Storms Area 3: Atmospheric Correction of Satellite Imaging Data Area 4: Propagation and Scattering in Media Area 5: Ecosystems and Vegetation Monitoring Area 6: Land Monitoring and Thermal Sensing Afternoon Sea Ice Remote Sensing and Modeling Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature Atmospheric Correction of Satellite and Aircraft Based Imaging Data Over Land Boreal Ecosystems Basic Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering I New Developments in SAR: Special Session Honoring Kiyo Tomiyasu on His 75th Birthday Data Compression TOPEX/Poseidon Results and Follow-On Radar Meteorology: Observations of Weather and EM Wave Propagation Sensing and Predicting Electromagnetic/Electrooptical Propagation Conditions in Coastal Environments Tuesday, August 9 Interactive Area 1: Clouds and Precipitation Area 2: Sea Surface Temperature/Optical Properties Area 3: Ocean Waves, Currents and Bathymetry Area 4: Ocean Features/Processing and Operations Area 5: Sea Ice Area 6: Remote Sensing in Education Morning Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering II Atmospheric Forcing and Oceanic Response in the Warm Pool of the Western Pacific Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature II Laboratory Observations and Modelling of Sea Ice Fluorescence Techniques in Remote Sensing Assessment of Vegetation Changes Remote Sensing Clouds with Application to Climate Research Remote Sensing of the Earth's Troposphere Crustal Motion SAR Interferometry I Joint US/Russian Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Wednesday, August 10 Interactive Area 1: Environmental Degradation and Pollution Area 2: Ocean Winds/Surface Scattering Area 3: Agriculture/Crop Monitoring Area 4: Data Integration and Analysis Area 5: Image Classification: Algorithms Area 6: SAR Processing Morning LIDAR Techniques for Remote Sensing Ocean Winds and Scatterometry Vegetation Fluorescence and Spectroscopy Remote Sensing of Lead Properties in the Arctic - LEADEX'92 Monitoring Arid and Semi-Arid Lands Tropical Forests and Wetlands Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification Observations of the Upper Atmosphere During the UARS Mission Polarimetric Theory, Signal and Image Processing Image Processing and Classification: Algorithms Afternoon SAR Processing I: Algorithms and Performance Geographic Information Systems and Applications Operational Satellite Oceanography Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring Ocean Instruments and Techniques Use of Radar and Microwave Radiometry for Mapping Snow and Sea Ice Cover Synthetic Aperture Radiometry for Remote Sensing Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere I Polametric Metrology, Calibration, and Signature Analyses Neural Network Applications to Remote Sensing Thursday, August 11 Interactive Area 1: Soil Moisture/Flooding Area 2: Bidirectional Reflectance/Topography and Tectonics Area 3: Environmental Monitoring Using ERS-1 Data Area 4: Optical/Infrared Sensor Calibration and Validation Area 5: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development I Area 6: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development II Morning Moisture Image Processing and Classification Radar Radiative Transfer and Scattering Analyses and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery I Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere II Future Spaceborne Missions Ocean Wave-Current Interaction Arctic Sea Ice Studies Precipitation Studies Exploratory Analysis and Visualization of Data Afternoon Analysis and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery II Vegetation Biomass Image Processing, Classification and Neural Networks Inverse Problems in Optical Remote Sensing Remote Sensing of Snow ERS-1 Achievements and New Results SAR Processing II: Motion Compensation Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical I SAR Imaging of Ocean Features Atmospheric Water Vapor Friday, August 12 Interactive Area 1: Ice Sheets and Snow Area 2: Optical/IR Image Classification and Analysis Area 3: SAR Image Classification Area 4: SAR Image Classification/Data Compression Area 5: Microwave Sensor Calibration and Resolution Enhancement Area 6: Airborne Instruments/Data System Development Morning SAR Interferometry II Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical II Propagation and Scattering Imaging Spectroscopy Applications in Earth Sciences Ice Sheets and Glaciers Polarimetric Observations and Scattering Characteristics of the Ocean Surface Atmospheric Sounding and Profiling Vegetation Scattering and Remote Sensing Subsurface Sensing and Inversion Image Processing and Classification: Optical/IR Back to IGARSS 94 Home Page IGARSS 94 (igarss@starhawk.jpl.nasa.gov) Generated on June 30,1994WT01-B02-46IA054-000904-B031-389http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/withimg.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184602 text/html 9432HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:44:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers with Images Find Papers with Images 940123: EVALUATION OF AN AUSTRALIAN ERS-1 SAR SCENE PERTAINING TO SOIL MOISTURE MEASUREMENT 940127: TRANSMITTED RADIATION OF SEARCHLIGHT IN TURBID ATMOSPHERE 940129: SIMULATION OF VISIBLE AND IR IMAGERY FOR GOES 940237: ESTIMATING HIGH-LATITUDE RADIATIVE FLUXES FROM SATELLITE DATA: REQUIREMENTS, PROBLEMS, AND POSSIBILITIES 940238: RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA 940270: FIRST RESULTS FROM SIR-C CALIBRATION 940288: ON THE DERIVATION OF COSEISMIC DISPLACEMENT FIELDS USING DIFFERENTIAL RADAR INTERFEROMETRY: THE LANDERS EARTHQUAKE 940303: DETECTION OF OCEANIC STERIC HEIGHT CHANGE USING TOPEX/POSEIDON SATELLITE ALTIMETERY 940315: HARDWARE CANCELLATION OF THE DIRECT COUPLING IN A STEPPED CW GROUND PENETRATING RADAR 940323: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA 940331: CANOPY PENETRATION STUDY FOR TROPICAL RAINFORESTS: MODELED RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM AMAZON FLOODPLAIN FORESTS AT C-, L-, AND P-BAND 940347: iSAR: A MULTISPECTRAL, POLARIMETRIC AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM 940348: A SAR PROCESSOR IMPLEMENTED ON A TRANSPUTER RING 940349: A QUICKLOOK PROCESSOR FOR AN AIRBORNE SAR 940350: ON-LINE COMPLEX PERMITTIVITY MEASUREMENTS FOR GROUND PENETRATING RADAR 940351: THE USE OF POLARIMETRY IN SUBSURFACE RADAR 940385: A NEW REGISTRATION ALGORITHM FOR OF ASAS MULTI-ANGLE IMAGES 940392: PHASE-UNWRAPPING OF SAR INTERFEROGRAM WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY OR MULTI-BASELINE 940426: AN AUTOMATED METHOD FOR MAKING MOSAIC OUT OF NOAA/AVHRR IMAGES FOR GLOBAL MONITORING 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940433: SEASONAL CHANGES IN DYNAMIC HEIGHTS BASED ON ALTIMETRIC DATA 940448: NEW FEATURES FOR TEXTURE ANALYSIS 940467: A COMPUTER-AIDED GEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION SYSTEM FOR SUBSURFACE IMAGING 940471: OPTIMIZATION OF THE SCAN GEOMETRY OF IMAGING MICROWAVE RADIOMETER 940479: ROBUST WATER TEMPERATURE RETRIEVAL USING MULTISPECTRAL AND MULTI-ANGULAR IR MEASUREMENTS 940480: ARE LEAF CHEMISTRY SIGNATURES PRESERVED AT THE CANOPY LEVEL? 940481: RADIOSITY BASED MODEL FOR TERRAIN EFFECTS ON MULTI-ANGULAR VIEWS 940498: ON THE EFFECT OF SOIL SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON THE RADAR BACKSCATTER RESPONSES TO SOIL MOISTURE 940514: CIRCULAR POLARIZATION FOR MAPPING FOREST BIOMASS AT P-BAND? 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940527: LINKWINDS, A VISUAL DATA ANALYSIS SYSTEM AND ITS APPLICATION TO REMOTE SENSED DATA 940530: SEASONAL CHANGES OBSERVED IN AVIR1S IMAGES OF JASPER RIDGE, CALIFORNIA 940531: VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA 940532: ESTIMATING DRY GRASS BIOMASS RESIDUES USING AVIRIS IMAGE ANALYSIS 940541: SCANSAR SIMULATION AND PROCESSING USING ERS-1 DATA 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940572: INTERPRETATION AND PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BLUE-GREEN AND RED VEGETATION FLUORESCENCE 940583: X-SAR DATA AND IMAGE QUALITY 940637: CALIBRATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE X-SAR SYSTEM 940640: USE OF FUZZY LOGIC FOR UNSUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION OF REMOTELY SENSED IMAGES 940660: NONLOCAL EFFECTS OF INTERNAL WAVES ON THE OCEAN SURFACE 940685: COMPARISONS OF NEURAL NETWORKS TO STANDARD TECHNIQUES FOR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND CORRELATION 940697: HIGH RESOLUTION MICROWAVE RADIOMETRIC SIGNATURES OFMID-LATITUDE AND TROPICAL RAINFALL 940734: POINT PROCESS MODELS FOR WEATHER RADAR IMAGES 940771: CLASSIFICATION OF ERS-1/JERS-1 COMPOSITE SAR IMAGES 940821: APPLICATION OF THE HOUGH TRANSFORM FOR AUTOMATED INTERPRETATION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN IMAGERIES 940879: ON MINIMIZING IMAGING LATENCY TIME FOR RADARSAT III 940914: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY ON LASER DISC: A WINNING COMBINATION FOR THE CLASSROOM 940960: THE EFFECT OF INTERNAL WAVES ON DECIMETER AND CENTIMETER SlRRFACE WAVES FOR VARIOUS ORIENTATIONS OF THEIR DIRECTIONS OF PROPAGATION. 941118: SALSA-MEX: SEMI-ARID LAND-SURFACE-ATMOSPHERIC MOUNTAIN EXPERIMENT WT01-B02-47IA054-000904-B031-422http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/pnumber.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184614 text/html 1132HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:44:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Number (94xxxx) Find Papers by Paper Number (94xxxx) Papers 940002 through 940099 Papers 940101 through 940199 Papers 940201 through 940299 Papers 940301 through 940399 Papers 940401 through 940499 Papers 940501 through 940599 Papers 940601 through 940699 Papers 940701 through 940799 Papers 940801 through 940899 Papers 940901 through 940999 Papers 941001 through 941099 Papers 941101 through 941155 WT01-B02-48IA054-000904-B031-452http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/document_form.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184627 text/html 1290HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:45:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Structured Field Search for Document Titles Structured Field Search for Document Titles Enter a word or words in the search dialog.For best results, use as many words as you think might apply.A maximum of 100 results will be returned, ranked by how well they match your query. You can read more about structured field search in the Introduction. TITLE....................AUTHOR_NAME..............SESSION_DATE.............SUBJECT_TYPE............. The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-49IA054-000904-B031-474http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/intro.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184640 text/html 2405HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:45:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS'94 Welcome Welcome to IGARSS `94 We invite you to attend the 1994 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (lGARSS'94) on August 8-12 at the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California. IGARSS'94 is hosted by the Jet Propulsion laboratory and jointly sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers' (IEEE), Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society (GRSS), the International Union of Radio Science (URSI), and, for the first time, the Optical Society of America (OSA). We are also fortunate to have the California Space Institute as a participant this year. The theme for 1994, "Surface and Atmospheric Remote Sensing: Technologies, Data Analysis, and Interpretation," reflects the need to view the Earth as a system of interrelated atmospheric, terrestrial, and oceanic processes. Plenary sessions will focus on the models, technologies, missions, and policies that will further our understanding of the environment and its resources. More than sixty technical sessions, including both oral and interactive papers, will provide more detailed presentations on these and other relevant topics. New this year will be"The User's Guide to the Data," an interactive series of exhibits, hands-on demonstrations, and presentations on the latest in data analysis and visualization. In addition, the lGARSS'94 Digest will be available on CD-ROM, as well as in the traditional book format for those of you who need the exercise. And, as always, we will hold the annual baseball and soccer games in the lGARSS tradition. Pasadena, best known as the home of the Rose Bowl ad Rose Parade, is the site of well-known sporting events (including the finals for the World Cup this year), world-class museums and theaters, and historic architecture. With its sunny, warm climate, Southern California provides the opportunity for a myriad of activities, from Santa Monica Beach to the San Gabriel Mountains to the happiest place on Earth: Disneyland. We look forward to seeing you in August! JoBea WayDan McCleeseIGARSS'94 Co-Chairmen WT01-B02-50IA054-000904-B032-22http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/reg.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184657 text/html 1097HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:45:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Registration Rates Registration Rates Member Early Registration Without Digest - 300.00 With Digest - 365.00 Member late Registration Without Digest - 350.00 With Digest - 415.00 Nonmember Early Registration Without Digest - 375.00 With Digest - 440.00 Nonmember late Registration Without Digest - 425.00 With Digest - 490.00 Student/Retired Early Registration Without Digest - 150.00 With Digest - 215.00 Student/Retired late Registration Without Digest - 175.00 With Digest - 240.00 Refund Schedule Prior to July 8,1994 Refundable less $150.00 service fee After July 8, 1994 Nonrefundable Updated 3/15/94 afarny@stardust.jpl.nasa.gov WT01-B02-51IA054-000904-B032-167http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/welcome.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184814 text/html 2176HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:47:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Welcome from the IGARSS '94 Co-Chairmen Welcome from the IGARSS '94 Co-Chairmen The staff at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory would like to welcome youto Pasadena and the 1994 International Geoscience and Remote SensingSymposium (IGARSS'94). IGARSS'94 is jointly sponsored by the Instituteof Electrical and Electronic Engineers' (IEEE) Geoscience and RemoteSensing Society (GRSS), the International Union of Radio Science (URSI),and, for the first time, the Optical Society of America (OSA). We arealso fortunate to have the California Space Institute as a participantthis year. The theme this year, "Surface and Atmospheric Remote Sensing:Technologies, Data Analysis, and Interpretation," reflects the need toview the Earth as a system of interrelated atmospheric, terrestrial, andoceanic processes. We would like to thank the technical chairmen Drs.Eni Njoku, Robert Menzies, and Jurgen Richter for their time andexpertise in defining and developing our extensive technical program. Their efforts have resulted in nearly 1000 technical papers, an IGARSSrecord. We hope you will visit "The User's Guide to the Data," aninteractive series of exhibits, hands-on demonstrations, andpresentations on the latest in data analysis and visualization. Anumber of recent data sets will be featured over the course of theexhibit. Also, this year marks the first time that the IGARSS Digest isavailable on CD-ROM; we hope this provides a welcome change from thestill-available book format. We also look forward to seeing you at the annual baseball and soccergames. Take some time to enjoy Old Pasadena,the surroundingentertainment centers, the dynamic natural "wonders," and the pleasantocean and beaches during your visit to Southern California! JoBea Way Dan McCleese IGARSS'94 General Co-Chairmen WT01-B02-52IA054-000904-B032-204http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/message.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184833 text/html 2822HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:47:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Message from Symposium Technical Chairmen Message from Symposium Technical Chairmen The Technical Program for IGARSS'94 reflects the symposium theme -"Surface and Atmospheric Remote Sensing: Technologies, Data Analysis andInterpretation." The program includes papers covering a wide spectrumof research in remote sensing science and techniques in the traditionalEarth science disciplines of oceans, atmospheres, land, and cryosphere. Also well represented are papers on topics of special interest tomembership of the sponsoring societies: the IEEE Geoscience and RemoteSensing Society, the Optical Society of America, and the InternationalUnion of Radio Science. To achieve balance in the program,approximately half of the technical sessions were organized as specialsessions comprising both invited and contributed papers. In addition,three plenary sessions were organized to highlight the integrating themeof the symposium. The first plenary session on Linkage Between EarthSystem Modeling and Remote Sensing provides perspectives on the need forglobal and long-term observations in understanding the Earth's diversegeophysical processes. The second plenary on New Developments in RemoteSensing Systems and Technologies presents some key trends shaping futureapplications of remote sensing. A third plenary, Policy Forum: Issuesof Mission Coordination and Data Availability, focuses on how remotesensing missions and data are being coordinated at the internationallevel, and how this affects opportunities for new science andapplications. Also included in the program are sessions on results fromrecent space missions and previews of future missions. In its breadthand depth this promises to be a very exciting symposium indeed! The response to the IGARSS'94 Call for Papers was overwhelming. TheTechnical Committee faced difficult choices in paper allocations and,unfortunately, not all submissions could be accommodated. In all, thefull program consists of 70 technical sessions and 30 interactivesessions for a total of approximately 1000 papers. Special thanks aredue to the members of the Technical Program Committee, and to theorganizers of the special sessions and plenaries who devotedconsiderable effort to ensuring the high quality of the solicitedpapers. Eni Njoku IEEE GRSS Technical Program Chairman Juergen Richter URSI Technical Program Chairman Robert Menzies OSA Technical Program Chairman WT01-B02-53IA054-000904-B032-240http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/msgieee.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184853 text/html 2894HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:47:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html MESSAGE FROM IEEE/GRSS PRESIDENT MESSAGE FROM IEEE/GRSS PRESIDENT On behalf of the IEEE/Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society, I wouldlike to welcome you to the 1994 International Geoscience and RemoteSensing Symposium (IGARSSU94). I encourage you to participate in the exchange of technicalinformation in the form of oral and extended interactive presentations,and to also take advantage of the informal discussion opportunitiesthroughout the week -- among these are the reception and banquet to beheld Monday and Wednesday evenings, respectively. New this year is theopportunity for you to assist in formatting and supporting the SocietyUstechnical positions on issues of concern to the membership through theIEEE/GRSS Technical Committees. Under the leadership of Chuck Luther,Office of Naval Research, the first Technical Committee meeting will beheld Wednesday from 12:10 to 1:40 pm in the East-West Room of CaltechUsAthenaeum -- lunch will be provided at a minimal charge of $10.00 perperson (tickets should be purchased in advance at the registrationdesk). Your participation is important to us and to the direction of ourSociety. I extend a special welcome to all our international participantswho comprise an outstanding 50% of attendees. Our Society is wellrecognized in the IEEE for its broad international participation. Iencourage all fellow IGARSS attendees to continue in your participation.The next few years will bring the introduction of new and excitingdirections for GRSS and IGARSS. In particular, with IGARSSU94 we haveseen the introduction of Digest materials available in CD ROM format(eliminating the need for extra luggage to take home bulky volumes).This practice will continue with IGARSSU95 along with the submission ofabstracts via electronic mail, and IGARSSU96 will introduce an annualcommercial tradeshow to be held in conjunction with IGARSS. Youwill find in your registration packet an extensive evaluation formcovering all aspects of the symposium. Please take a few minutes tocomplete this questionnaire -- it will assist future organizing teams tobetter respond to your preferences. Finally, we would like to thank JoBea Way, Dan McCleese and theentire IGARSSU94 Organizing and Technical Committees for all the effortput forward in organizing an outstanding, well-rounded program. Again, welcome to sunny Southern California! Enjoy your stay. Andrew J. Blanchard President IEEE/Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society WT01-B02-54IA054-000904-B032-269http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/orgcom.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210184923 text/html 1416HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:48:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Organizing Committee Organizing Committee JoBea Way and Dan McCleese General Co-Chairmen Eni Njoku GRSS Technical Chairman Juergen Richter URSI Technical Chairman Robert Menzies OSA Technical Chairman Marguerite Schier Symposium Coordinator Beth Emmons Finance Chairman Kyle McDonald Publications Chairman Mike Martin CD ROM Chairman Ben Holt Publicity Chairman Don Collins and Jeff Dozier Users Guide to the Data Co-Chairmen Mike Wiskerchen Sponsor Chairman Pat McLane Local Arrangments Chairman Anthony Freeman Sporting Events Chairman Phyllis Freeman Accompanying Persons Program Chairman Neil Nickle Technical Tours Chairman Sally Ride CalSpace Representative Charles Kennel NASA Representative Chuck Luther ONR Representative Tammy Stein IGARSS Facilitator WT01-B02-55IA054-000904-B032-301http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/techcom.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185001 text/html 2577HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:48:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS '94 Technical Committee IGARSS '94 Technical Committee Eni Njoku IGARSS Technical Program Chairman (JPL, Pasadena, CA) Juergen Richter URSI Technical Program Chairman (Naval Command, Control, and OceanSurveillance Center, San Diego, CA) Robert Menzies OSA Technical Program Chairman (JPL,Pasadena, CA) Kenn Anderson Naval Command, Control, and Ocean Surveillance Center, San Diego,CA Ghassem Asrar NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC Robert Bernstein SeaSpace, San Diego, CA Wolfgang-Mather Boerner University of Illinois, Chicago, IL Frank Carsey JPL, Pasadena, CA James Churnside NOAA/Wave Propagation Lab, Boulder, CO Jeff Dozier University of California, Santa Barbara, CA Dara Entekhabi Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA Robert Frankot Hughes Aircraft Company, Van Nuys, CA Anthony Freeman JPL, Pasadena, CA David Goodenough Pacific Forestry Centre, Victoria, Canada Martti Hallikainen Helsinki University of Technology, Espoo, Finland Yann Kerr Sukacheck Institute of Forestry and Research, Krasnosarsk, Russia Charles Luther Office of Naval Research, Arlington, MD Bruce Murray California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA Paolo Pampaloni CNR/IR OE, Florence, Italy Fred Prata CSIRO, Victoria, Australia Michael Rast ESTEC/ESA, Noordwijk, The Netherlands Sasan Saatchi JPL, Pasadena, CA Vincent Salomonson NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD Alois Sieber Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy Phil Slater Universit y of Arizona, Tucson, AZ Joao Soares Institut Nacional de Pesquisas Espacials, Sao Jose, Brazil Mikio Takagi U niversity of Tokyo, Japan Leung Tsang University of Washington, Seattle, WA Jakob van Zyl JPL, Pasadena, CA Werner Wiesbeck WT01-B02-56IA054-000904-B032-320http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/plenary.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185012 text/html 3923HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:48:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Plenary Sessions Plenary Sessions Monday, August 8, Opening Plenary Session Linkage Between Earth System Modeling and Remote Sensing Chairman: Dr. Moustafa T. Chahine, Chief Scientist, JetPropulsion Laboratory Understanding the Earth System Using Modeling andSpaceObservations Lennard Fisk Department of Atmosphere, Ocean and Space Science,University of Michigan Status of Earth System Modeling and Needs for Remotely Sensed Data Berrien Moore III, Institute for the Study of Earth, Ocean, andSpace, University of New Hampshire Land Information: Baselines for Spaceborne Environmental Monitoringand Modeling John E. Estes, Department of Geography, University of California,Santa Barbara Tuesday Afternoon, August 9, Plenary Session New Developments in Remote Sensing Systems and Technologies Chairman: Dr. Charles Elachi Director for Space and Earth SciencePrograms, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena Convergence of Military and Civilian Space Technologies in RemoteSensing Kathryn D. Sullivan, Chief Scientist, NOAA Data Visualization and Networks in Earth System Science Jeff Dozier, Center for Remote Sensing and Environmental OpticsUniversity of California, Santa Barbara Small Satellite Technology W. David Thompson , President Spectrum Astro, Inc. Advanced Spaceborne Sensors Technology Charles Elachi, Director for Space and Earth Science Programs JetPropulsion Laboratory Tuesday Evening, August 9, 19:30 - 21:30 Plenary Session Policy Forum: Issues of Mission Coordination and Data Availability Chair: Dr. Lisa R. Shaffer, Acting Director, Mission to PlanetEarth Division Office of Policy Coordination and InternationalRelations, NASA Headquarters, Washington DC In recent years there has been a proliferation of spaceborne systemremote sensing capabilities among the world's spacefaring nations. Atthe same time budgetary and political considerations are encouraging newperspectives on the opportunities for sharing of remote sensinginstruments, platforms, and data across institutional and nationalboundaries. The need for global observations and internationalscientific participation in addressing critical issues of globalenvironmental change is also a key factor in fostering the newperspectives. This session will provide an opportunity for brief remarksby a panel of experts, and for audience interactive participation, on awide range of topics including instrument development, mission planning,data availability, pricing and distribution, and research collaboration. Dr. Luiz Alberto Vieira Dias General Coordinator for Earth Observation, INPE, Sao Jose dosCampos, Brazil Mr. Yukio Haruyama Head, Earth Observation Planning Department, National SpaceDevelopment Agency, Tokyo, Japan Mr. Livio Marelli Head, Projects and Engineering Department, ESRIN, European SpaceAgency, Frascati, Italy Dr. S. Ichtiaque Rasool Director, Data Information System Office, International GeosphereBiosphere Program, Paris, France Mr. Rob Shanks Vice President, Hammon, Jensen, Wallen & Associates, Oakland,California, USA Dr. Volker Liebig Head, Atmosphere, Land and Ocean Research Division, EarthObservation Department, German Space Agency, DARA, Bonn, Germany WT01-B02-57IA054-000904-B032-350http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/aareadme.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185026 text/html 3358HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:49:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Welcome to the IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest. Welcome to the IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest. Disclaimers Accessing the IGARSS '94 Digest Who to Contact Disclaimers First: All users of this CD-ROM should understand that theresolution of the printed page is far higher than that of a computerscreen. Our endeavor is to scrunch 2400 pixel by 3300 pixel printedpages onto a video display which will usually have a resolution of 480pixels by 640 pixels. It is impossible to do this in a reallysatisfactory manner. Therefore the goal is to provide enough of a viewof the papers on the screen to determine that a page or article shouldbe printed on a higher resolution device. Second: Scanning hardcopy pages has several technicalproblems. A page of mixed text and gray scale imagery presents aformidable challenge to existing scanners. An optimum text scan yieldspoor images, an optimum gray scale scan yields poor text and line art. Adding color graphics or color images exacerbates the problem. Thiselectronic digest contains optimum text scans, sometimes appearing witha black border around the edges. Third: You will sometimes notice that a paper title withinan abstract does not exactly match the title listed in the sessionreferring to that paper. This anomaly exists because hardcopy abstractswere scanned months in advance and some authors changed their titlesafter submitting those original abstracts. Accessing the IGARSS '94 Digest This CD-ROM has several access paths for different users. If you arenot an experienced computer user, you will probably want to install theAdobe Acrobat(TM) Reader and open the IGARSS.PDF file which is locatedin the root directory of the CD-ROM. This file provides the table ofcontents and all papers in one form or another. Limited text searchcapabilities are available with the IGARSS.PDF version. If you are a more experienced computer user, you may want toinstall both NCSA's Mosaic and the Adobe Acrobat(TM) Reader, and openthe IGARSS.HTM file which is located in the root directory of theCD-ROM. Read the appropriate AAREADME file for your platform(AAREADME.MAC (Macintosh), AAREADME.UNX (Unix), AAREADME.PC (Windows PC)). Also, please read About the IGARSS `94 CD. The NCSA Mosaicversion provides a hypertext interface for browsing papers and abstractsvia session, author, and topic. This version also gives you the abilityto view image files and additional information supplied by the authors. Who to Contact For assistance, you may contact Ann Bernath at the Jet PropulsionLaboratory. You may contact her by phone at (818) 306-6478, or bye-mail at abernath@stardust.jpl.nasa.gov. WT01-B02-58IA054-000904-B032-377http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/aboutcd.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185039 text/html 7545HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:49:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html About the IGARSS '94 CD About the IGARSS '94 CD Contents Locating Papers of Interest Using the Hypertext Interface - NCSA's Mosaic Using the Adobe Acrobat(TM) Reader Viewing Attachments Provided by the Author Who to Contact for Help The IGARSS '94 CD is an electronic digest of papers submitted to the1994 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS),sponsored by the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society, and hostedby the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, inPasadena, California. Contents Abstracts Papers Hypertext Browsing Software (NCSA's Mosaic) Adobe Acrobat(TM) Reader Software Access to the IGARSS '94 World Wide Web Server Locating Papers of Interest You may browse the contents of the CD using the hypertext interfacesoftware, NCSA's Mosaic. You may locate papers using any one of thefollowing methods. By Primary Author The Author pages provide you with a list of authors by primaryauthor. Choose the letter of the last name of the primary author, C, for instance , to see a list of papers by primary authors whoselast names begin with C. By Session The Session page is listed Monday through Friday and lists allInteractive, Morning, and Afternoon sessions. From this page, selectan individual session to see a list of papers. By Topic The Topic page lists some of the common topics, or keywords, foundin the IGARSS '94 abstracts. Select a topic to see a list of papers. By Papers with Images Some papers were submitted electronically and include grayscale and even color images. The With Images page lists those papers. By Paper Numbers (94xxxx) Each IGARSS '94 paper has an associated paper number. You will seethis number listed at the top of each abstract. If you know the papernumber you would like to see, for instance, Paper 940914, you can selectPapers 940900 through 940999 from the PaperNumber page, and then select Paper 940914. Using theWorld Wide Web The contents of this CD, plus a full-text abstract searchcapability, is available from the IGARSS '94 World Wide Web server. Ifyou are linked to the Internet, you may want to visit it. Using the Hypertext Interface - NCSA's Mosaic NCSA's Mosaic is a World Wide Web client which provides a hypertextuser interface to HyperText Markup Language (HTML) files, as well asother file types. Depending on the file type, Mosaic will eitherdisplay it appropriately, such as HTML or plain text, or launch anexternal viewer such as xv, Adobe Acrobat(TM) Reader, etc. Words, phrases, or images which are hotare hyperlinks and will be underlined, highlighted, or both. Clickingon a hyperlink will activate it. Once it has been activated, it willdisplay in a different or subdued color, depending on your Mosaicclient. When you choose a paper title from any of the methods listed above,the abstract will be displayed to you. From here, you can choose ahyperlink to view the paper (see the next section) and/or any of itsattached materials. Within Mosaic, you may search for a string within any currentlydisplayed document by selecting Find In Current from the File menu.(Typing an s often gives you access to this capability.) If you arepresented with a long list of paper titles, you may want to use thiscapability to locate a particular paper. Using the Adobe Acrobat(TM) Reader If a paper is available in Portable Document Format (PDF), you willsee the following display when viewing its abstract. Clicking on this hyperlink will launch Adobe Acrobat(TM) Reader. Once in Acrobat, you may use the icons and options to view thepages of an individual paper. You may enlarge or reduce the size of thepage on your screen, using the + and - icons, view thumbnail images ofthe pages, move from one page to the next, or print the paper. (Be sureto specify that you want the page to "scale to fit.") Some PDF files may have embedded hypertext links that will take youto other pages in that same PDF file. Click on these links to make thehypertext jump. They look like the following. Papers will look and display differently depending on theirconversion history. Papers that were converted directly from Postscript files usingAdobe's Distiller may load more slowly, but will display images better. Papers that were scanned from hardcopy will lose grayscale and willonly display black and white. These may also display artifacts from thescanning process. Papers that were submitted as Postscript files but could not beconverted directly using Adobe's Distiller, will lose grayscale and willonly display black and white. Exit Adobe Acrobat (TM) from the File menu to return to NCSA Mosaic. Viewing Attachments provided by the Author If there is a list of attached materials, you will see the followingtype of display. Note the icons for viewing images and non-image files. If you select an image, you must have an image display program onyour local machine to display them. NCSA Mosaic will try and launchcertain default image display programs based on your platform. If youneed to change these defaults to launch the program of your choice, thiscan be done by: Selecting the Options/Helper Applications menu on the Mac Updating the .mailcap and .mime.types files on Unix platforms Updating the mosaic.ini file on the PC Once an image display program has been launched, you must exit thisprogram to return to NCSA Mosaic. Otherwise, you may experience memoryproblems (especially Mac users). In some cases, you must click on theimage to activate the menu of the display program. Who to Contact For assistance, you may contact Ann Bernath at the Jet PropulsionLaboratory. You may contact her by phone at (818) 306-6478, or bye-mail at abernath@stardust.jpl.nasa.gov. WT01-B02-59IA054-000904-B032-402http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/uxreadme.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185052 text/html 2426HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:49:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest Software Installation Instructions IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest Software Installation Instructions Be sure to read the Read Me First file(aareadme.txt) and About the IGARSS '94 CD(aboutcd.txt). Unix Platform INSTALLING NCSA MOSAIC Copy the following files from the software/unixapps directory toyour home directory mailcapmimetype NCSA Mosaic expects these files to be dot files, so rename them mv mailcap .mailcapmv mimetype .mime.types Choose the NCSA Mosaic binary for your specific Unix machine fromthe software/unixapps/mosbin directory Copy the appropriate Mosaic binary to a directory on your file system, preferably to a directory that is in your path (otherwise, youwill need to add this directory to your path) Change the name of the NCSA Mosaic binary to "mosaic" Make the NCSA Mosaic binary executable  chmod +x mosaic INSTALLING ADOBE ACROBAT READER Make an "adobe" directory on your file system. If you have rootprivileges, make the directory /usr/adobe cd to that directory Copy the file software/unixapps/acroread.tar Untar the file with the following command tar xvf acroread.tar Change to the AcroRead_1.0 directory Type the following command to set Acrobat's environment variable  setenv ACROEXCH_HOME `pwd` Copy the execute script to a directory on your file system that isin your path (otherwise, you will need to add this directory to yourpath) cp bin/acroread /usr/local/bin/ # for example STARTING NCSA MOSAIC Mount the IGARSS94 CDROM on your filesystem cd to the IGARSS94 CDROM Use the "-home" option of NCSA Mosaic to point to the IGARSS94 home page. mosaic -home igarss.htm & WT01-B02-60IA054-000904-B032-428http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mcreadme.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185106 text/html 3403HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:49:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest Software Installation Instructions IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest Software Installation Instructions Be sure to read the Read Me First(aareadme.txt) file, and About the IGARSS'94 CD(aboutcd.txt). Macintosh Platform Note:You may experience a memory problem when NCSA Mosaiclaunches applications, such as Adobe Acrobat (TM), JPEGView, etc., ifthe application is not closed each time. If this occurs, you willreceive an error message indicating that the file you are trying todisplay cannot be read, and you will need to restart Mosaic. Open the software/macapps folder. Install Acrobat(TM) Reader 1.0 Double click on the Acrobat Reader Installer under the InstallerDisk 1 folder A contract message will appear - click on "Accept" Follow the instructions to install Acrobat Reader 1.0 on your harddrive For optimal performance, increase the Acrobat Reader partition size(memory allocation) to 4096kb or greater. To do this: Highlight the Acrobat Reader 1.0 application icon. Choose "Get Info" from the "File" menu. Type "4096" in both of the editable boxes in the lower right cornerof the dialog box. Close the dialog box. Install NCSA Mosaic If you do not have NCSA Mosaic already installed on your machine, dothe following: Copy the NCSA Mosaic folder to your hard drive. Start NCSA Mosaic Your installation is complete. OR Tailor NCSA Mosaic's Preferences If you already hadMosaic on your system and you did not install it from the CD-ROM, youmay want to replace your Preferences file with the one provided, or,you may just want to update your own Preferences file as describedbelow. Start NCSA Mosaic Select Preferences under the Options menu Type in "file:///IGARSS94/igarss.htm" in the Home dialog box. Thiswill set the default Home page. Note: You will be using Mosaicin Local mode. Select Helper applications Click on "Add document type" Type "application/acrobat" Scroll through the list of document types (on the right of yourscreen) and highlight (click on) "application/acrobat" Click on "Set application" Move through the directory structure of your hard drive andhighlight Acrobat Reader 1.0 - click on "Open" When prompted to pick a file type, click on "PDF file type" Click on "Add extension" Type "pdf" and select "OK", then select "application/acrobat" from the document type list You may add or change other helper applications using this methodto tailor your NCSA Mosaic client further. Click on "OK" and "Apply" to exit Quit NCSA Mosaic Restart NCSA Mosaic WT01-B02-61IA054-000904-B032-455http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/pcreadme.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185129 text/html 1225HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:50:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest Software Installation Instructions IGARSS '94 Electronic Digest Software Installation Instructions Be sure to read the Read Me First file(aareadme.txt) and About the IGARSS '94 CD(aboutcd.txt). PC With Windows Platform Install Acrobat(TM) Reader Execute SOFTWARE/PCAPPS/VIEWERS/ACROREAD/AASETUP.EXE Install NCSA Mosaic Read SOFTWARE/PCAPPS/WNMOS20A4/INSTALL.TXT file for complete NCSAMosaic installation instructions Note: The current release of Mosaic for Windows (2.0A4) willnot launch the Adobe Acrobat (TM) Reader in local mode. When thisproblem is fixed, you can download a new version of Mosaic from theInternet via anonymous ftp at ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu. In the meantime, youwill need to open PDF versions of the papers from within AdobeAcrobat(TM). WT01-B02-62IA054-000904-B033-298http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/topic.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185440 text/html 1517HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:53:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Topic Find Papers by Topic Airborne AirSAR Alaska SAR AVHRR AVIRIS Backscatter Biomass Boreal Canopy Climate Cloud Earth ERS-1 Feature Fire Flood Forest Ice Leaf Method Microwave Ocean Polarimetry Radio Rainforest RCS Satellite Sea Ice Shuttle SIR-C Soil Solar Temperature TOPEX Tree Wake WT01-B02-63IA054-000904-B033-330http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185450 text/html 12620HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:53:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name Document Keyword: Author Name Select a Author Name to find Document titles (1) Moon S. Kim, (2) Craig S. T. Daughtry, (1) Emmett W. Chappelle, and (1) Robert A. Maffione, Curtis D. Mobley, (1,2) E. Ben-Dor and (1) A. Banin (1,2)COSTES F., (3)RAIU S., (3) CHANZY A., (2)CHENERIE I., (1) LEMORTON J. (1,2)E. Ben-Dor and (1)A. Banin * Catherine MERING, ** Yveline PONCET. ***P. Basili, **P. Ciotti, *G. dAuria, *N. Fierdicca and *F. S. Marzano ***P. Basili, **P. Ciotti, *G. dAuria, *N. Pierdicca and *F. S. Marzano 1 Lawrence A. Corp, 11 Emmett W. Chappelle, 2 James E. McMurtrey and A new polarimetric calibration method will be shown based in the A. Bourissou and K. Pham J. LIevy-Vebel T. Le Toan A. BEAUDOIN and M. DESHAYES A. Caristrom and L.M.H. Ulander B. Hakansson A. Coradini(1) A. Demircan, W. Mauser A. Forte, F. Vineiii A. Freeman and K. Cranda1l* A. Freeman, C. Kramer and B. Chapman A. Freeman, J. Cruz, B. Chapman, M. Alves, M. Azeem and S. Shaffer A. Freeman A. Guissard and J.L. Fernandez A. K. Fung, S. Tjuatja, and C. Terre A. K. Fung, S. Tjuatja, A. Langman and M.R.Inggs A. Langman, N.R Ballard and M.R.Inggs A. Laurence Gray, Marco W.A. van der Kooij(1), Karim E. Mattar, and A. M. Kuzimina and V. V. Yutsis A. Nashashibi, K. Sarabandi, and F.T.Ulaby A. Netterstrm and E. Lintz Christensen A. Nystrom, A. Stjernrnan and J. Vivekanandan A. Ochadlick, Jr., J. Davis, W. Everett, J. Kraus and M. Rankin, A. P. Wang (1), S. Ueno (2), and M. Toho (2) A. Pietroniro A. R. Ehsani*, J. M. Simpson+, J. A. Reagan* A. R. Knight and M. R. Inggs A. Takahashi A. W. England and J. F. Galantowicz A.E. Roche, J.B. Kumer, J.L. Mergenthaler A.F. Theisen1, B.N. Rockl, R.T. Eckert2 A.I. Sudbin, A.Volynsky A.J. Gasiewski and D.M. Jackson A.J. Sieber (1), C. Lavalle (1), G. De Grandi (1), D. Sloggett (2) A.M. Ignatov(1,2), I.L. Dergileva(2), Yu.B. Ratner(2), S.M. Sakerin(3), A.M. Ignatov1, L.L. Stowe2, R.R. Singh3 A.M. Osharin A.R. Huete and H. Liu A.R. Huete, H. Liu, G.R. de Lira, K. Batchily, and R. Escadafal^1 A.S.Shmalenyuk, Yu.G.Tishchenko, N.A.Armand, V.M.Polyakov A.V. Ryzhkov and D.S. Zrnic AHMAD BILAL Aaron Moody, Suchi Gopal, and Alan H. Strahler Abdelgadir A. Abuelgasim and Sucharita Gopal Adrian Luckman, Geoff Groom, John Baker Ahmed Kabeche and Jacques Testud Aim Meygret, Olivier Hagolle, Patrice Henry, Magdeleine Dinguirard* Akira Ishimaru, Lynn Ailes-Sengers. Phillip Phu and Dale Winebrenner Alan A. Thompson, Neil S. McLagan and Thomas E. Feather Alan B. Tanner, William J. Wilson and Sasan S. Saatchi Alan H. Strahler(1) and Shunlin Liang(2) Alberto Moreira and Rolf Scheiber Alberto Moreira, Rainer Spielbauer and Winfried Ptzsch Alexander F. H. Goetz Allan S. Jacobson and Andrew L. Berkin Alpay Birer - Graduate Student Anders Stjernman, J. Vivekanandan, Anders Nystrom Andrade, H.A. and Garcia, C.A.E. Andre Lannes and Eric Anterrieu Andre Smirnov Robert Kropfli Andrea Baraldi and Flavio Parmiggiani Andrew Pazmany, James Mead, John Galloway, and Robert McIntosh Andrew S. Milman Anne W. Nolin and Konrad Steffen Anne W. Nolin Antony K. Liu Arcady Serbin, Victor Feigels Armand Lopes and Franck Sery Armin Doerry, MS 0529,505/845-8165, FAX 505/844-0858 Artashes K. ARAKELIAN Axel Wagner B. Conterno (1), G. Milillo (2), F. Selvaggi (1). B. D. Ganapol B. D. Tapley, J. C. Kies, and C. K. Shum B. J. Choudhury B. L. Gotwols, M. [Jose, R. E. Sterner II, D. R. Thompson B. L. Markham, S. P. Ahmad* J.R. Irons and D. L. Williams B. Lemonnier1, C. Lopez2, E. Duporte3, R.Delmas4 B. Saether, H. Rueslatten and A. Gronlie, B. Schmid, R. Peter and C. Matzler B. Solaiman and M.C. Mouchot B. Solaiman, M.C. Mouchot and R. Koffi B. Z. Petrenko and M. T. Smirnov B.M. De Vliegher*, P.S. Basigos ** Balzer Barbara Hess Daniel Steinwand Stephen E. Reichenbach Barkstrom Berger M & Kaufmann H. Bernard Pinty, LaMP, 24 avenue des Landais, Bleiweiss Boerner Boonrat Kitichotpanit and Yasuo Kuga There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-64IA054-000904-B033-359http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185502 text/html 11606HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:53:48 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 2) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 2) Select a Author Name to find Document titles Borel Borgarelli Boyarskii Brian Brisco Brian Laursen & Niels Skou Britaldo Silveira Soares Filho Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren Bruce R. Ramsay Byrd C. Fowler, J. Maslanik, W. Emery C. Kim C. Banninger C. Dionisio, A. Torre C. Dionisio, E. Zampolini C. Evans, S. Haimov, R. K. Moore C. H. Wash and K. L. Davidson C. L. Tang and Quincy Gui C. Marzo, G. Milillo C. Mavrocordatos, J. Richard, N. Suinot C. R Zeisse C. R. Philbrick C. T. Swift, J. Aleksa and T. M. Scheve C. Tang and K. Aydin C. Wu, J. Graf, M. Freilich*, D. Long**, M. Spencer, W. Tsai, C. Winn C.C. Lin and P.L. Mancini C.E. Priebe,^1,2 G.W. Rogers,^1,2 & J.L. Solka^1 C.H. Leu and Chen L.J. C.L. Purdy, D.W. Hancock, III, and G.S. Hayne C.S.T. Daughtry1, J.E. McMurtrey III1 and E.W. Chappelle2 C.Y. Chang COLLIN S. ROESLER Carl Wales, Project Manager Carlos R Cabrera-Mercader and David H. Staelin Carlos R. Jorquera, Virginia G. Ford, Valerie G. Duval, Carol J. Bruegge Carmen Tornow, Christoph C. Borel and Bill J. Powers Cavanie Chapman Charles L. Werner Charles R. Edelsohn, Radsar Group Charles R. Guarino Charles Rino and Eric Eckert Chehbouni, A. (1*), J. P. Lhomme(2) E. G. Njoku(1), D. Nichols(3), D. Cherny Cheryl A. Bertoia Christoph C. Borel and Siegfried A.W. Gerstl Christopher Jarchow and Paul Hartogh Christopher S. Ruf and Kultegin Aydin Christopher S. Ruf Christopher Wackerman^1, Robert Shuchman^1 and Florence Fetterer^2 Chu Citeau Jean 1, Michel Carn 1, and Pascal Sagna 2 Citeau Jean and Pascal Agna* Cixiang Zhan Claudio Koechler(1), Brian Hosgood(1), Guido Schmuck(1), Jean Claus Brning Cloude Collins Corina C. F. Yanasse, Alejandro C. Frery, Corinna Prietzsch & Hellmuth GroB Craig Clayton and Yasuo Kuga Crystal Barker Schaaf^1, Xiaowen Li^2, and Alan H. Strahler^2 Curt H. Davis Curtis E. Woodcock Cynthia Williams(1), Kyle McDonald(2), Eric Rignot(2), Leslie D. A. Boyarskii1 V. V. Tikhonov2 D. B. Lysak, Jr., T. J. Kane, C. R. Philbrick D. Giuli, L. Baldini, L. Facheris, M. Mecacci, E. Palmisano D. Giuli, L. Facheris, L. Baldini, P. Mazzetti, E. Palmisano D. Hiltbrunner(1), C. Matzler, A. Wiesmann D. J. Donohue D. L. Bickel and W. H. Hensley D. P. Gibbs, C. L. Betty, A. K. Fung, and H. Dibas D. R. Alexander, R. P. Kubik, P. E. Poulain, D. R. Stevens, I. G. Cumming, and M. R. Ito D. R. Thompson1 and H. C. Graber2 and R. E. Carande3 D. S. Liu and E. F. Wood D. Sadot and N. S. Kopeika D. T. Davis, J.N. Hwang, and L. Tsang D. W. Blood, S. McKinley ad C. R. Philbrick D. van Halsema, M.W.A. van der Kooij(1) D.B. Kunkee and A.J. Gasiewski D.B. Zhang, L. Van Gool and A. Oosterlinck D.L. Schuler J.S. Lee, LJ. Du, S.A. Mango, and M.R. Grunes D.L. Schuler and J.S. Lee D.M. Le Vine and M. Kao, Microwave Sensors Branch, Code 975, NASA/GSFC DAVID L. TOLL Dale P. Winebrenner, Richard D. West, and Leung Tsang Dale P. Winebrenner, T.C. Grenfell, J. Sylvester, ad L. Tsang Dale P. Winebrenner, Dan Madurasinghe, G.R.Haack Dan R. Sheen, Clifford M. Strawitch and Terry B. Lewis Daniel B. Carr Daniel J Jacob, Division of Applied Sciences Daniele Hauser Daran L. Rehmeyer Dave Sloggett (1) , Charlotte Gurney and Richard Gooding David A. Siegel, Libe Washburn and J. Carter Ohlmann David Allison^1, Michael J. Barnsley^1, Nigel Dyble^1 David Atlas David B. Hogan There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-65IA054-000904-B033-387http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185514 text/html 13056HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:54:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 3) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 3) Select a Author Name to find Document titles David Cuddy, Tom Bicknell, Mike Tankenson David G. Long and David S. Early David G. Long David Graham, Hughes 5TH, 4400 Forbes Blvd., David J. Diner and Susan R. Beutelschies David J. Harding, J. Bryan Blair, James B. Garvin David L. Porter, Rickey D. Chapman, Donaldd R. Thompson, and Richard David Lyzenga and Christopher Wackerman David Mouat, Judith Lancaster and Timothy Minor David Mouat David S. Early and David G. Long David W. Mullins Dayalan Kailingam Dayalan Kasilingam Demin Wang and Dong-Chen He Denise Hagan Denise J. Gineris Dennis A. Flower, Lucien Froidevaux, William G. Read, Joe W. Waters Dennis A. Flower, Robert F. Jarnot, Joe W. Waters Dino Giuli, Luca Facheris, Luca Baldini, Elena Palmisano Dipak R. Paudyal, Apisit Eiumnoh, Josef Aschbacker and R. Schumann Dirk H. Hoekman and Joost J. van der Sanden Don Rundquist, PhD, Chris Keithley, M.S. andBryan Leavitt, M.S. Donald J. Cavalieri Donna Haverkamp and Costas Tsatsoulis Dony Kushardono, K. Fukue, H. Shimoda and T. Sakata Douglas R. Daum, Warren B. Davis, and David G. Long Dr. Alan W. Lohanick Dr. Nikola V. Kolev, Sen. Researcher Dr.Kornienko S.G. and Dr.Savin A.V. Drew Pilant E. J. Kim, J. F. Galantowicz, and A. W. England E. Krogager E. Lintz Christensen, S N. Madsen, J. Dall, and N. Skou, E.G. Josberger^1, M.A. True^2, S.M. Hodge^1, E.Krogager E.S. Kasischke(1,2), L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez(2), N.H.F. French(2), Eastwood Im, William T.K. Johnson, Kevin Wheeler Edmond Mesrobian, Eddie Shek, Richard Muntz and William Cheng Eduardo D. Assad(1), Edson E. Sano(1), Balbina Soriano(2), Silvando C. Edward J. Walsh, D. Vandemark, D. E. Hines Edward V. Browell,^1,2 Syed Ismail,^1 N. Scott Higdon,^1 Edward Zalewski and Peter Petrone Edwin T. Engman Edwin W. Eloranta Eero Rossi and Martti Hallikainen El Saleous Ellen J. Ferraro, Calvin T. Swift Enamul Hoque1 and Guido Remus2 Engen Eric C. Brown de Colstoun^1, Charles L. Walthall^1, Carol A. Russell^2 Eric Rignot and Jakob van Zyl Eric Rignot, Cynthia Williams*, JoBea Way, Kyle McDonald, John Yarie** Eric Rignot, Kyle McDonald, JoBea Way, Reiner Zimmermann, Cynthia Erkki Tomppo, Petri Mikkela, Helena Henttonen, Matti Katila 1) Eva Vargova Evlyn M. Novo # Ezekiel Bahar and Bom Son Lee Ezekiel Bahar and Robert D. Kubik F. Cabot (1), A. Chehbouni (2)(3), E.G. Njoku(2), Y.H. Kerr(1), G. Dedieu(1) F. Fierens, I Kanellopoulos and G. G. Wilkinson F. H. A. Campbell, R. J. Brown F. Kogan and J. Sullivan F. Li, S. Durden, E. Im and W. Wilson F. M. Monaldo, R. F. Gasparovic, R. E. Sterner II F. Mills l,5, K. Okada l,4, Y. Kannari l, S.H. Chang 2, F. Orban-Ferauge, J. P. Rasson, V. Granville F. T. Ulaby, L. Pierce, C. Dobson, S. Chacon, and K. Sarabandi FRAN STETINA FRISON P.L. , MOUGIN E. , LOPES A. Farid Askari(1), Timothy Donato(2) Felicitas v. Poncet, Corinna Prietzsch, Maike Tapkenhinrichs Ferdinand Klaus, Monika Wagner, Otmar Loffeld Ferri Fleming Y.M. Lure and Yi-Chung Rau Florin Caldararu, Mira Caldararu, Adrian Jelev(1) Adrian Iacob (1) Francesco Holecz, Erich Meier, Jens Piesbergen and Daniel Nesch Francis M. Ngai and James C. Curlander Alan D. Stocker Frank Carsey Frank J. Wentz Frank Monaldo and Robert Beal Franz Leberl*) Fred J. Tanis and Robert G. Onstott Frederic Borne, CIRAD-GERDAT, Frederic Borne, Fumihiro Sakuma, Masanobu Kobayasi and Akira Ono Furio Provvedi, Guido Levrini Fusina G. BONGI1, A. PALLIOTTI1, P. ROCCHHI1 I., MOYA2 and Y. GOULAS2 G. De CAROLIS1, T. LE TOAN2,G. PASQUARIELLO3, F. POSA1, and P. SMACCHIA 4 G. FRANCESCHETTI, G. FORNARO, E. S. MARZOUK G. Feingold* , A. S. Frisch**, B. Stevens+ and W. R. Cotton+ G. Franceschetti (1,2), M. Migliaccio (3), D. Riccio (2) G. Franceschetti (1,2), D. Lustrini (2), M. Migliaccio (3), D. Riccio (2) G. Genovese, M.Millot, R.P.H.M. Schoenmakers, G. M Skofronick-Jackson and A. J. Gasiewski G. Macelloni, S. Paloscia, P. Pampaloni, R. Ruisi and C. Susini G. Prisco - Western European Union Satellite Centre, G. Schreier, VI. Markwitz G. W. Schwaab, U. Klein, K. Kunzi, U. Raffalski There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-66IA054-000904-B034-1http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185529 text/html 12056HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:54:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 4) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 4) Select a Author Name to find Document titles G.C.Toon, J.-F.Blavier, B.Sen, and J.T.Szeto G.G. Lemoine, I.G.M. Bakker and E.J. Huising G.J. Rijckenberg* G.K. Hartmann, W. Degenhardt and R. Zwick G.R. Valenzuela, S.A. Mango, G.O. Marnorino, F. Askari, J.S. Lee G.R. de Lira, K. Batchily, Hongtao, J, and A. Huete G.V.Kolarov, A.D.Deleva, Ts.A.Mitsev Gary Geling, Dan Ionescu * Gary Koh and Robert E. Davis Gastellu-Etchegorry J.P., Zagolski F., Pinel V., Giordano G., George A. Riggs George Seryakoff Gerald E. Nedoluha, Richard M. Bevilacqua, Gibbs Gille Gilles Guillemin, Philippe Ricaud, Giovanna Cecchi Giovina Cecchi, Luca Pantani, Marco Bazzani, Valentina Raimondi Glenn F. Cunningham^1, Ronald Kwok^1 and Jeff Banfield^2 Glenn P. Sandlin Goodenough Goodrich Graeme Stephens Grant A. Ellis and Irene C. Peden Guy A Schiavone^1, K ONeill^2, and K.D. Paulsen^1 H. Anys, D.-C. He, L. Wang id Q.H.J. Gwyn H. Bach, W. Mauser H. Cosnefroy(1), X. Briottet(1), M. Leroy(2), P. Lecomte(3), and R. Santer(3) H. Greidanus H. J. C. van Leeuwen and J. C. P. W. Clevers H. J. Mametsa1, P. F. Combes2, J. L. Lopez3, H. Moreau1,2 H. Liu and A. Huete H. Nakamura and D. Entekhabi H. Runge, P. Secchi, A. Roth, U. Steinbrecher, H. T. Ewe, M. E. Veysoglu, C. C. Hsu, R. T. Shin, J. A. Kong H.-D. Dicken, A. Berg, J. Langen H.Tarayre Hagg Hans Dieter Storzer and Adalbert Beyer Hans-Grater Kohl Hans-Gunter Kohl, Edmond Nezry, Hugo De Groof, Gilbert Kattenborn Hans-Jurgen Muller Harry Urkowitz and Jerald D. Nespor Hauser Heidi A. Hovland, Johnny A. Johannessen and Gunnar Digranes Heike Bdenbender Helen Worden Henning Skriver, Jorgen Dall, and Soren N. Madsen Henry T. Wang(1), Owen M. Griffin(1), and Guy A. Meadows(2) Herbert V. Hitney Hermann J. H. Kux Hernandez F.P.* Dutra, L.V.* Grover K.** Amaral, S.* Quegan,S.** Hiroshi Hanaizumi, Ryoichi Takesaki Hochwald Howard A. Zebker and Paul Rosen Hugh Holt, Harold D. Maney Huynen I-I Lin, IEEE student member and W. G. Rees I. R. Joughin and D. P. Winebrenner I. Stuart McDermid, Eva F. Fishbein, Lucien Froidevaux, Eric W. Sirko Igor Lavrenov, Tatiana Belonenko, Yurii Sharikov Igor V. Cherny* and Vladimir P. Shevtzov** Igor V. Cherny Ingo Hennings(1), Margitta Mctzner(2), and John Matthews(3) Isham Ismail Jouny Itaru Sano and Sonoyo Mukai J B Stewart, Institute of Hydrology, Wallingford, Oxon, OX10 8BB, UK J. A. Sanchez-Gil and A. A. Maradudin J. ASCHBACHER1, R P. DIPAK2, A PONGSRIHADULCHAI3, J. Askne, A. Carlstrom, W. Dierking, and L. Ulander J. Bredow, A. K. Fung, D. Gibbs and S. Tjuatja J. Bredow, A.K. Fung and S. Tjuatja J. Bryan Blair/Code 924,301-286-9809, FAX 301-286-1761 J. C. Landry and A. W. England J. C. RCCARTHY, P. B. BUDNI, G. W. LABRIE, E. P. CHICKLIS J. C. Souyris, L. Wang, C. C. Hsu, J. A. Kong J. Carswell and R. McIntosh J. Cook, G.G. Love, S.D. Burk, and W.T. Thompson J. Dall, N. Skou, E. Lintz Christensen J. F. Galantowicz and A. W. England J. Fortuny*, E. Ohlmer*, A. J. Sieber* J. G. Planes, M. Deschaux-Beaume J. Hubbert V.N. Bringi J. Judge, J.F. Galantowicz, and A.W. England J. Langen, A. Berg, H.-D. Dicken, T. Wehr, K. Kuenzi J. McMurtrey III(1), E. Chappelle(2), M. Kim(2), L. Corp(2), C. J. P. Rasoon, F. Orban-Ferauge, V. Granville J. P. Reilly J. Qi, M. S. Moran J. R. Moreira, R. Lanari J. Richard, C. Macrocordatos, N. Suinot J. T. Macklin J. Turk, J. Beaver, V.N. Bringi J. Vivekanandan ^1, J. Turk^2 J. Vogelzang J. Yivekanandan^1, J. Turk^2 J. Young and L. Peters, Jr. J.-P Lhomme and A. Chehbouni(1) J.A. Johannessen1, R.A. Shuchman2, G. Digranes1, There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-67IA054-000904-B034-29http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185558 text/html 11834HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:54:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 5) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 5) Select a Author Name to find Document titles J.A. Reagan and W.H. Erxleben J.A. YOUNG, P.G. ROGERS, P.P. JORDAN AND L.A. BRANDT J.C.N. Epiphanio1, A.R. Huete, and H. Liu J.D. Winningham, R.A. Frahm, and R. Link J.F.L Gower J.L. Haferman(1), T.F. Smith(1), W.F. Krajewski(2) J.M. Horrell, A.R. Knight, and M.R. Inggs J.M. Norman W. P. Kustas J.R. Wang and P. Racette J.S. Lee(1), D.L. Schuler(1), R.H. Lang(2) and K.J. Ranson(3) J.W.F. Goddard, J. D. Eastment and J. Tan JEFFREY M. SABBURG JOHN R. SCHOTT Jack S. Margolis (818) 354-3616; Sumita Nandi (818) 354-0015; Jacob H. Gunther and David G. Long James A. Cummings and R. Michael Clancy James A. Price and Zaaron H. Allen James A. Weinman James C. Curlander James C. Schatzman, Benito Chen, James C. Tilton Edward Seiler James C. West*, Ruimin Chen James C. West James J. Butler James L. Mueller James M.Stiles, Kamal Sarabandi and Fawwaz T. Ulaby James R. Drummond, G. V. Bailak and G. Mand James R. Hendricks, Robert R. Leben, and George H. Born Jan F.H. Snel, Hans Schroote, Margreet E. Bossen, Bert W.A. van Hove1, Janet M. Intrieri and Wynn L. Eberhard Jansen Jarkko Koskinen, Lauri Kurvonen, Ville Jaaskelainen Jason Daida*, Nancy French+, Robert Onstott+, Fred Tanis+, Jason M. Daida1, Philip B. Russell2, Timothy L Crawford3, Jason M. Daida Jean Verdebout, Stephane Jaequemoud, Giovanni Andreoli, Brian Jean-Marc Boucher, Stphane Pleihers Jean-Pierre Gambotto Jeannette van den Bosch and Robert O. Green Jeff Duncan Jeffrey Key. Robert Stone and James Maslanik Jeffrey Klein, Scott Hensley, Soren Madsen and Frank Webb Jeng.Jong (J. J.) Pan Sheng-Tun Li Jerome Bruniquel and Armand Lopes Jerome de La Noe Jerry A. Gelbwachs Jesse Boyce, PhD. Jiancheng Shi and Jeff Dozier Jiancheng Shi1, Jeff Dozier1 and Helmut Rott2 Jihad S. Daba and Mark R. Bell Jim Washburne Jinfei Wang Wenhong Liu Joo R. Moreira Joao Vianei Soares Joao dos Santos Vila da Silva Jochen Grandell and Martti Hallikainen Joey C. Comiso Johansen, M.E., Tommervik, H., and Pedersen, J.P. John A. Sahhh, Andrew G. Tescher, John T.Reagan John C. Curlander Alan Thompson John E. M. Goldsmith and Scott E. Bisson John Eliis John F. Vesecky John J. Bates John M. Melack and Mary Gastil. Marine Science Institute, John P. Kerekes and Hector J. Jimenez-Gonzalez John P. Kerekes John V. Martonchik and James E. Conel Jon Atli Benediktsson, Kolbeinn Arnason, Jon Davis, Michael Pankin, Andrew Ochadlick, Jose F. Moreno and Joaquin Melia Jose F. Moreno Josef Nannemann, Matthias Wolff Joseph G. Shanks Joseph P. Hoffbeck and David A. Landgrebe Joseph W. Boardman Jouni Pulliainen, Kari Heiska, Jarkko Koskinen, Judit M. Pap and Richard C. Willson Juergen H. Richter Juha Hyyppa and Jouni Pulliainen Juha Hyyppa, Jouni Pulliainen, Kari Heiska and Martti Hallikainen Juha-Petri Karna and Kai Makisara Juhan Ross1, Outi Meinander2 and Madis Sulev3 Jun-ichi KUDOH1, Hiroshi KAWAMURA2 and Yoshiaki NEMOTO1 Jurgen V. Vogt & Michel M. Verstraete Justin D. Paola and Robert A. Schowengerdt Jyri Heilimo, Juhani Talvela, Martti Hallikainien K. Aydin and C. Tang K. Aydin K. J. Thome, S. F. Biggar, D. I. Gellman, and P. N. Slater K. J. Thome K. M. St.Germain K. Okada(1,4), T. Narita(1), T. Ezaka(1), F. Mills(1,5), K. P. Gaikovich K. SANTANAM, B. LAXSHMI, K.C. Partington, C.J. Willis, A.J. Sephton, N.P. Walker & C.J. Oddy K.P.Gaikovich K.S. Chen and C.F. Chen K.S. Chen and Y.C. Tzeng K.S. Chen, W.L. Kao and C.F. Chen There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-68IA054-000904-B034-68http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185614 text/html 11888HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:54:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 6) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 6) Select a Author Name to find Document titles K.S. Chen KATSUYA HORI, TAKASHI HOSHI Kai Mkisara, Juha-Petri Krna, and Anssi Lohi Kamal Sarabandi and Eric S. Li Kari Heiska Karim E. Mattar, A. Laurence Gray, Marco W.A. van der Kooij(1), and Karl F. Huemmrich1 and Forrest G. Hall2 Kazuo Ouchi and Donald A. Burridge Kazuo Ouchi Keiji Osaki Kevin ONeill Kilary Maybee and James Maslanik Kim Willis, Lockheed Engineering & Sciences Company, Klaus Strodl, Ursula Benz, Frank Blser, Knut Eldhuset and Per AtIe Valand Knut Eldhuset Kohei Arai* and Masao Moriyama** Kohei Arai*, Yoko Ueda*, Yasunori Terayama* and Masao Moriyama** Kohei Arai, Masayoshi Ozawa and Yasunori Terayama Kohei Arai Kohji Yamashita and Akio Yasuda Koji Komiyama, Yoshihiko Kato and Takashi Iwasaki Kon Leung, D. Cuddy, and M. Chen Kovalick Krogager Kusiel S. Shifrin, Ilja G. Zolotov Kutuza Kyle C. McDonald, Reiner Zimmermann, JoBea Way and Eric Rignot Kyoung-Ok Kim, Young-Kyu Yang, Jong-Hoon Lee, Kyu Yoshimori, Kazuyoshi Itoh and Yoshiki Ichioka Kyung Pak, Leung Tsang, and Chi H. Chan L. Alparone L. Bliven L. Camenen1, Y. Goulas3, G. Guyot1, I. Moya^2, and G. Schmuck3 L. Du,J. S. Lee, D. L. Schuler and S. A. Mango L. Lightstone L. Minna1, C. Ottonello2, S. Pagnan3 and G. Tacconi4 L. Sparks L. W. Kenyi L. Zurk^1,K. H. Ding^2, L. Tsang^3, D. P. Winebrenner^1 L.E. Pierce, F.T. Ulaby, and M. C. Dobson L.L. Bourgea-Chavez, I.S. Kasischke, ad N.H.F. French LS. Fedor Lars M. H. Ulander Laura L. Hess*, John M. Melack**, and Frank W. Davis* Laurence Hafemeister, Student member, IEEE, Jean-Pierre Cocquerez Laurens Bierens Laurent Prevot, Yves Brunet* and Bernard Seguin Lauri Kurvonen, Martti Toikka and Martti Hallikainen Lee F.Johnson Lee, Sanghoon Lee-Lueng Fu and Roger Davidson Leong Keong Kwoh, Ee Chien Chang, Wang Cheng Alice Heng, Hock Lim Leung Tsang, Zhengxiao Chen, Hung Hau Ding+, C. Hsu+, and Guifu Zhang Lewicki Li Li(1,2), J. Vivekanandan(1), C. H. Chan(2) and L. Tsang(2) Lisa Zurk and William J. Plant Lisheng Xu Jianyun Zhang Guodong Zhang Liwen Pan and John Gille Lixin Zeng and Gad Levy Loizzo Louis Gerber and Niklaus Kmpfer Louisa K. Emmons and Robert de Zafra Luca Pantani Ludovic Roux, Jacky Desachy, Laurent Mascarilla Luis Jimenez and David Landgrebe Lujian ZHANG M. Chandra A. Schroth E. Lueneburg M. A. Friedl M. Carn, C. Jean and A. Pesin M. Cattabeni, A. Monti-Guarnieri, F. Rocca M. Chahine M. Craig Dobson, Leland L. Pierce and Fawwaz T. Ulaby M. Dechambre M. E. Veysoglu, H. T. Ewe, A. ff. Jordan, R. T. Shin, J. A. Kong M. El-Shenawee, member IEEE, and E. Bahar, fellow IEEE. M. G. Bulatov, G. A. Bolotnikova, V. S. Etkin, E. I. Skvortsov, M. Gabella*, G. Perona M. I. Charnotskii M. J. Schwartz, J. W. Barrett, P. W, Rosenkranz, and D. H. Staelin M. Maier M. R. Keller Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. Phone: M. Rusakov M. S. Seymour and I.G. Cumming M. Schrader^1,2, C. Croske^3, ad J. Olivero^1,2,3 M. Tateiba, H. Koga, Z. Q. Meng M. Thurai(1) and J. Vivekanandan(2) M. Zink M.G. Divakarla, J.M. Norman and L.M. Murdock M.Hagen^1, J. Hubbert^2, C. Richter^3, V.N. Bringi^2, P.F. Meischner^1 M.Kabutz, M.R.Inggs and A.Langman M.P.G. Otten, J.S. Groot M.R Inggs, J. Horrell, A. Knight and P. Koeppen M.S. Dawson, F. Amar, V. Rawat, A.K. Fung, and M.T. Manry M.S. Spina, M. J. Schwartz, and D. H. Staelin M.T. Barnsley and D. Allison M.Yu. Gorbunov and A.M. Chekalyuk (*) Madison J. Post Maekawa Magdy F. Attia, Ph.D, Senior Member IEEE There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-69IA054-000904-B034-102http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_7.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185631 text/html 12242HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:55:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 7) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 7) Select a Author Name to find Document titles Mahta Moghaddam and Sasan Saatchi Makoto Kawa,ura* Yuji Tsujiko** Makoto Satake, Masaharu Fujita*, Hiroshi Hanado, Hiroaki Horie, Kenji Malinas Marc Sarazin Marco W.A. van der Kooij^1, A.Laurence Gray, Mike Manore, Karim E. Mattar, Marie C. Colton Marie-Catherine Mouchot, Basel Solaiman, Alfonso Parra Mark Folkman, Peter Jarecke, Ted Hedman, Steve Carman Mark Helmlinger, Robert Green, James Conel and Jeannette van den Bosch Mark R. Drinkwater Mark W. Smith Marlys Remus and Khalid Sayood Martin-Neira, M., Y. Menard, J.M. Goutoule and U. Kraft Martti Kemppinen and Martti Hallikainen Martti Kemppinen, Jorma Pallonen, Martti Hallikainen Mary Fae McKay, Mail code SN5, NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Matthew J. McGill, Wilbert R. Skinner, Todd D. Irgang, - Kenneth W. Fischer Maurice Borgeaud, Josef Noll, and Andrea Bellini Max P. Bleiweiss Melinda M. Brugman, Alain Pietroniro Michael F. Baumgartner & Gabriela Apfl Michael H. Freilich David G. Long Michael H. Newkirk* and Gary S. Brown Michael Hamilton, Curtiss O. Davis Michael J. Collins Michael Manore Michael R. Gunson Michael Y. Jin Michelle M. Parmeter Milton Smith(1), Dar Roberts(1), Joachim Hill(2), Wolfgang Mingquan Bao, Claus Bruning and Werner Alpers Mitsuo TATEIBA* and Yukihisa NANBU** Moctezuma Monteiro, A. and Garcia, C.A. E. Morten Larsen Mostafa A. Karam Mr Ron Saper, Vantage Point International, Myrian de Moura Abdon N. Allan, D. McLaughlin, E. Twarog N. Blaunshtein and R. Mazar N. Blaunshtein N. M. Mattikalli, B. J. Devereau , and K. S. Richards N. R. Stapleton N.H.F. French, I.S. Kasischke and L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez N.J.S. Stacy and M.P. Burgess N.Kampfer, C.Aellig ad C. Rudin Nadine C. L. Chrien, Mary L. White, Edward C. Hagerott, Carol J. Bruegge Naeije Nahid Khazenie(1) and Robert Price(2) Nakamura, H.1, D. Entekhabi1 and E. Njoku2 Narinder Chauhan(1), Roger Lang(1), Jon Ranson(2), Ozlem Killic(1) Nasir D. Memon Khalid Sayood National Hydrology Research Institute Nelson D. A. Mascarenhas and Alejandro C. Frery Nezry Nigel Hinds and A. W. England Nilson Njoku, E. G.(1), A. Chehbouni(1*), F. Cabot(2), B. Rague(1), O. Amram - G. Flouzat O. M. Johannessen ONKAR DIKSHIT Olaf Hellwich Oleg V. Kopelevich, Dr.Sci. [Phys.& Math.] Olivier HAGOLLE, Jean-Michel MARTINUZZI, Christophe LATRY Otmar Loffeld P. Blonda (1), V. la Forgia (2), G. Pasquariello (1), G. Satalino (2) P. Chang1, J. Mead 1, R. McIntosh1, R. Davis2 and H. Boyne2 P. Cipollini (l), G. Corsini (l), M. Diani (l), E. Ferretti (2) P. Cipollini, G. Corsini P. E. ONeill P. Ferrazzoli, L. Guerriero, D. Solimini P. Lewis P. Lombardo, A. Blakek, D. Blacknell, C.J. Oliver P. Mazzinghi P. Pasquali, R. Pellegrini, C. Prati P. Pellegretti, L.Bruzzone, and S.B. Serpico P. Piau P.C. Rogers, L.A. Brandt, and J.A. Young P.E. ONeill, Hydrological Sciences Branch/974, NASA/GSFC P.F. Polatin, K Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby P.G. Posey and R.H. Preller P.H.Y. Lee, J.D. Barter, C.L. Hindman, B.M. Lake, H. Rungaldier P.J. Saich & R.A. Cordey P.R. North and S.E. Plummer P.R. North, S.A. Briggs, S.E. Plummer, A.K. Wilson, C. Godsalve, Pallikala Paris W. Vachon Partha Sarathi Bhattacharjee Pascale C. Dubois and Jakob van Zyl Paul A. Rosen and Atsushi Hiramatsu* Paul Hartogh and Christopher Jarchow Paul Snoeij(1), Peter Hoogeboom(2), Peter J. Koomen(2), Paul Snoeij, Peter A.E.M. Janssen, Han A.M. Janssen, Erik van Halsema, Paul Snoeij1, Peter J. Koomen2, Peter Hoogeboom2 and Henk Pouwels3 Pen-Shu Yeh and Warner H. Miller Per Gloersen, NASA/GSFC, Code 971, Peter Ashcroft and Benoit Morel Peter Brandt and Werner Alpers Peter J. van Oevelen There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-70IA054-000904-B034-124http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_8.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185644 text/html 12596HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:55:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 8) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 8) Select a Author Name to find Document titles Peter J.F. Swart and Paul Snoeij Peter Jarecke, Mark Frink, Mark Folkman, Steve Carman Peter Meyer, Robert O. Green(1), Karl Staenz(2), and Klaus I. Itten Peter W. Gaiser, Naval Research Laboratory, Ph. Ricaud, J. de La Noe, R. Lauque Philip W. Dabney, Code 925, NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, MD 20771, Philip W. Rosenkranz Pichel, W., Sapper, J., Duda, C., Maturi, E., Jarva, K., and Stroup, J. Problems Prof. Jacques R. Givri Quilfen Quinn J. Hart, Susan L. Ustin, George Scheer, and Lian Duan, R Bevilacqua, T Pauls, M Daehler, W Waltman R Raghavan l, J. Turk 2 and J. Vivekanandan 3 R. Glazman, A. Fabrikant and A. Greysukh R. A. Kropfli S. F. Clifford R. Avissar, B. Li, B.H. Lynn, T. Schmidt, and F. Zeng R. Bamler, H. Breit, M. Eineder, D. Just, U. Steinbrecher R. Bertoni, F. Impagnatiello R. Carande, W. Brown and M. Kubrick R. D. Palmer and A. Bhattacharyya R. D. Palmer, Y. Lei and P. Solanki R. Eatock and M. R. Inggs R. F. Gasparovic R. G. Caves and S. Quegan R. G. Caves1, S. Quegan1, R. G. White2 and R. Cook3 R. G. White R. H. Preller and P. G. Posey R. H. Wade and W. F. Weeks R. Helvey R. K. Raney, CCRS, Canada R. Keith Raney R. Kwok and G. F. Cunningham R. Kwok, D. A. Rothrock*, G. F. Cunningham and H. Stern* R. Lanari R. Mazar, L. Kodner, and A. Bronshtein R. Michael Hardesty, Robert M. Banta, Madison J. Post, R. P. Avramova R. P. Silberstein, R. Haberstroh, D. DiMarzio, Grumman Corporate R. Peter ad N. Kmpfer R. Porco, J. Bredow, S. Tjuatja, A. Fung R. T. Austin and A. W. England R. Tough (1), D. Blacknell (1) and S. Quegan (2) R. Touzi R. West, D. P. Winebrenner, and L. Tsang R.A. Neville, J. Schwarz, & N. Rowlands R.D. Graetz & M.A. Wilson R.D. Graetz1, M.A. Wilson1, A.J.Prata2, Ij. Barton2 & R.M. Mitchell2 R.J. Brown, M. Manore R.L. de Zafra, C. Trimble, J.M. Reeves, D. Cheng, and D. Shindell R.P. Gauthier, K. Staenz, P.M. Teillet R.P.M.H. Schoenmakers(1), G.G. Lemoine(2) and H.J.C. van Leeuwen(3) Ralph Kahn and Robert Haskins Ram M. Narayanan and Sandy R. Jackson Ram M. Narayanan, Yi Xu and Danny W. Rhoades Ramani Seshamani, M. Shashikala, T.K. Alex, Y.K. Jain and Ramani Seshamani, T.K. Alex, Y.K. Jain AND K. Kasturirangan Ranjit Bhaskar Rapoport V.O., Belova N.I, Fedoseev Yu.G., Sazonov Yu.A.,, Rapoport V.O., Fedoseev Yu.G., Belova N.I, Sazonov Yu.A., Rast Reiner Zimmermnn, Kyle McDonald, JoBea Way, Ram Oren* Reinhard Beer Remotely sensed satellite data being multispectral is multi- Richard A. Berk Richard A. Paulus Richard C. Willson, Judit M. Pap, Roger S. Helizon Richard E. Cofield Richard Escadafal, ORSTOM (France) Richard L. Austin Richard R. Forster, Andrew G. Klein, Troy A. Blodgett and Bryan L. Isacks Richard W. Zurek Robert A. Kropfli Sergey Y. Matrosov Robert A. Shuchman1, Robert G. Onstott1, Robert W. Fett2, Robert E. Coulter Robert E. Crippen and Ronald G. Blom Robert F. Jarnot Robert G. Onstott1 and Michael P. Madden2 Robert G. Onstott Robert G. Onstottl, Marc Perlin2, and Huanjay Lin1 Robert J. Stewart, Fleming Y.M. Lure and Joe C. Liou Robert M. Cramblitt and Mark R. Bell Robert Meneghini, Code 975, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Robert O. Green*, James E. Conel, Jack Margolis and Thomas G. Chrien Robert Shuchman1, Johnny Johannessen2, Cliff Rufenach1, Robert T. Frankot, Hughes Aircraft Company Roberta H. Yuhas and Alexander F.H. Goetz Roberts, D.A.(1), Green, R.O.(2), Adams, J.B.(3), Sabol, D.E.(3) and Robin Roland Romeiser Romeiser Rosenthal and R. Helvey Ruben Cerdan Rudi Goossens, Morgan De Dapper Rune Solberg, Anne. H. S. Solberg and Geir Storvik Rune Solberg, Thore Egeland and Erik Blviken Ruth Ryan Reed, David G. Long, David V. Arnold, and R. Scott Collyer S. Arnault, LODYC, UMR 121 CNRS/ORSTOMNPMC, T14-2, 4 S. Baronti (*), S. Luciani(**), S. Paloscia(*), G. Schiavon (**), There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-71IA054-000904-B034-153http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_9.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185659 text/html 12569HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:55:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 9) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 9) Select a Author Name to find Document titles S. Chercali and G. Flouzat, S. D. Gasster, D. Rudy, D. L. Glackin S. Durden, E. Im, F. Li, A. Tanner, W. Wilson S. F. Biggar, K. J. Thome, and P. N. Slater S. H. Melfi, David Whiteman, Richard Ferrare, Keith Evans S. H. Yueh, S. V. Nghiem, and R. Kwok S. H. Yueh, W. J. Wilson, F. K. Li, and S. V. Nghiem S. H. Yueh, W. J. Wilson, S. V. Nghiem, F. K. Li, and W. B. Ricketts S. Jacquemoud, J. Verdebout, G. Schmuck, G. Andreoli, S. Mathieu +, P. Leymarie ++, M. Berthod + S. RAMBAL, M. METHY and C. DAMESIN S. Rasoul Safavian S. Saatchi, M. Moghaddam. K. McDonald, and S. Durden S. Sandven, O. M. Johannessen III and K. Kloster S. Tjuatja and A.K. Fung S. V. Nghiem, R. Kwok, and S. H. Yueh S. V. Pereslegin, A.M. Korolev, M.N. Marov S.D. Burk, W.T. Thompson, J. Cook, and G.G. Love S.K. Srivastava, N.W. Shepherd S.M.Golynski S.R.J. Axelssonl, K-G Johnsson2, B-E Tullson2, J. Kjellgren3, A. S.V. Pereslegin, A.M. Xorolev, S.A. Mishin SHI ZHIFU HE MING ZHAO KAI SUN YUANFU Samuel F. Pellicori Samuel Haimov+, Bruce Gotwols++, William Plant* and Richard K. Moore+ Sanghoon Lee Sasan S. Saatchi and Robert Treuhaft Sasan S. Saatchi, Brian Rague, and Reinner Zimmermann Satoshi Ochiai, Yoshihisa Irimajiri, and Harunobu Masuko Savorskij V.P. Schmid Schwartz Scott J. Goetz(1), Forrest G. Hall(2), Karl F. Huemmrich(1), Seidel Serge Guillobez, Sh. N. Garin, V. M. Pankov, and Yu. G. Shkurkin Shaun Quegan and Ian Rhodes Shepard A. Clough Sherif Abdelsayed, Dan Ionescu, and David Goodenough Shih-Tseng Steve Wu Shira Lynn Broschat Shouwen Tang Shunlin Liang(1) and Alan H. Strahler(2) Shunlin Liang Sieber Silveira Simon J. Hook and Kinya Okada Simultaneous Ku-Band Scatterometer Measurements Sivaprasad Smiley S. Hsu and Sanford Ashton Smith Solberg Sonoyo MuKai1 , Itaru Sio1 , Tsutomu Takashima2 and Yasushi Yamaguchi3 Statistical and Textural Properties of SAREX Data From the Tapajos Test Site Stefan Buckreuss Stefan Sandmeier, Peter Meyer and Klaus I. Itten Stephanie L. Granger, Robert D. Haskins, Andrew J. Pursch Stephen J. Ford and David M. McKeown. Jr. Stephen J. Frasier, Yong Liu, and Robert E. McIntosh Stephen M. Sekelsky, Andrew L. Pasmany, and Robert E. McIntosh Stephen McNeill, Stella Belliss, Ted Barnes Stephen McNeill Steven A. Rutledge Steven M. Watson Stojan Marinov Marinov, Stuart R. Phinn, Department Of GeOgraphy, San DiegO State University, Sucharita Gopal and Curtis Woodcock Sune R.J. Axelsson Susan L. Ustin, Lai-Han Szeto, Qing-Fu Xiao, and Quinn J. Hart, Susan L. Ustin, Lian Duan, Quinn J. Hart, Suzanne Dickinson Svetlana V. Patsayeva, Victor I. Yuzhakov T. C. Grenfell(1) and ID. K Perovich(2) T. C. Grenfell(1), M. R Wensnahan(1) and D. K. Perovich(2) T. Elfouhaily, B. Chapron and K. Katsaros T. J. Jackson, USDA-ARS Hydrology Lab, Beltsville, MD 20705 T. J. Kane, S. Raja, ad C. R. Philbrick T. Kusaka and Y. Kawata T. W. Cooley*, J. A. Reagan**, J. Bufton+, B. Minster++ T. Webster and A. Siegel, System, Planning Corporation, T. Wehrl, S. Crewell1, K. Kunzi1, H.Nett2 T.I. Lukowski, I.A. Neeson1, T.C. Khandelwal2, R.Z. Moucha2 Takeshi Suitz, Kenichi Okamoto, Hideo Maeno and Seiho Uratsuka Takeyuki Ojima Tanis Ted Rogers Terje Wahl, Tom Anderssen, Age Skoelv Terje Wahl, 201ge Sk277elv Terrill W. Ray (Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, Terrill W. Ray and Bruce C. Murray Terrill W. Ray Thomas G. Chrien, , Christopher Chovit, Ian H. Novack and Robert O. Green Thomas G. Chrien, Michael L. Eastwood, Christopher Chovit, Robert Thomas Viehoff, Aining Li, Christoph Oelke and Helge Rebhan Thomas W. Wagner Thorsten Markus and Barbara A. Burns Tikhonov Timothy F. Donato(1), Farid Askari(2), Owen M. Griffin(2), Tommervik, H., Odasz, A.M.*, and Skevik, K* Tore Guneriussen*, Harald Johnsen* and Knut Sand** There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-72IA054-000904-B034-173http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_10.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185712 text/html 12583HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:55:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 10) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 10) Select a Author Name to find Document titles Toshiaki Kozu, Toneo Kawanishi Troy L Mazely, Randall R. Friedl, Scott L. Nickolaisen Tsan Mo Tsutomu FUJIMOTO *, Mamoru TANAKA * and Itsuo TAKANANE ** Tsutomu Takashi: and Kazuhiko Masuda U. Wegmller (1), F. Hoelcz (1), Y. Wang (2), and G. Kattenborn (3) U. Wegmller(1), C. L. Werner(1), D.R, Nesch(1), and A. Sieber(2) Ulrich R. Kraft V. A. Mitev and G. I. Sokolinov V. David Sanchez A., Senior, IEEE V. Dulov, S. Grodsky, V. Kudryavtsev V. Gond (1), F. Cabot (1), A. Chehbouni (2), J.C. Meunier (I) V. I. Lytle V. Mikhalevich V. R. WISMANN, K. BOEHNKE, C. SCHMULLIUS V. S. Etkin, A. V. Kuzmin, M. N. Pospelov, A. I. Smimov, V. S. Etkin, Yu. G. Trokhimovski, V. V. Yakovlov V. V. Bakhanov, D. L. Belyakov, A. G. Ryabinin, V. I. Titov, V. V. Bakhanov, V. I. Titov, D. L. Belyakov, V. V. Malinovsky V. V. Yutsis, M. K. Ivanov and A. F. Limonov V.B.Kisselev(1), L. Roberti(2)(3), G. Perona(2) V.I. Kharukl, V.N. Morgunl, B.N. Rock2, and D.L. Williams3 V.I. Titov, V. V. Bakhanov, G. N. Balandina, D. L. Belyakov, V.I.Feigels, V.Pelevin, O.Abramov, G.Karlsen V.S. Etkin, M.S. Dzura, Yu.P. Perfiliev, Yu.G. Trokhimovsky VA.Ilyin, S.V.Slobodchikova, V.S. Etkin VA.Ilyin, S.V.Slobodchikova VA.Ilyin, Yu.M.Sosnovsky Van Baelen Vassily Nikolaevitch Naboko, Venkataraman Lakshmi and Eric F. Wood Verdi Veronique Carrere Vesecky Vladimir G. Irisov W. J. Emery, Y. Yu, G. A. Wick, P. Schluessel and R.W. Reynolds W. Kenneth Stewart, Xiaoou Tang, and Hanumant Singh W. L. Smith, H. E. Revercomb, H. B. Howell, H. L. Huang, W. P. Chu W. P. Waite, V. H. Kaupp, H. C. MacDonald, L. Gournay, J. Sandy, and W. Timothy Liu, Carol S Hsu, and Wenqing Tang W.M. Moon(1), X.G. Miao(1), V. Singhroy(2) and W.T. Thompson, S.D. Burk, J. Cook, and G.G. Love WILLIS,Kimberly J.; DALEY, Walter Rosenthal Walton B. Campbell Wave Fields and Fronts Wei Xu, Ee Chien Chang, Leong Keong Kwoh, Hock Lim, Wang Cheng Alice Heng Weijian Wan+*, Donald Fraser+, and Brian Lees* Weissman Wendling L., Desachy J., Zehana M. Werner Alpers Wietske Bijker William H. Farrand William J. Plant, William C. Keller, Andrew T. Jessup William Kovalick, Hughes STX, 4400 Forbes Blvd., Lanham, MD 20706, William M. Cornette William Philpot William Snyder William Y. Tseng* and Long S. Chiu** Winfield B. Sylvester Wolfgang Balzer Wynn L. Eberhard ad Jaret M. Intrieri Wynn L. Eberhard X. Jia and J. A. Richards Xiaowen Li^2, Alan H. Strahler^1, and Curtis E. Woodcock^1 Y. E. Yang, H. T. Ewe, C. C. Hsu, L. Wang, J. A. Kong, R. T. Shin Y. Kawata, A. Yamazaki, K. Takemata, T. Kusaka and S. Ueno Y. MENARD, P. ESCUDlER, E. JEANSOU, O. ZANIFE, P. VINCEN Yaffa L. Grossman, Eric W. Sanderson, Susan L. Ustin, and Quinn J. Hart, Yasuyuki Maekawa, Osaka Electro-Commun.Univ., Yi-Cheng Lin and Kamal Sarabandi Yi-Chung Rau and Fleming Y. M. Lure Yi-Chung Rau* and C. R. Philbrick# Yisok Oh, Kamal Sarabandi, and Fawwaz T. Ulaby Yong Han J. B. Snider E. R. Westwater Yong Han Yong Wang and John M. Melack Yong Wang, Frank W. Davis, and John M. Melack Yong Wang, Solange Filoso*, and John M. Melack Yonhong Jhung and Philip H. Swain Yudong Cai Yuei-An Liou* and A. W. England Yuri Trokhimovsky and Vitali Yakovlev Z. Li, S. Tjuatja, A.K Fnng and D. Gibbs Zagolski F. and Gastellu-Etchegorry J.P. Zehana M., Saint-Joan D., Desachy J. Zhaohui Li. assistant research fellow Zhen-son Wang, Zhi-qin Wang, and Jiang Xu Zhenghao Shi and Ko B. Fung Zhengming Wan and Jeff Dozier Zhengxiao Chen, Daniel T. Davis, Leung Tsang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, Zhu Chong-guang^1, Wang Jun^11, and Alan H. Strahle^2 Ziad S. Haddad, Eastwood Im and Stephen L. Durden Ziad S. Haddad, Pascale Debois and Jakob van Zyl Zu-Han Gu and Jun Q. Lu _ David E. Pitts, Michael R. Helfert, Kamlesh Lulla, Jeffrey M. Bremer acob R. Longacre and Mark A. Landry There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-73IA054-000904-B034-194http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc1_11.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185721 text/html 1336HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:56:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Author Name  (Page 11) Document Keyword: Author Name (Page 11) Select a Author Name to find Document titles by Scott Hensley and Frank Webb by Scott Hensley and Scott Shaffer by Scott Hensley, Paul Rosen and Howard Zebker by Scott Hensley, Scott Shaffer and Richard Goldstein by Scott Shaffer, Scott Hensley and Robert Frankot e. Pottier van Leeuwen The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-74IA054-000904-B034-222http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc2_1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185736 text/html 6139HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:56:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Session Date Document Keyword: Session Date Select a Session Date to find Document titles F.I1 F.I2 F.I3 F.I4 F.I5 F.I6 FA.A FA.AA FA.CP FA.E FA.ES FA.H FA.S FA.T FA.V FA.Z M.I1 M.I2 M.I3 M.I4 M.I5 M.I6 MP.A MP.AA MP.CP MP.E MP.ES MP.H MP.S MP.T MP.V-02 MP.V MP.Z N/A T.I1 T.I2 T.I3 T.I4 T.I5 T.I6 TA.A TA.AA TA.CP TA.E TA.ES TA.H TA.S TA.T TA.V TA.Z Th.I1 Th.I2 Th.I3 Th.I4 Th.I5 Th.I6 ThA.A ThA.AA ThA.CP ThA.E ThA.ES ThA.H ThA.S ThA.T ThA.V ThA.Z ThP.A ThP.AA ThP.CP ThP.E ThP.ES ThP.H ThP.S ThP.T ThP.V ThP.Z W.I1 W.I2 W.I3 W.I4 W.I5 W.I6 WA.A WA.AA WA.CP WA.E WA.ES WA.H WA.S WA.T WA.V WA.Z WP.A WP.AA WP.CP WP.E WP.ES WP.H WP.S WP.T There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-75IA054-000904-B034-256http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc2_2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185813 text/html 657HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:56:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Session Date  (Page 2) Document Keyword: Session Date (Page 2) Select a Session Date to find Document titles WP.V WP.Z The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-76IA054-000904-B034-307http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc3_1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185841 text/html 13999HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:57:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Subject Type Document Keyword: Subject Type Select a Subject Type to find Document titles Sea Ice Remote Sensing and Modeling Analyses and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery I Analysis and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery II Arctic Sea Ice Studies Area 3: Atmospheric Correction of Satellite Imaging Data Area 1: Atmospheric Sounding and Monitoring Area 1: Clouds and Precipitation Area 1: Environmental Degradation and Pollution Area 1: Ice Sheets and Snow Area 1: Soil Moisture/Flooding Area 2: Ocean Winds/Surface Scattering Area 2: Bidirectional Reflectance/Topography and Tectonics Area 2: Ocean Winds/Surface Scattering Area 2: Optical/IR Image Classification and Analysis Area 2: Radar Meteorology and Storms Area 2: Sea Surface Temperature/Optical Properties Area 3: Atmospheric Correction of Satellite Imaging Data Area 3: Environmental Monitoring Using ERS-1 Data Area 3: Ocean Waves, Currents and Bathymetry Area 3: SAR Image Classification Area 4: Data Integration and Analysis Area 4: Ocean Features/Processing and Operations Area 4: Optical/Infrared Sensor Calibration and Validation Area 4: Propagation and Scattering in Media Area 4: SAR Image Classification/Data Compression Area 5: Ecosystems and Vegetation Monitoring Area 5: Image Classification: Algorithms Area 5: Microwave Sensor Calibration and Resolution Enhancement Area 5: Sea Ice Area 5: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development I Area 6: Airborne Instruments/Data System Development Area 6: Land Monitoring and Thermal Sensing Area 6: Remote Sensing in Education Area 6: SAR Processing Area 6: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development II Atmospheric Correction of Satellite and Aircraft Based Imaging Data Over Land Atmospheric Forcing and Oceanic Response in the Warm Pool of the Western Pacific Atmospheric Sounding and Profiling Atmospheric Water Vapor Basic Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering I Boreal Ecosystems Crustal Motion Data Compression ERS-1 Achievements and New Results Exploratory Analysis and Visualization of Data Fluorescence Techniques in Remote Sensing Assessment of Vegetation Changes Future Spaceborne Missions Geographic Information Systems and Applications Ice Sheets and Glaciers Image Processing and Classification: Optical/IR Image Processing and Classification: Algorithms Image Processing and Classification: Optical/IR Image Processing and Classification: Radar Image Processing, Classification and Neural Networks Imaging Spectroscopy Applications in Earth Sciences Inverse Problems in Optical Remote Sensing Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere I Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere II Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere I Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere II Joint US/Russian Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment LIDAR Techniques for Remote Sensing Laboratory Observations and Modelling of Sea Ice< Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature II Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature Moisture Monitoring Arid and Semi-Arid Lands N/A Neural Network Applications to Remote Sensing New Developments in SAR: Special Session Honoring Kiyo Tomiyasu on His 75th Birthday Observations of the Upper Atmosphere During the UARS Mission Ocean Instruments and Techniques Ocean Winds and Scatterometry Operational Satellite Oceanography Polametric Metrology, Calibration, and Signature Analyses Polarimetric Observations and Scattering Characteristics of the Ocean Surface Polarimetric Theory, Signal and Image Processing Precipitation Studies Propagation and Scattering Radar Meteorology: Observations of Weather and EM Wave Propagation Radiative Transfer and Scattering Remote Sensing Clouds with Application to Climate Research Remote Sensing of Lead Properties in the Arctic - LEADEX92 Remote Sensing of Snow Remote Sensing of the Earths Troposphere SAR Imaging of Ocean Features SAR Interferometry I SAR Interferometry II SAR Processing I: Algorithms and Performance SAR Processing II: Motion Compensation Sensing and Predicting Electromagnetic/Electrooptical Propagation Conditions in Coastal Environments Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical II Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical I Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical II Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical I Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical II Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering II Subsurface Sensing and Inversion There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-77IA054-000904-B034-333http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc3_2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185853 text/html 1548HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:57:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Subject Type  (Page 2) Document Keyword: Subject Type (Page 2) Select a Subject Type to find Document titles Synthetic Aperture Radiometry for Remote Sensing TOPEX/Poseidon Results and Follow-On Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring Tropical Forests and Wetlands Use of Radar and Microwave Radiometry for Mapping Snow and Sea Ice Cover Vegetation Biomass Vegetation Fluorescence and Spectroscopy Vegetation Scattering and Remote Sensing The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-78IA054-000904-B035-39http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210185956 text/html 21806HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:58:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title Document Keyword: Title Select a Title 1993 LABORATORY AND FLIGHT TEST RESULTS FOR AN AIRBORNE ASTER SIMULATOR 2.0 MICRON SOLID STATE SOURCE TECHNOLOGY 3D-RECONSTRUCTION OF LASER-INDUCED CHLOROPHYLL-FLUORESCENCE OF BEECH (FAGUS SYLVATICA L) LEAVES A 2D-SPECAN SAR PROCESSOR A 75-110 GHZ MILLIMETER-WAVE SPECTROMETER FOR POLLUTION STUDIES A 95 GHz AIRBORNE RADAR FOR HIGH RESOLUTION POLARIMETRIC CLOUD MEASUREMENTS A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE UARS MISSION AND CORELLATIVE MEASUREMENTS CAMPAIGN A BROADBAND CIRCULAR MICROSTRIP ANTENNA A COMPACT DUAL-FREQUENCY ALTIMETER FOR TOPEX-POSEIDON FOLLOW ON MISSION A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF CONVENTIONAL AND NEURAL NETWORK CLASSIFICATION OF MULTISPECTRAL DATA A COMPARISON ANALYSIS OF Ku-BAND SLAR SEA SURFACE IMAGES, AT VV AND HH POLARIZATIONS OBTAINED DURING, THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT A COMPARISON OF DIGITAL SPECKLE FILTERS A COMPARISON OF MEASURED AND CALCULATED SPECTRAL RADIANCE A COMPARISON OF SEVERAL ALGORITHMS FOR ON-BOARD SAR RAW DATA REDUCTION A COMPUTER-AIDED GEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION SYSTEM FOR SUBSURFACE IMAGING A CONTEXTUAL CLASSIIFIER BASED ON MARKOV RANDOM FIELDS AND ROBUST M-ESTIMATES A CONTINENTAL INSTRUMENTED GROUND SITE NETWORK (CIGSN, AUSTRALIA): A PREREQUISITE FOR THE DETECTION, INTERPRETATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF GLOBAL CHANGE. A CONTRIBUTION TO THE INVERSE MAGNETIC FIELD PROBLEM OF MAGNETIZED BODIES A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL FOR THE LABRADOR PACK ICE A Combined IR-Microwave Spaceborne Cloud Profiler A DECADE OF ATMOSPHERIC STUDIES USING A PULSED CO2 DOPPLER LIDAR A DESCRIPTION SUSCEPTIBILITY INDEX: USE OF GIS TO ASSESS POTENTIAL DESERTIFICATION A DETAILED STUDY OF THE BACKSCATTER CHARACTERISTICS OF SNOWCOVER MEASURED AT 35, 95 AND 225 GHZ A FORMULATION OF MILLIMETER WAVE SCATTERING AMPLITUDE MATRICES FOR ICE CRYSTALS A FRACTAL-BASED APPROACH TO ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELLING A FUZZY NEURAL NETWORK MODEL (FNN MODEL) FOR CLASSIFICATION USING LANDSAT TM IMAGE DATA A GENERAL IN-SCENE PARAMETER ESTIMATION METHOD FOR QUANTITATIVE IMAGE ANALYISIS A GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FINALISED TO THE GOME INSTRUMENTS (ERS-2 MISSION) A GIS-DRIVEN INTERACTIVE RADAR IMAGE SIMULATION USING EMSARS MODEL A HIGH PRECISION SUN PHOTOMETER FOR DETERMINATION OF AEROSOL OPTICAL DEPTH, COLUMNAR WATER VAPOR AND OZONE A HIGH-LEVEL PROTOCOL FOR CONFIGURING INFORMATION SYSTEM USER INTERFACES A HYBRID GEOMETRIC-OPTICAL RADIATIVE-TRANSFER MODEL FOR THE DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE OF DISCONTINUOUS VEGETATION CANOPIES A HYBRID NEURAL NETWORK MODEL EOR CLASSIFICATION OF MULTIANGLE AND MULTISPECTRAL ASAS RADIANCE MEASUREMENTS A KALMAN FILTER FOR SPECKLE REDUCTION IN SAR DATA A KNOWLEDGE BASED CLASSIFICATION OF MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA OVER THE TROPICS A LANDCOVER CLASSIFICATION METHOD WITH THE AID OF SPATIAL INFORMATION USING NEWRAL NETWORK A MATCHING PROCEDURE FOR REMOTE SENSING IMAGES A METHOD FOR ASSESSING THE LOCATING ACCURACY AND DETECTION EFFICIENCY OF OPERATIONAL LIGHTNING SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS A METHOD FOR SURFACE TEMPERATURE RETRIEVAL WITH ASTER/TIR A METHOD FOR THE CALCULATION OF THE FIELD OF THRE-DIMENSIONAL BODIES WITH A HOMOGENEOUS MAGNETIZATION A MILLIMETER-WAVE CLOUD PROFILING RADAR SYSTEM (CPRS) A MODEL TO SIMULATE AND PREDICT SOIL SALINITY AND WATER LOGGING. (ELABORATED FOR THE NILE DELTA FRINGES, EGYPT) A MODELING STUDY OF BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE FROM SOIL SURFACES A MODIFIED AIRBORNE LASER ALTIMETER FOR MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION STRUCTURE A MODIFIED VERSION OF THE SAR SPECKLE FILTER BASED ON DETECTION OF STRUCTURES A MULTIBAND ROAD EXTRACTION SCHEME FOR LANDSAT-TM IMAGERY A MULTIFRACTAL APPROACH FOR TERRAIN CHARACTERIZATION AND CLASSIFICATION ON SAR IMAGES A NEURAL CLASSIFIER OF TERRAIN COVERS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA A NEW APPROACH FOR FEATURE TRANSFORMATION TO EUCLIDEAN SPACE USEFUL IN THE ANALYSIS OF MULTISPECTRAL DATA. Kulkarni Linganagouda, P.Nagabhushan & K.Chidananda Gowda * S.J.College of Engineering, MYSORE. Karanataka,India. Phone: 0821-34944, Telex: 846-246 SJCE-IN A NEW APPROACH FOR IMAGE REGISTRATION IN INTERFEROMETRIC PROCESSING A NEW APPROACH IN REMOTE SENSING IMAGE ANALYSIS FOR NATURAL ENVIRONMENT CARTOGRAPHY A NEW APPROACH TO DETERMINING SPECTRAL ABUNDANCES OF MIXTURES IN MULTISPECTRAL IMAGES A NEW METHOD FOR INHERENT HYDRO-OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS EVALUATION A NEW METHOD FOR WIDE FIELD SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR PROCESSING A NEW MTI-SAR-APPROACH USING THE REFLECTIVITY DISPLACEMENT METHOD A NEW REGISTRATION ALGORITHM FOR OF ASAS MULTI-ANGLE IMAGES A NEW SOLUTION FOR MOTION COMPENSATION BASED ON TWO-DIMENSIONAL SAR PROCESSING A NOVEL METHOD FOR CO-DIMENSIONAL PHASE ESTIMATION A NOVEL STEPPED CW GROUND PENETRATING RADAR A New Extended Target Decomposition Scheme A PLEA FOR RADAR BRIGHTNESS A PRECISE- NAVIGATION PROCEDURE FOR AUTOMATIC PICTURE TRANSMISSION APT IMAGERY OF METEOROLOGICAL SATELLITE NOAA A PROXY METHOD OF SOLAR SOFT X-RAY DETERMINATIONS AND RESULTANT NO PRODUCTION AND TRANSPORT A Parametric Study of the Trunk-Ground Corner Effect in Forest Remote Sensing A QUICK ACCESS DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR IN-SITU DATA FOR EOS AIRS PRODUCT VALIDATION A QUICKLOOK PROCESSOR FOR AN AIRBORNE SAR A RADAR LAND CLUTTER MODEL AND ITS VERIFICATION A RAPID TRANSMITTANCE ALGORITHM FOR MICROWAVE SOUNDING FREQUENCIES A REMOTE SENSING MONITORING SYSTEM FOR A COLONIZATION AREA IN TROPICAL RAIN FOREST A REVIEW OF MODELING FOR MILLIMETER WAVE REMOTE SENSING OF SNOW A Rationale for the Modeling and Measurement of Non-Gaussian SAR Image Texture A Revisition of Some Basic Formulations in Radar Polarimetry A SAR INSTRUMENT FOR GLOBAL MONITORING OF LAND SURFACES AND POLAR ICE A SAR PROCESSOR BASED ON TWO-DIMENSIONAL EXACT TRANSFER FUNCTION A SAR PROCESSOR IMPLEMENTED ON A TRANSPUTER RING A SCATTERING MODEL FOR THE RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF PRAIRIE GRASS A SELF-ORGANISING MAP MODEL FOR REMOTE SENSING IMAGERY ANALYSIS A SHORTWAVE RADIATION MODEL FOR RADIOMETRIC CORRECTION OF OPTICAL SATELLITE DATA IN RUGGED TERRAIN A SIMPLE MODEL RELATING DIRECTIONAL RADlATIVE TEMPERATURE TO AERODYNAMIC TEMPERATURE AND SURFACE ENERGY FLUXES A SNOW INDEX FOR THE LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER AND MODERATE RESOLUTION IMAGING SPECTRORADIOMETER A SOIL COLOR INDEX TO ADJUST FOR SOIL AND LITTER NOISE, IN VEGETATION INDEX IMAGERY OF ARID REGIONS A SPACEBORNE SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETER SIMULATED BY THE TUD DEMONSTRATION MODEL A STOCHASTIC RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODEL OF A DISCONTINUOUS VEGETATION CANOPY A STUDY OF LINEARIZED INDEX GENERATION USING MULTI-SPECTRAL IMAGE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING A STUDY OF THE MICROWAVE SOUNDING UNIT ON THE NOAA-12 SATELLITE A STUDY ON GLACIER MOVEMENT USING SATELLITE SAR AND VISIBLE/NEAR-IR IMAGERY A STUDY ON WHOLE THREE YEARS DATA ANALYSIS OF NOAA AVHRR IMAGES A SUBBAND ALGORITHM FOR REAL-TIME AUTOFOCUSING OF SAR IMAGES A SURVEY OF TECHNIQUES TO AGGREGATE ENERGY BALANCE CONTROLLING PARAMETERS OVER HETEROGENEOUS LANDSCAPE A SW PRODUCT FOR SAR RAW-DATA SIMULATION A SW PRODUCT FOR SAR RAW-DATA SIMULATION A SYSTEM FOR GEOMETRIC AND RADIOMETRIC CORRECTION OF AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA A SYSTEMS BASED MODIFICATION OF THE NDVI TO MINIMIZE SOIL AND ATMOSPHERIC NOISE A Simulation of EOS MISR Data and Geometric Processing for the Prototyping of the MISR Ground Data System A TECHNIQUE FOR LOSSLESS COMPRESSION OF GMS IMAGES A TEST OF AUTOMATIC FEATURE SELECTION IN AVIRIS DATA A TRADE-OFF BETWEEN SAR AND OPTICAL INTERFEROMETRY FOR TOPOGRAPHIC MAPPING OF THE LUNAR SURFACE (MORO MISSION) A TWO-PHASE ALGORITHM TO CORRECT FOR ATMOSPHERIC EFFECTS ON THE 85 GHZ CHANNELS OF THE SSM/I IN THE ARCTIC REGION ABOUT THE USING OF MODULAR STRUCTURED SYSTEMS BY THE SCIENTIFIC MEASUREMENTS FOR REMOTE SENSING. ABSOLUTE-RADIO CALIBRATION OF LANDSAT-5 THEMATIC MAPPER AND THE PROPOSED CALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-79IA054-000904-B035-65http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190010 text/html 21865HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:58:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 2) Document Keyword: Title (Page 2) Select a Title ACCESSING PORTIONS OF LOSSLESSLY COMPRESSED MULTIBAND DATA ACCOUNTING FOR REGIONAL FACTORS OF THE ALTIMETER SEA STATE BIAS ACCURACY OF PROFILE RETRIEVALS FROM MM-WAVE SPECTRA OF CLO AND N20 ACIP THE ITALIAN SAR PROCESSOR FACILITY FOR XSAR MISSION ACQUISITION OF IN SITU SURFACE AND ATMOSPHERIC MEASUREMENTS FOR AVIRIS DATA VALIDATION AND ANALYSIS ACTIVE MICROWAVE MEASUREMENTS OF SNOWCOVER: PROGRESS IN POLARIMETRIC SAR ACTIVE/PASSIVE OBSERVATIONS OF A P0LYNYA AREA IN THE BEAUFORT SEA ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMS FOR SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE DATA PROCESSING ADAPTIVE MAXIMIZATION OF LOSSLESS IMAGE COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE IMAGES ADAPTIVE RECONSTRUCTION OF SEQUENTIAL AVHRR IMAGERY OF TEXAS VIA DYNAMIC COMPOSITING USING EXPONENTIALLY WEIGHTED POLYNOMIAL FUNCTION ADVANCES IN RADAR METEOROLOGY: AN OVERVIEW AEROSOL OPTICAL THICKNESS RETRIEVAL FROM SUN PHOTOMETER MEASUREMENTS AEROSOL RETRIEVAL BASED ON PHOTOPOLARIMETRY AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM AIRBORNE POLDER DATA BY MULTIPLE SCATTERING MODEL AIR POLLUTION MONITORING USING SnO2 SENSORS AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE TM DATA INTEGRATION FOR WATER MONITORING ALONG THE LIGURIAN COAST AIRBORNE AND SPACEBORNE CLOUD RADAR DESIGNS AIRBORNE DUAL-CHANEL RADIOMETRIC OCEAN SURFACE OBSERVATIONS DURING SCOPE `93 AIRBORNE IMAGING OF TROPOSPHERIC EMISSION AT MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRIC SAR RESULTS FROM MOUNTAINOUS AND GLACIAL TERRAIN AIRBORNE LIDAR PAYLOAD FOR PRIMARY PRODUCTIVITY AND RELATED PARAMETER SENSING IN COASTAL WATERS AIRBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF BALTIC SEA ICE AIRBORNE PASSIVE POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE ANISOTROPY AT 92 GHZ AIRBORNE RADIOMETER FOR SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS DURING TOGA COARE AIRBORNE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENTS OF MARINE MONITORING AIRSAR/TOPSAR STUDIES OF TROPICAL GLACIERS IN THE CORDILLERA REAL, BOLIVIA ALGORITHMS FOR EXPLORATORY SCREENING OF DATA-DENSITY IMAGES ALGORITHMS FOR THE DETECTION OF SHIPS AND SHIP WAKES IN SAR IMAGES ALTIMETRICALLY DERIVED FRONT AND EDDY POSITIONS FOR OPERATIONAL NOWCASTS AMI-Wind Measurements Compared to SSM/I Interpretations Over Arctic Sea Ice AN APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF CLOUDE APPROACH IN RADAR POLARIMETRY AN APPROACH TO ESTIMATING SURFACE PARAMETERS AND FLUXES USING MODELING AND MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING AN APPROACH TO GEOGRAPHIC PATTERN RECOGNITION USING A MATHEMATICAL MORPHOLOGY AN ASSESSMENT OF SST ESTIMATION ACCURACY WITH ADEOS/OCTS DATA AN ASTRONOMICAL SITE MONITOR FOR THE ESO VERY LARGE TELESCOPE AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM AN AUTOMATED MATCHING ALGORITHM FOR MAGELLAN STEREO DATA AN AUTOMATED METHOD FOR MAKING MOSAIC OUT OF NOAA/AVHRR IMAGES FOR GLOBAL MONITORING AN EARLY EOS PROGRESS REPORT AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS AN EFFICIENT WATER CONCEPT FOR MONITORING VEGETATION IN WEST AFRICA AN EMPIRICAL SOIL MOISTURE ESTIMATION ALGORITHM USING IMAGING RADARS AN ENHANCED RADIOBRIGHTNESS AND SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MONITORING SYSTEM FOR STUDIES OF LAND-ATMOSPHERE INTERACTIONS AN EVALUATION OF BATS AS A BASIS FOR A RADIOBRIGHTNESS MODEL FOR NORTHERN PRAIRIE AN EVALUATION OF ERS-1 PRI DATA IN THE CONTEXT OF THE RAPID ESTIMATION OF CROP ACREAGES IN EUROPE. AN EXAMINATION OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER OF SEA ICE IN THE EAST SIBERIAN AND CHUKCHI SEAS AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF LIGHT SCATTERING MECHANISMS FROM SOILS USING POLARIZED BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE AN EXPERMENTAL STUDY OF RELATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS FROM SURFACE AND VOLUME SCATTERING MECHANISMS IN SALINE ICE AN INTEGRATED DATA BASE APPROACH IN SUPPORT OF REMOTE SENSING STUDIES OF AGRICULTURAL AREAS AN INTEGRATED GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS APPROACH TO LAND COVER CHANGE ASSESSMENT AN INVERSION ALGORITHM FOR RETRIEVING SOIL MOISTURE AND SURFACE ROUGHNESS FROM POLARIMETRIC RADAR OBSERVATIONS AN ITERATIVE FREQUENCY-DOMAIN TECHNIQUE TO REDUCE IMAGE DEGRADATION DUE TO LENS DEFOCUS AND MOTION BLUR AN OVERVIEW OF THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT AN UNMANNED AIRCRAFT VEHICLE SYSTEM FOR BOUNDARY-LAYER FLUX MEASUREMENTS OVER FOREST CANOPIES ANALYSIS OF ACTIVE CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE FROM DOUGLAS FIR. EFFECTS OF AIR POLLUTANTS ON FLUORESCENCE YIELD AND FLUORESCENCE BAND RATIO. ANALYSIS OF DOPPLER AND CORRELATION RADAR METHODS FOR OCEAN CURRENTS VELOCITY MESOSCALE FIELD RECONSTRUCTION ANALYSIS OF ERROR SOURCES IN THERMAL INFRARED CALIBRATION OF AERIAL AND SATELLITE IMAGES ANALYSIS OF MULTI-INCIDENCE ANGLE SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER DATA FROM THE DMSP SSM/I ANALYSIS OF NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHZ DATA OVER VEGETATED LAND SURFACES: THEORY AND EXAMPLES ANALYSIS OF POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATA FROM VEGETATED AREAS ANALYSIS OF RADAR SCATTERED SIGNAL FROM TERRAIN BASED ON FRA CTAL CHARACTERISTICS ANALYSIS OF REAL IR SCENES ACQUIRED FOR SWOE JT&E ANALYSIS OF SCATTERING FROM ROUGH SURFACES AT SMALL GRAZING ANGLES USING A PERIODIC-SURFACE MOMENT METHOD ANALYSIS OF SPECTRAL AND FRACTAL PROPERTIES OF A NONLINEAR SEA SURFACE ANALYSIS OF SURFACEBASED PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS DURING LEADEX `92 ANALYSIS OF THE SPECTRAL BEHAVIOR OF THE VEGETATION IN THE SOUTH OF THE BRASILIAN PANTANAL ANALYSIS OF TIME-RESOLVED CHLOROPHYLL FLORESCENCE AND BACKSCATTERED SIGNAL FROM VEGETATION ANALYZING SPATIO-TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE PARAMETERS FROM NOAA AVHRR DATA ANGLE AND POLARIZATION DEPENDENT MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM OCEAN WAVES ANGULAR CHRACTERISTICS OF PATHFINDER AVHRR LAND THERMAL IMAGERY AND 0RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODELING ANTARCTIC PASSIVE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES DURING SUMMAR AND AUTUMN ANTARCTIC POLYNYA AREAS DERIVED WITH SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY AND THEIR IMPACT ON OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE ANTENNA DISTORTIONS IN MULTIPLE PHASE CENTRE INTERFEROMETRIC SYSTEMS APPLICATION OF A COMPACT RANGE ANTENNA FOR ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM SEA ICE APPLICATION OF A STOCHASTIC VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLE TO RANDOM ROUGH SURFACE SCATTERING APPLICATION OF AN AGROMETEOROLOGICAL MODEL AND LANDSAT- TM DATA TO ESTIMATE ACTUAL TRANSPIRATION OF CORN APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS FOR DETECTION OF SEA ICE COVERAGE AND MOVEMENTS FROM SATELLITE IMAGERY APPLICATION OF EQUIVOCATION QUANTIFICATION TO FUZZY DATA APPLICATION OF ERS-1 SAR-DATA IN LARGE AREA FOREST INVENTORY APPLICATION OF PARAMETRIC METHODS SPECTRUM ESTIMATION FOR RADIO ACOUSTIC SOUNDING APPLICATION OF THE GPIB IN DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEMS FOR MEASUREMENTS OF THE LIDAR PARAMETERS OF THE PHENOMENA. APPLICATION OF THE HOUGH TRANSFORM FOR AUTOMATED INTERPRETATION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN IMAGERIES APPLICATIONS OF ANGULAR AND FREQUENCY CORRELATION FUNCTIONS FOR DETECTING THE CHARACTERISTICS OF GEOPHYSICAL MEDIA AT MILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS APPLICATIONS OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETRY ARMAR OBSERVATIONS DURING TOGA/COARE ARTIFICIAL DISTRIBUTED TARGETS FOR THE CALIBRATION OF IMAGING RADAR SYSTEMS ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK MODEL FOR RECOGNITION OF LAND C0VER TYPE OF REMOTE SENSING ASF DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR RADARSAT/ERS-2 ASF SAR PROCESSING SYSTEM OVERVIEW ASSESSING THE LANG SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE WITH INFRARED AND MICROWAVE DATA ASSESSMENT OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (A_par_) USING HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTlON REFLECTANCE BANDS ASSESSMENT OF FOREST CANOPY CHEMISTRY WITH ISM ASSIMILATING REMOTELY-SENSED DATA INTO A DYNAMIC-THERMODYNAMIC ICE MODEL ASTER ROUDN-ROBIN RADIOMETERS FOR THE PREFLIGHT CROSS-CALIBRATION OF EOS AM1 INSTRUMENTS ATMOSPHERIC AND TOPOGRAPHIC CORRECTION OF SATELLITE DATA OVER MOUNTANIOUS TERRAIN ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS IMAGES WITH A PROCEDURE BASED ON THE INVERSION OF 5S MODEL ATMOSPHERIC HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL STRUCTURE OBSERVATIONS ATMOSPHERIC PROPERTIES MEASUREMENTS AND DATA COLLECTION FROM A MANNED HOT AIR BALLOON ATMOSPHERIC TRANSMITTANCE MEASUREMENTS NEAR 54 AND 118 GHZ ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR PROFILES USING A RAMAN LIDAR There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-80IA054-000904-B035-133http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190053 text/html 22007HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:59:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 3) Document Keyword: Title (Page 3) Select a Title AUTOMATED MULTI-SENSOR IMAGE MAPPING SYSTEM(1) AUTOMATIC CLOUD CLASSIFICATION WITH VISIBLE AND THERMAL INFRARED RADIOMETER DATA AUTOMATIC DEM GENERATION USING MAGELLAN RADAR STEREO DATA AUTOMATIC FILTER OZONOMETER AUTOMATIC MAPPING OF THE VARIOUS TYPES OF LIGNEOUS VEGETATION COVERS ACCORDING TO THEIR DENSITY AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS AVHRR OBSERVATIONS OF PERSIAN GULF OIL SPILLS Advanced Airborne Multispectral Dual-Polarization MM-Wave Imaging Technique An Automatic System for Operational Snow-Cover Monitoring in the Norwegian Mountain Regions Analysis of Main Driving Factors in Successional Changes of Reflectance in Northern Temperate Forests Analysis of Real IR Scenes Acquired for SWOE JT&E Application of ERS-1 SAR for Coastal Inundation Application of the Polarimetric Matched Image Filter to the Assessment of SAR Data From the Mississippi Flood Region Are Leaf Chemistry Signatures Preserved at the Canopy Level? Atmospheric Boundary Layer Investigations With a UHF Doppler/Interferometric Wind Profiler BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN SURFACE UNDER LOW WIND CONDITIONS BACKSCATTER MODELLING OF SKIP-GENERATED INTERNAL WAVE WAKES OBSERVED DURING THE LOCK LINNHE SERIES OF EXPERIMENTS BACKSCATTERING FROM SEA ICE WITH VERTICAL STRUCTURAL VALUATION: A MODEL ANALYSIS BALLOON-BORNE MEASUREMENTS OF STRATOSPHERIC TRACE GASES BY FTIR SOLAR ABSORPT[ON SPECTROMETRY BAND PASS OPTIMIZATlON FOR TOTAL COLUMN MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC CO AND CH4 USING A LENGTH MODULATED GAS FILTER CORRELATION RADIOMETER. BAYESIAN ESTIMATION OF SOIL PARAMETERS FROM REMOTE SENSING DATA BEYOND THE OBVIOUS: SOME REFLECTIONS BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION MEASUREMENTS IN THE NASA/GSFC DIFFUSER CALIBRATION FACILITY BIOPHYSICAL PARAMETER RETRIEVALS USING ASAS BIDIRECTIONAL MEASUREMENTS BISTATIC SCATTERING CHARACTERISTICS OF DENSE RANDOMLY DISTRIBUTED CYLINDERS BLUE-GREEN FLUORESCENCE EXCITED BY UV LASER ON LEAVES OF DIFFERENT SPECIES ORIGINATES FROM CUTIN AND IS SENSITIVE TO LEAF TEMPERATURE Biophysical Interpretation of Spectral Mixture Models Based on Radiative Transfer Models and Observational Data C-BAND SOLID STATE DUAL POLARIZATION T/R MODULES FOR AIRBORNE SAR APPLICATIONS CALIBRATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE X-SAR SYSTEM CALIBRATION EXPERIMENTS OF ERS-1 SAR WITH ACTIVE RADAR CALIBRATOR IN JAPAN CALIBRATION FOR RADARSAT CALIBRATION OF MAS ANTENNA USING RADIATION OF THE LUNAR SURFACE CALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED SOLID-STATE ARRAY SPECTRORADIOMETER CALIBRATION OF THE CARABAS VHF SAR SYSTEM CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE CANADAS GLOBESAR PROGRAM CANOPY PENETRATION STUDY FOR TROPICAL RAINFORESTS: MODELED RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM AMAZON FLOODPLAIN FORESTS AT C-, L-, AND P-BAND CHANGE POINT ANALYSIS WITH ADAPTIVE MODELS CHARACTERISING THE LANDCOVER OF THE AUSTRALIAN CONTINENT FOR INCORPORATION INTO HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION GCMs. CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS CHARACTERIZATION OF CANOPY PHYSIOLOGY AT BOREAS WITH SAR CHARACTERIZATION OF COMPOUNDS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE VARIATION IN BLUE BAND FLUORES CENCE FROM NITROGEN DEFICIENT SOYBEANS CHARACTERIZATION OF SOIL MOISTURE USING A MICROSTRIP RESONATOR CIRCULAR POLARIZATION FOR MAPPING FOREST BIOMASS AT P-BAND? CLASSIFICATION OF AVRIS DATA FROM ICELAND-GEOLOGIC APPLICATIONS CLASSIFICATION OF COMBINED REMOTE SENSING IMAGERY AND GIS DATA USING MARKOV CHAIN SIMULATION CLASSIFICATION OF ERS-1/JERS-1 COMPOSITE SAR IMAGES CLASSIFICATION OF MULTIPOLARISATION AIRBORNE RADAR IMAGES IN AGRICULTURAL AREAS CLASSIFICATION OF REMOTELY SENSED IMAGES USING MATHEMATICAL MORPHOLOGY CLASSIFICATION OF THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST USING JERS-1 SAR DATA CO PROFILE RETRIEVAL EXPERIMENTS FOR THE MOPITT INSTRUMENT CO2 LIDAR: A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT VIEW OF CLOUDS COAST LINE DETECTION FROM SAR IMAGES COASTWATCH OPERATIONAL MAPPED AVHRR IMAGERY COHERENT CHANNELS EXPANSION IN THE THEORY OF WAVE PROPAGATION IN TURBULENCE COLLECTIVE SCATTERING EFFECTS IN VEGETATION CANOPIES AT MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES BASED ON MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS COMBINATION OF INTERFEROGRAMS FROM ASCENDING AND DESCENDING ORBITS COMBINED USE OF SPECTRAL MEASUREMENTS: A PROMISE FOR SURFACE PARAMETER RETRIEVAL COMMENTS ON SAR SIGNAL AND NOISE EQUATIONS COMPARING NUMERICAL AND ANALYTICAL SCHEMES FOR AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM THE ADVANCED VERY HIGH RESOLUTION RADIOMETER COMPARISON AND VISUALIZATION OF FEATURE SPACE BEHAVIOUR OF STATISTICAL AND NEURAL CLASSIFIERS OF SATELLITE IMAGERY COMPARISON BETWEEN PREDICTED PERFORMANCES OF BISTATIC AND MONOSTATIC RADAR IN VEGETATION MONITORING COMPARISON OF A POLARIMETRIC SCATTERING AND EMISSION MODEL WITH OCEAN BACKSCATTER AND BRIGHTNESS MEASUREMENTS COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS COMPARISON OF LANDSAT TM AND SAR MAPPING OF ALPINE SNOW AND GLACIERS: RESULTS OF RECENT CRYSYS RESEARCH AT WAPTA ICEFIELD, ALBERTA COMPARISON OF LONG VALLEY TOPSAR DATA WITH KINEMATIC GPS SURVEY MEASUREMENTS COMPARISON OF MEASURED AND PREDICTED SCATTERING COEFFICIENTS AT 94 GHZ. COMPARISON OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER WITH OPTICALLY-DERIVED CROSS SECTIONS FROM WIND-GENERATED WAVES IN A WAVETANK COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES COMPARISON OF SIMULATION TECHNIQUES FOR CORRELATED GAMMA AND K DISTRIBUTED IMAGES FOR SAR APPLICATION COMPARISON OF TIME SERIES AVHRR NDVI VALUES WITH ECOSYSTEM PARAMETERS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF LAND DEGRADATION IN THE ARID UNITED STATES COMPARISON OF TWO SPECTRAL-TEXTURE CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS COMPARISON OF WATER VAPOR MEASUREMENTS BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS AND RAMAN LIDAR COMPARISONS OF INTERNAL WAVES AS OBSERVED BY A TOWED CTD AND RADAR COMPARISONS OF LIDAR AND MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR AND TEMPERATURE COMPARISONS OF NEURAL NETWORKS TO STANDARD TECHNIQUES FOR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND CORRELATION COMPARISONS OF RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODELS OF VEGETATION CANOPIES WH LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS COMPONENT AND SYSTEM MEASUREMENT OF THE MODIS SPECTRAL BANDS COMPREHENSIVE MODELING OF THE WIND WAVE SYSTEM WITH WIND-WAVE INTERACTION AND DISSIPATION COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE MULTISPECTRAL IMAGERY FOR APPLICATIONS REQUIRING HIGH-QUALITY RADIOMETRY COMPUTATION OF CARBON AND WATER CYCLES IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS FROM A BIOGEOCHEMICAL MODEL WITH REMOTELY SENSED DATA CONCEPTUAL DESIGN, PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND RESULTS OF THE HIGH RESOLUTION REAL-TIME PROCESSOR OF THE DLR AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM CONSIDERATIONS IN USING SPECTRAL VEGETATION INDICES TO DETERMINE BIOPHYSICAL VARIABLES IN THE BOREAL FOREST CONSTRUCTION OF AN AIRBORNE 93 GHz IMAGING RADIOMETER CONTRASTING TARGET, STRAY-LIGHT, AND OTHER PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR MISR CONTRIBUTION OF ERS-1 WIND SCATTEROMETER DATA TO THE STUDY OF TERRESTRIAL VEGETATION CONTRIBUTION OF MULTI-TEMPORAL DATA TO IMPROVE THE RADIOMETRIC RESOLUTION OF SAR IMAGES CORRECTING INFRARED SATELLITE ESTIMATES OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE FOR ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR ATTENUATION CORRECTION FOR QUADRATURE ERRORS CROSS CALIBRATION OF A BLACKBODY STANDARD WITH AN ACTIVE CAVITY RADIOMETER CROSS-SECTION ESTIMATION BY SIMULATED ANNEALING CROSS-TRACK AND PROPOSED MULTI-FREQUENCY SAR INTERFEROMETRY: COMPARISONS WITH OPTICAL HOLOGRAPHIC INTERFEROMETRY CRUSH: A COMPARATIVE LOSSLESS COMPRESSION PACKAGE Calibration of Polarimetric Measurement System Using an Active Calibrator Calibration/Validation of ERS-1 Wind Scatterometer Precision Products Comparison of Data and Model Slope Statistics for a Current Convergence Feature Confocal Techniques Applied to Microwave Holographic Synthetic Aperture Radar (HSAR) DEM CORRECTED ERS-1 SAR DATA FOR SNOW MONITORING IN ALPINE REGIONS DERIVING ANTECEDENT MOISTURE CONDITIONS FROM AIRBORNE SAR FOR INPUT INTO A FLOOD FORECASTING MODEL DESAMPLING FIR FILTERS IN REAL-TIME IMAGING TECHNIQUES There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-81IA054-000904-B035-174http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190122 text/html 22400HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 18:59:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 4) Document Keyword: Title (Page 4) Select a Title DESCRIPTION OF A RADAR/RADIOMETER METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION TO AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS OVER- STRATIFORM RAIN IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOME DATA PROCESSOR DESIGN OF A Ka BAND POLARIMETRIC RADIOMETER DESIGN OF NEW PHOTODIODE STANDARDS FOR USE IN THE MISR IN-FLIGHT CALIBRATOR DETECTING FLOODED OR NONFLOODED GROUND UNDERNEATH FLOODPLAIN FORESTS IN AMAZON BY RADAR BACKSCATTER: MODELING RESULTS DETECTION OF ATMOSPHERIC CHLORINE-COMPOUNDS WITH AN AIRBORNE SUBMILLIMETER RECEIVER DETECTION OF HEAVY METAL CONTAMINATED SEDIMENTS USING IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA DETECTION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES USING NEURAL NETWORK TECHNOLOGY DETECTION OF OCEANIC STERIC HEIGHT CHANGE USING TOPEX/POSEIDON SATELLITE ALTIMETERY DETECTION OF SHALLOWLY BURIED DIELECTRIC OBJECTS WITH MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS. DETECTION OF SHIP TRACKS IN AVHRR CLOUD IMAGERY WITH NEURAL NETWORKS DETECTION OF SURFACE CURRENT FEATURES WITH ERS-1 SAR IMAGING RADAR DETECTION OF TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL VARIATlONS OF CHLOROPHYLL IN LAKES WITH AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DETECTION OF VOLUME SCATTERING EFFECTS IN BEAMWIDTH LIMITED ALTIMETRY DATA DETECTION, ESTIMATION OF DIRECTIONAL FEATURES ON OCEAN SURFACE IMAGES DETERMINATION OF ICE AGE: A PROPOSED SCHEME FOR A RADARSAT SEA ICE GEOPHYSICAL PROCESSOR SYSTEM DETERMINATION OF PARTICULATE RESUSPENSION AND MIXING NEAR AN OCEAN OUTFALL USING HYPERSPECTRAL OCEAN COLOR IMAGERY DETERMINATION OF PROPORTIONS OF LAND USE BLEND IN PIXELS OF A SATELLITE IMAGE DETERMINATION OF SURFACE FEATURES ON GLACIERS IN ALASKA FROM ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS DETERMINATION OF WIND SPEED, WIND DIRECTION AND ATMOSPHERIC STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR DATA DURING NORCSEX91 DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING OF A REMOTE SENSING BASED HYDROLOGIC MODEL DEVELOPMENT OF A GENERIC SAR PROCESSOR IN THE NETHERLANDS DEVELOPMENT OF A HIGH RESOLUTION ICE ECHO SOUNDER FOR ARCTIC ICE SHEET DEVELOPMENT OF A TACTICAL TERRAIN ANALYSIS SYSTEM WITH GIS TECHNIQUE DEVELOPMENT OF AN AEROSOL OPACITY RETRIEVAL ALGORITHM FOR USE WITH MULTI-ANGLE LAND SURFACE IMAGES DEVELOPMENT OF COHERENT LASER RADAR DEVELOPMENT STATUS OF CASSINI RADAR FOR REMOTE SENSING OF TITAN DIFFERENTIAL ABSORTION LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WATER VAPOR DIGITAL CORRELATOR PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR A SYNTHETIC APERTURE IMAGING RADIOMETER DIRECTIONAL VEGETATION INDEX INTERACTIONS IN ASAS IMAGERY DISCRETE FEATURE ANALYSIS OF SIDESCAN-SONAR UNDER-ICE IMAGERY DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN YOUNG SEA ICE TYPES FROM SINGLE LOOK SAR IMAGE DATA. DISCUSSION OF DIFFERENT SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM OF UNCLASSIFIED PIXELS DIURNAL OBSERVATIONS OF SOIL MOISTURE WITH PASSIVE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS DIURNAL VARIATIONS OF BACKSCATTERING COEFFICIENT OF BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF PINE TREES AT C- AND X-BANDS DOES SNOW COVER MASK THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURE OF SEA ICE? DOMINANT PLANT PHYSIOGNOMIES IN THE SOUTH OF THE BRASILIAN PANTANAL DOPPLER PARAMETER ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS FOR SAR PROCESSING WITH THE CHIRP SCALING APPROACH DOPPLER SPECTRA OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM THE SEA SURFACE OBTAINED FROM A THREE-SCALE COMPOSITE SURFACE MODEL DTM GENERATION FROM 35-DAY REPEAT PASS ERS-1 INTERFEROMETRY Data Processing and Calibration of the Advanced Solid State Array Spectroradiometer Delineation of 1993 Midwest Flooding Using ERS-1 SAR and Spot Imagery Design and Implementation of the GOME Data Processor Determining Winds Aloft With a Radar Wind Sensor: Accounting for Rain-Drop Fall Speed Development of Polarimetric Vector Signal and Tensor Image Processing in POL-RAD/SAR Analysis EARLY STAGES OF SEA ICE GROWTH OBSERVED WITH SATELLITE DATA EARTH CRUST TENSION AND RECENT GEODYNAMIC ACTIVITY OF THE STRAIT OF SICILY EFFECT OF DOPPLER CENTROID MIS-TRACKING ON THE PARAMETER ESTIMATION OF POINT TARGET COMPLEX SIGNALS EFFECT OF LATENT HEAT TRANSFER ON DIURNAL AND ANNUAL PREDICTION OF TEMPERATURE AND RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF NORTHERN PRAIRIE EFFECT OF RADIANCE-TO-REFLECTANCE TRANSFORMATION AND ATMOSPHERE REMOVAL ON MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF HIGH-DIMENSIONAL REMOTE SENSING DATA EFFECT OF SNOW STEREOLOGY ON MILLIMETER WAVE EXTINCTION EFFECT OF THE OCEAN MEDIUM NON-UNIFORMITIES ON WAVE BREAKING AND MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS SEA TEMPERATURE EFFECTIVE NUMBER OF LOOKS FOR A MULTILOOK INTERFEROMETRIC PHASE DISTRIBUTION EFFECTS OF A REFRACTlVE ATMOSPHERE ON INTERFEROMETRIC PROCESSING EFFECTS OF CHANGE IN SPECTRAL RESOLUTION AND CHANNEL POSITION ON RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODEL-BASED ATMOSPlIERIC CORRECTION TECItNIQUES APPLIED TO IMAGING SPECTROMETERS EFFECTS OF RESOLUTION AND SPATIAL PROPERTIES ON TEXTURAL CLASSIFICATION EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS EFFICIENCY OF SIMULTANEOUS DOPPLER-RADAR AND DUAL-POLARIZATION RADIOMETER SENSING IN ENVIRON-MENTAL INVESTIGATIONS ELABORATION OF A WILD FIRE HAZARD MODEL FOR THE EPARCHY OF PYLIAS (SW-MESSINIA, GREECE) BASED UPON REMOTE SENSING AND GIS ELECTRICALLY BASED ABSOLUTE SPECTRAL RADIANCE CALIBRATIONS FOR REMOTE SENSING ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING MODEL FOR A TREE TRUNK ABOVE A GROUND PLANE EMISSIONS FROM ORBITING TETHERED SATELLITE SYSTEMS TO THE EARTHS SURFACE: DATA ANALYSIS. END-TO-END SPECTRAL RESPONSE CHARACTERIZATION OF THE CLOUDS AND THE EARTHS RADIANT ENERGY SYSTEM SENSORS FROM 0.3 TO 200 mm ENGINEERING PFRORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE TOPEX RADAR ALTIMETER ENHANCED BACKSCATTERING FROM 1-D FREE STANDING DIELECTRIC FILM ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGING FROM SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT EVALUATION OF THE IRON ORE MINING ACTIVITIES IN MINAS GERAIS STATE, BRAZIL, USING ORBITAL REMOTE SENSING AND GIS ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF SOIL CONTAMINATED WITH HEAVY METALS USING LASER-INDUCED-BREAKDOWN SPECTROSCOPY ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OVER THE OSAKA BAY AREA BY SATELLITE ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER MODELLING AND INTERPRETATION OF SEA ICE SIGNATURES ERS-1 SAR IMAGES OF ATMOSPHERIC GRAVITY WAVES ERS-1 SAR IMAGING OF OCEAN FEATURES iN THE VESTFJORDEN AREA ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS OF INTERNAL WAVES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT ERS-1 SAR VIEWS THE OCEAN: AN ASSESSMENT ESAs Future Plans for Earth Observation From Polar Orbit ESTIMATING DRY GRASS BIOMASS RESIDUES USING AVIRIS IMAGE ANALYSIS ESTIMATING FIRN TEMPERATURES IN GREENLAND AND ANTARCTICA FROM DUAL POLARIZATION C-BAND MICROWAVE EMISSION OBSERVATIONS ESTIMATING FRACTIONAL VEGETATION COVER AT THE SUB PIXEL SCALE IN A SEMIARID REGION USING A STATISTICAL MIXTURE MODEL AND REMOTELY SENSED DATA ESTIMATING OF SURFACE TEMPERATURES ON FOREST STANDS USING AIRBORNE MSS EMITTANCE DATA ESTIMATING SNOW PARTICLE SIZE USING TM BAND-4 ESTIMATING THE FRACTION OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (fAPAR) FROM OFF-NADIR AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS ESTIMATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF COHERENCE IN SAR INTERFEROGRAMS. ESTIMATION OF AREAL SOIL-WATER CONTENT DURING HAPEX-SAHEL AND EFEDA-SPAIN ESTIMATION OF CONIFER BI-DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE USING A MONTE CARLO METHOD ESTIMATION OF FOREST CANOPY LEAF AREA INDEX USING DIRECTIONAL ASAS MEASUREMENTS ESTIMATION OF FOREST STAND STRUCTURE FROM LANDSAT TM THROUGH INVERSION OF THE LI-STRAHLER MODEL ESTIMATION OF ICE WATER CONTENT USING MULTI-PARAMETER RADAR MEASUREMENTS ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES ESTIMATION OF NET CARBON FLUX OVER THE FIFE SITE BY COMBINING SATELLITE AND IN-SITU OBSERVATIONS WITH MODELS USING GIS ESTIMATION OF PENETRATION DEPTH IN A RANDOM MEDIA USING FREQUENCY DECORRELATION OF BACKSCATTERED FIELD ESTIMATION OF SENSIBLE HEAT FLUX USING A TWO- AND THREE-COMPONENT MODEL DURING THE MONSOON `90 EXPERIMENT ESTIMATION OF TURBULENT PARAMETERS OF THE ATMOSPHERIC AEROSOL BY LASER RADAR ESTIMATION OF WIND SPPED AND WIND DIRECTION FROM ERS-1 IMAGERY ESTIMATORS AND DISTRIBUTIONS IN SINGLE AND MULTI-LOOK POLARIMETRIC AND INTERFEROMETRIC DATA EVALUATION OF A MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 DATASET FOR HYDROLOGIC APPLICATIONS EVALUATION OF AN AUSTRALIAN ERS-1 SAR SCENE PERTAINING TO SOIL MOISTURE MEASUREMENT EVALUATION OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODELS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SOIL MOISTURE IN TROPICAL AGRICULTURAL SOILS EVALUATION OF REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES FOR MEASURING CLOUD WATER AND DRIZZLE IN MARINE STRATOCUMULUS CLOUDS There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-82IA054-000904-B035-214http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190150 text/html 21863HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:00:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 5) Document Keyword: Title (Page 5) Select a Title EVALUATION OF THE MULTICHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ALGORITHM ALONG THE BRAZILIAN COAST EVALUATION OF THE SSALT POSEIDON ALTIMETER EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS OF AUTOMATED SUN-TRACKING SOLAR RADIOMETERS EXPERIMENTAL DISCOVERY OF SEGNETOELECTRICAL ICE IN THE FREEZEN SAND EXPERIMENTAL MEASUREMENTS AND THEORETICAL BOUNDS ON THE COMPLEX PERMITTIVITY OF SEA ICE AT Ka BAND (26.5-40 GHz) EXPORT OF OZONE AND ITS PRECURSORS FROM NORTH AMERICA TO THE GLOBAL TROPOSPHERE EXTERNAL POLARIMETRIC CALIBRATION OF THE DANISH POLARIMETRIC C-BAND SAR EXTRACT OF POLLUTED AREA IN INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX BY MOS-1(MESSR) IMAGE DATA EXTRACTING SEASONAL PARAMETERS OF SEA ICE MORPHOLOGY FROM SAR IMAGERY: SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF FIRST-YEAR ICE EXTRACTION OF HULL CHARACTERISTICS FROM SAR IMAGES OF SHIP WAKES Efficient Speckle Filtering of SAR Images Estimating High-Latitude Radiative Fluxes From Satellite Data: Requirements Experiences From Real Time Runoff Forecasts by Snow Cover Remote Sensing FAR-INFRARED ABSORPTION OF CO2 CLATHRATE HYDRATE FASTSCAN: A REAL-TIME SAR PROCESSOR FOR RADARSAT GROUND STATIONS* FEATURE EXTRACTION FROM POL-SAR IMAGERY FOR BADAR TARGET IDENTIFICATION AND CLASSIFICATION FEATURE-SELECTION FOR REMOTE-SENSING DATA CLASSIFICATION FIELD AND LEAF LEVEL FLUORESCENCE FOR DISTINGUISHING PLANT GROWTH DIFFERENCES DUE NITROGEN FERTIlIZATION IN A CORN CANOPY FIELD OF VIEW CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE FIELD PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS OF SNOWPACK AT 37 GHz FIRST RESULTS FROM SIR-C CALIBRATION FIRST RESULTS OF ONE PASS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRY WITH THE DORNIER SAR SYSTEM FIRST RESULTS OF ZONALLY AVERAGED CLO CONCENTRATIONS AS MEASURED BY MAS ON ATLAS-1 FIRST-ORDER 4-D DATA ASSIMILATION IN A DlSTRIBUTED MODEL OF SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND ENERGY FLUXES FLUORESCENCE LIDAR IN VEGETATION REMOTE SENSING: SYSTEM FEATURES AND MULTIPLATFORM OPEREATION FLUORESCENCE LIDAR REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION: RESEARCH ADVANCES IN EUROPE FLUORESCENCE SIGNATURES APPLIED TO CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS: CASE STUDIES WITH MEDITERRANEAN OAK ECOSYSTEMS. FLUORESCENT SPECTROSCOPY OF OIL POLLUTIONS AND DISSOLVED ORGANIC SUBSTANCE IN NATURAL WATER FOOTPRINTS OF STORMS ON THE SEA: A VIEW FROM SPACEBORNE SAR FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY FOREST MODELING OF JACK PINE TREES FOR BOREAS FORWARD AND INVERSE SIGNATUUE MODELING FOR CONGELATION ICE FREQUENCY AND AZIMUTHAL VARIATIONS OF RADAR CROSS-SECTION AND THEIR INFLUENCE UPON LOW FREQUENCY SAR-IMAGING. FREQUENCY SELECTION AND MULTIPOLARIMETRY FOR HARD TARGET DETECTION FULL WAVE BACKSCATTER PREDICTIONS FROM LAYERED STRATIFIED MEDIUM FULL WAVE SCATTER CROSS SECTIONS FOR TWO-DIMENSIONAL RANDOM ROUGH SURFACES USING JOINT CONDITIONAL SURFACE HEIGHT CHARACTERISTIC FUNCTIONS FULLY POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF ROBOTICALLY FABRICATED DENSE MEDIA TARGETS FUZZY SEGMENTATION AND SAMPLE-BASED OBJECT RECOGNITION IN REMOTE SENSING IMAGES FUZZY SET TECHNIQUE FOR SPATIAL PROBLEM SOLVING GENERALIZATION OF CLASSIFIED IMAGES FOR GIS GENERATION OF HIGH RESOLUTION TOPOGRAPHlC MAPS OF THE GALAPAGOS ISLANDS USING TOPSAR DATA GEOLOGICAL MAPPING OF DEATII VALLEY USING AN AIRBORNE ASTER SIMULATOR GEOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER (AVlRlS): TECHNIQUE AND RESULTS GEOMETRIC CORRECTION OF AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA GEOMETRIC MIXTURE ANALYSIS OF IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA GEOMETRIC PROCESSING OF DISSIMILAR MAGELLAN RADAR IMAGES GEORADIOMETRIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS DATA IN RUGGED TERRIN AS A BASIS FOR QUANTITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS GLOBAL AND REGIONAL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANALYSES AT FLEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER GLOBAL PRODUCTION OF MULTI-CHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURES USING THE NAVAL OCEANOGRAPHIC OFFICES SATELLITE PROCESSING SYSTEM GLOBAL VERIFICATION RESULTS FOR TOPEX/POSEIDON AND ERS-1 ALTIMETRY GROUND BASED LIDAR CHARACTERIZATION OF CIRRUS CLOUDS GROUND BASED MILLIMETER WAVE SYSTEM FOR CLO AND OTHER MINOR CONSTITUENTS OBSERVATION DEVELOPED IN CRL GROUND TRUTH STUDIES: USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA IN K-12 EDUCATION GROUND-BASED MONITORING OF WATER VAPOR IN THE MIDDLE ATMOSPHERE GUIDANCE FOR AN EXPERT SYSTEM APPROACH TO ELEVATED DUCT ASSESSMENT OVER THE NORTHEASTERN PACIFIC OCEAN Global Cloud System Histories Obtained From Earth Radiation Budget (ERBE) Scanner Data HARDWARE CANCELLATION OF THE DIRECT COUPLING IN A STEPPED CW GROUND PENETRATING RADAR HEAVY PRECIPITATION MEASUREMENTS AT S-BAND WITH A POLARIMETRIC RADAR HEIGHT AND LARGE-SCALE HEIGHT ROUGHNESS INFORMATION FROM CCRS INTERFEROMETRIC SAR DATA OF ARCTIC SEA ICE. HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF ICE PARTICLES IN WINTERTIME THUNDERCLOUDS OBSERVED BY A DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR HIGH DIMENSIONAL FEATURE REDUCTION VIA PROJECTION PURSUIT HIGH PRECISION MOTION COMPENSATION FOR MULTIPLE PASS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRY HIGH RESOLUTION MICROWAVE RADIOMETRIC SIGNATURES OF MID-LATITUDE AND TROPICAL RAINFALL HIGH RESOLUTION MULTIFREQUENCT SAR SYSTEM FOR SPACEBORNE APPLICATIONS HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTION FLUORESCENCE LIDAR: THREE YEARS OF EXPERIMENTS ON VEGETATION HIGH WIND STUDY: A VALIDATION WIND DATA BASE FOR AMI ON ERS-1 HIGH-RESOLUTION MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC TURBULENT LAYERS USING FREQUENCY DOMAIN INTERFEROMETRY HORIZON SENSOR-BASED 14-16 MICRON RADIATION MEASUREMENTS FROM IRS-lB HOW TO DOUBLE THE SPATIAL RESOLUTION OF A PUSH-BROOM INSTRUMENT High Precision Calibration of a Sun Photometer Using Langley-Plots Performed at Jungfraujoh (3580 M) and Standard Irradiance Lamps Hydrodynamic and Radar Modeling of Surface Features Observed in Gulf Stream Boundary Regions ICE EDGE DETECTION AND ICE/WATER CLASSIFICATION UTILIZING THE ERS-1 AND TOPEX ALTIMETERS ICE LEAD ORIENTATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE WINTER BEAUFORT SEA IDENTIFYING AND MAPPING WETLANDS USING COMBINED SAR AND LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER DATA IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND EXPLORATORY SPATIAL DATA ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES. IMAGE PROCESSING ON PC-CLASS WORKSTATION IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION METHODS FOR MIRAS IMAGES OF CONVECTIVE CELL-TOP ALTITUDES USING 118-GHZ SPECTRAL DATA IMAGING SPECTROMETER MEASURED LEAF WATER AND CELLULOSE IN THE SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS PRIOR TO THE 1993 ALTADENA FIRE IMAGING TARGETS EMBEDDED IN A LOSSY HALF-SPACE WITH SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR IMPACT OF RECENT ENHANCEMENTS AND UPGRADES OF THE ADVANCED SOLID-STATE ARRAY SPECTRORADIOMETER (ASAS) IMPLEMENTATION OF A RAIN MEASUREMENT MODE INTO RA-2 RADAR ALTIMETER IMPROVEMENT IN 1985-1993 NDVI TIME-SERIES FOR WORLD DESERT TARGETS USING POST-LAUNCH CALIBRATION IMPROVEMENT OF RAINFALL ESTIMATES IN ARID AREAS USING METEOSAT AND TOVS DATA IMPROVEMENTS IN ATMOSPHERIC WIND PROFILING USING IMAGING DOPPLER INTERFEROMETRY IMPROVEMENTS TO THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER (AVIRIS) CALIBRATION SYSTEM IMPROVING DEM GENERATION WITH ADDITIONAL CONSTRAINT INFORMATION IMPROVING PERFORMANCE OF SUPERVISED CLASSIFIERS USING A SIMPLE ITERATIVE ESTIMATION PROCEDURE AND ITS CONVERGENCE ISSUES IN-FIELD CHARACTERIZATION OF SAHARAN SITES FOR SATELLITE CALIBRATION IN-FLIGHT WAVELENGTH CALIBRATION OF MULTISPECTRAL THERMAL INFRARED DATA IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION INCOHERENT DOPPLER LIDAR FOR CONTINUOUS MEASUREMENT OF WIND AND AEROSOL PROFILES INDOOR EXPERIMENT OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL SUPERSYNTHESIS RADIOMETER INDUCED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD ASSOCIATED WITH WAKES - SIGNAL PROCESSING ASPECTS INFLUENCE OF AN INHOMOGENEOUS IONOSPHERE ON MOBILE SATELLITE COMMUNICATION INFLUENCE OF SCALE CHANGE ON BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCES OF A PECAN ORCHARD DERIVED FROM ASAS IMAGE DATA INFLUENCE OF SUN-VIEW GEOMETRIES ON THE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG VEGETATION INDICES, LAI, AND ABSORBED PAR INFORMATION CONTENT OF COMPRESSED REMOTELY SENSED DATA INGARA: THE AUSTRALIAN AIRBORNE IMAGING RADAR SYSTEM There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-83IA054-000904-B035-280http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190240 text/html 21907HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:00:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 6) Document Keyword: Title (Page 6) Select a Title INITIAL RESULTS FROM THE DEPLOYMENT OF AN ULTRA-WIDEBAND SCATTEROMETER INSAR Imagery of Surface Currents INTEGRATED GEOPHYSICAL IMAGING OF THE SUDBURY STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR AND OTHER AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL DATA INTERACTIVE INTEGRATION OF INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGERY, SATELLITE ALTIMETERY, AND IN SITU MEASUREMENTS INTO THE PRODUCTION OF AN OPERATIONAL OCEAN FEATURES ANALYSIS PRODUCT INTERFEROMETRIC SAR PHASE DIFFERENCE CALIBRATION: METHODS AND RESULTS INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF FREEZING AND THAWING PERMAFROST IN ALASKA WITH ERS-1 INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA INTERNAL CALIBRATION SCHEMES FOR A POLARIMETRIC PHASED ARRAY AIRBORNE SAR INTERPRETATION AND PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BLUE-GREEN AND RED VEGETATION FLUORESCENCE INTERPRETATION OF PARAMETRlC MAPS OBTAINED BY MEANS OF "BLUE TO GREEN RATIO" OVER COASTAL WATERS INTERPRETATION OF TIME-DOMAIN INDUCED POLARIZATION AND RESISTIVITY DATA FOR EARTH MODELING INVENTORY BY COMPARTMENTS USING RADAR-DERIVED STAND PROFILES INVERSION ALGORITHMS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE INVERSION OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA BY A DYNAMIC LEARNING NEURAL NETWORK INVERSION OF SOIL MOISTURE WITH RADAR BACKSCATTERING DATA INVERSION TECHNIQUES FOR ATMOSPHERIC LIMB MEASUREMENTS USING THE OCCULTATION APPROACH INVESTIGATING THE TROPICAL ATLANTIC VARIABILITY FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER INVESTIGATION OF LEAF BIOCHEMISTRY BY STATISTICS AND MODELS INVESTIGATION OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND WIND FIELDS IN THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT INVESTIGATION OF THE VERTICAL PROFILES OF LINEAR DEPOLARIZATION RATIO AND REFLECTIVITY AT S, X AND K BAND WAVELENGTHS INVESTIGATION OF VARIATIONS OF LONG SURFACE WAVE PARAMETERS BY OPTICAL TECHNIQUES DURING JUSREX 1992 INVESTIGATIONS ON THE BIOCHEMICAL COMPONENTS NIR ABSORTION FEATURES IN AVIRIS AND LABORATORY REFLECTANCE SPECTRA OF VEGETATION. IRON BOLTZMANN FACTOR LIDAR: PROPOSED NEW REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUE FOR MESOSPHERIC TEMPERATURE Image Quality K-DISTRIBUTION FOR MULTI-LOOK PROCESSED POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY K-STATISTICS OF TERRAIN CLUTTER IN HIGH RESOLUTION SAR IMAGES K-band Model Computations of Propagation Effects in Precipitation KA-BAND PROPAGATION MEASUREMENTS FROM THE ADVANCED COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY SATELLITE (ACTS) Ka-BAND OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION: A COMPARATIVE STUDY L-BAND SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETERS FOR EARTH REMOTE SENSING LABORATORY CALIBRATION OF ELECTRO-OPTICAL IMAGERS AT CCRS LABORATORY INVESTIGATION OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN DIELECTRICAL AND RADIATION PROPERTIES OF FREEZEN SAND LABORATORY STUDIES OF SALINITY INFLUENCE ON DIELECTRIC CHARACTERISTICS OF SAND LAND COVER CLASSIFICATION BY SAR LAND COVER DISCRIMINATION USING SAREX DATA LAND USE CLASSIFICATION USING FAST LEARNING NEURAL NETWORKS AND TOPOLOGY SELECTION ALGORITHMS LASER ALTIMETRY WAVEFORM MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION CANOPY STRUCTURE LASER PROBING OF THE SEA IN THE SECTION OF ATLANTIC LASER PROPAGATION IN SALT WATER ICE LASERS FOR LIDAR BATHIMETRY AND OCEANOLOGICAL RESEARCH: CHOICE CRITERIA LATITUDINAL STRUCTURE OF MIDDLE ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR REVEALED BY SHIPBOARD MICROWAVE SPECTROSCOPY LIDAR IMPLEMENTATION OF PUMP-AND-PROBE TECHNIQUE FOR REMOTE ESTIMATES OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS EFFICIENCY IN PLANTS LIDAR MEASURED REFRACTIVE EFFECTS IN A COASTAL ENVIRONMENT LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF STRATOSPHERIC OZONE AND TEMPERATURE AT TABLE MOUNTAIN, CA, AND MAUNA LOA, HI, AND COMPARISON WITH UARS RESULTS. LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WATER VAPOR CONCENTRATIONS IN THE TROPOSPHERE LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WAVE-HEIGHTS SPECTRA IN THE OCEAN LIDAR SOUNDING OF THE ATMOSPHERE WITH TUNABLE ACOUSTO-OPTICAL FILTER AS SPECTRAL ELEMENT IN RECEIVER LIMITS OF SPACE BASED REMOTE SENSING FOR SOURCE CHARACTERIZATION LINEAR MIXTURE MODELLING APPLIED TO AVHRR DATA FOR MONITORING VEGETATION LINEAR RESPONSE OF SEA LEVEL TO WIND FORCING DETERMINED FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER DATA LINKWINDS, A VISUAL DATA ANALYSIS SYSTEM AND ITS APPLICATION TO REMOTE SENSED DATA LOCOSAR : A SAR IMAGE SIMULATOR LOSSLESS COMPRESSION AND MULTIRESOLUTION DECOMPRESSION OF THE GLOBAL AVHRR 1 KM DATA SET LOW GRAZING ANGLE BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN - THE EFFECTS OF SHADOWING AND MULTIPLE SCATTERING LOW GRAZING ANGLE SCATTER FROM WIND WAVES AND SOLITONS MAPPING COASTAL CURRENTS WITH SAR, USING NATURALLY- OCCURRING SURFACE SLICK PATTERNS MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL MAPPING MONTANE SNOW COVER AT SUBPlXEL RESOLUTION FROM THE THEMATIC MAPPER USING A NEURAL NETWORK SIMULATOR MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGRAPHY IN A MULTI-SENSOR APPROACH MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS MAPPING THE DIAGENETIC ZONE TRANSITIONS OF GREENLAND USING THE AAFE RADAR ALTIMETER MAPPING VEGETATION TYPES USING POLARIMETRIC RADAR MARINE MODIFICATIONS TO LOWTRAN RADIANCE PREDICTIONS MARITIME PRECIPITATION DISTRIBUTIONS DETERMINED FROM AIRBORNE RADAR AND MULTI-FREQUENCY RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION FOR SAR INTERFEROMETRY MEASUREMENT AND MODELING OF THE BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE OF SNOW MEASUREMENT OF OCEANIC WIND VECTOR USING SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS MEASUREMENT OF TOPOGRAPHIC SURFACE SLOPES IN POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES MEASUREMENTS OF CARBON MONOXIDE AND METHANE FROM SPACE MEASUREMENTS OF CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE IN SEVERAL PLANT SPECIES IN DIFFERENT AIR POLLUTION AFFECTED SITES IN VARANGER, NORTHERN NORWAY, COMPARED WITH REMOTE SENSING DATA MEASUREMENTS OF LAND SUBSIDENCE WITH SAR INTERFEROMETY MEASUREMENTS OF OCEAN CURRENTS WITH SAR INTERFEROMETRY AND HF RADAR MECHANISMS FOR THE PHOTODISSOCIATION OF TROPOSPHERIC AND STRATOSPHERIC NITRATES MELTING LAYER OBSERVATIONS WITH RADAR AND AIRCRAFT MESOSCALE MODELING OF REFRACTIVE CONDITIONS DURING THE VOCAR EXPERIMENT METHODOLOGIES FOR ESTIMATING THE VERTICAL PROFILE OF REELECTIVITY THROUGH C-BAND DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR METHODS FOR THE RETRIEVAL OF ATMOSPHERIC STATE PARAMETERS FROM HIGH RESOLUTION SPECTRAL RADIANCE DATA MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER, SURFACE FLUXES, AND INFRARED IMAGERY MEASURED FROM A BLIMP OVER THE OCEAN MICROWAVE EFFECTIVE PERMITTIVITY MODEL OF MEDIA OF DIALECTRIC PARTICLES AND APPLICATIONS TO DRY AND WET SNOW MICROWAVE EMISSION FROM NEW AND YOUNG CONGELATION SALINE ICE MICROWAVE LJMB SOUNDING OF THE EARTHS ATMOSPHERE: UARS RESULTS AND EOS PLANS MICROWAVE RADIATION PULSE SCATTERING BY A WATER DROP IN THE ATMOSPHERE MICROWAVE RADIOMETRY ON BARE SOILS : COMPARISON OF VARIOUS EMISSION MODELS OF LAYERED MEDIA WITH MEASUREMENTS MICROWAVE SCATTERING DISTRIBUTIONS FROM A RAIN-ROUGHENED WATER SURFACE: MEASUREMENTS AND MODELING MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM FOREST CANOPIES MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODEL FOR GRASSLAND AND SHORT VEGETATION CANOPIES MICROWAVE SOIL MOISTURE PREDICTION THROUGH CORN IN WASHITA 92 MICROWAVE SPATIAL SPECTRA OF OCEAN-ATMOSPHERE SYSTEM MICROWAVE STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF BRINE LAYERS ON HOMOGENEOUS SALINE ICE SHEETS MIDDLE ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR and OZONE RETRIEVALS FROM THE MM-WAVE ATMOSPHERIC SOUNDER (MAS) SHUTTLE EXPERIMENT MILLIMETER WAVE DETECTION OF MESOSPHERIC OZONE USING A HIGH RESOLUTION CHIRP TRANSFORM SPECTROMETER BACKEND MILLIMETER WAVE MEASUREMENTS AT THE ARCTIC NDSC STATION NY-ALESUND IN THE WINTERS 1992/93 AND 1993/94 MILLIMETER WAVE SCATTERING FROM ICE CRYSTAL DISTRIBUTIONS MILLIMETERWAVE MEASUREMENTS OF TRACE GASES AT THE JUNGFRAUJOCH STATION MIRAS, A Two-Dimensional Aperture Synthese Radiometer MODEL FOR ESTIMATING SURFACE ROUGHNESS OF LEVEL AND RIDGED SEA ICE USINg ERS-1 SAR MODEL VALIDATION FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY OF CROPS AT FELTWELL, UK MODEL-BASED FEATURE CLASSIFICATION AND CHANGE DETECTION MODELING INTERPRETATION OF SCATTERING FROM SNOW-COVERED SEA ICE There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-84IA054-000904-B035-305http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_7.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190256 text/html 22568HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:01:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 7) Document Keyword: Title (Page 7) Select a Title MODELING SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN SATELLITE-BASED ESTIMATES OF LEAF AREA INDEX USING A SCENE SIMULATION MODEL MODELING SURFACE EFFECTS WITH THE PARABOLIC EQUATION METHOD MODELING THE NEAR-SURFACE OCEANIC WIND VORTICITY MODELLING AND MODEL VERIFICATION OF THE SPECTRAL REFLECTANCE OF SOIL UNDER VARYING MOISTURE CONDITIONS MODELLING CANOPY RADIATIVE TEMPERATURE SURFACE AND FLUX ESTIMATION MODELLING OF RADIOWAVE PROPAGATION IN A DISTURBED IONOSPHERE DURING SEISMIC ACTIVITY MONITORING AGRICULTURAL SURFACES USING ERS-1 MULTITEMPORAL SAR DATA. MONITORING ALPINE SNOW COVER VARIATIONS USING NOAA-AVHRR DATA MONITORING AND MODELING SEMI-ARID LANDSCAPE RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE MONITORING ARID LAND SURFACES CHANGES: OPTICAL REMOTE SENSING OF THE NON-VEGETATED COMPONENT MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA MONITORING OF CARBON RELEASE IN ALAS- BOREAL FORESTS MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR MONITORING THE STRATOSPHERIC OZONE PROFILE WITH GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MONITORING THE TOTAL SOLAR IRAADIANCE OF THE GEOSPHERE MONOSTATIC POLARIMETRIC CALIBRATION VIA TARGET SPINOR X. Fbregas, A. Broquetas. J. Romeu, L. Jofre E.T.S. Ing. Telecomunicacin Barcelona P.O.Box 30002, 08080 Barcelona, Spain MONTE CARLO SIMULATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING FROM A HETEROGENEOUS TWO-COMPONENT MEDIUM MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS OF THE EXTINCTION RATE OF DENSELY PACKED SPHERES WITH CLUSTERED AND NON-CLUSTERED GEOMETRIES BASED ON SOLUTION OF MAXWELLS EQUATIONS MOTION COMPENSATION FOR AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRIC SAR MOTION COMPENSATION FOR AIRBORNE SAR BASED ON INERTIAL DATA, RDM AND GPS MULTI-DIMENSI0NAL RADIATIVE TRANSFER COMPUTATIONS USING A SCALABLE PARALLEL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DISCRETE-ORDINATES METHOD MULTI-FREQUENCY, POLARlMETRIC AND INTERFEROMETRIC SAR OBSERVATIONS OF OCEAN FEATURES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT MULTI-SCALE TEXTURE IN SAR IMAGERY: LANDSCAPE DYNAMICS OF THE PANTANAL, BRAZIL MULTI-STAND RADAR MODELING FROM PRE-BOREAS EXPERIMENT MULTI-TEMPORAL COMPARISONS OF ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA FOR LAND APPLICATIONS MULTICANAL DATA ACQUISITION SYSTEM FOR REMOTE SENSING OF THE PHENOMENA. MULTIPLE SCATTERING FROM RANDOM ROUGH SURFACES BASED ON A DETERMINISTIC FULL WAVE MODEL MULTISCALE ANALYSIS OF SHAPES APPLIED TO THERMAL INFRARED SEA SURFACE IMAGES MULTISCALE OBJECTS DETECTING IN THE MM - WAVE IMAGING OF OCEAN SURFACE. MULTISPECTRAL CLASSIFICATION BY A MODULAR NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE MULTISPECTRAL LANDSAT IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING NEURAL NETWORKS AND MULTI-EXPERTS APPROACHES MULTISPECTRAL MM-WAVE DIAGNOSTICS OF TWO COUPLED OCEANIC EDDIES (ROSSBY SOLITON) MULTITEMPORAL CLASSIFICATION OF TEXAS AVHRR IMAGERY USING HARMONIC COMPONENTS Measurements of Surface Wind on the Ocean Using an Airborne Radar Looking at Small Incidence Angles Model of Complex Dielectric Constant of Wet and Frozen Soil in the 1-40 GHZ Frequency Range Multitemporal Analysis of ERS-1 SAR and Landsat TM Data for Geologic Studies NASA-SPONSORED EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH INITIATIVE NDS, A PORTABLE SOFTWARE TOOL FOR VISUALIZATION AND ANALYSIS OF 3D RADAR IMAGES NDVI SENSITIVITY TO ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR AS A FUNCTION OF SPECTRAL BANDWIDTH NEURAL NETWORK ADAPTIVE WAVELET CLASSIFICATION OF RADAR TARGETS NEURAL NETWORK-BASED INVERSION TECHNIQUE FOR SAR IMAGES OF OCEAN SURFACE WAVES NEURAL NETWORKS FOR COARSE-SCALE LAND-COVER CHARACTERIZATION USING MULTISOURCE DATA: ASSESSMENT AND COMPARISON TO A BIOPHYSICAL THRESHOLDlNG TECHNIQUE NEW ARRANGEMENT FOR REMOTE VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC INHOMOGENEITIES BY IMAGING AND DATA PROCESSING NEW CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION OF FILTERS USED FOR SPECKLE REMOVAL IN SAR IMAGES USING FUZZY LOGIC NEW FEATURES FOR TEXTURE ANALYSIS NEW FEATURES IN THE TRANSMISSION OF LIGHT THROUGH THIN METAL FILMS WITH RANDOMLY ROUGH SURFACES NEW PERSPECTIVES ON ACTIVE TECTONICS: OBSERVING FAULT MOTION, MAPPING EARTHQUAKE STRAIN FIELDS, AND VISUALIZING SEISMIC EVENTS IN MULTIPLE DIMENSIONS USING SATELLITE IMAGERY AND GEOPHYSICAL DATA BASES NEW STATISTICS FORMULATION FOR INHOMOGENEOUS OCEAN SURFACE NIST TRACEABLE CALIBRATION SYSTEM FOR SURFACE AND SUBMERSIBLE SENSORS NO SIGNIFICANT TREND IN ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC ICE CONCENTRATIONS FROM 1973 TO 1991 NOAA AVHRR DATA PROCESSING: REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS IN OPERATIONAL ALGORITHMS NOISE RESISTANT ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES FOR SAR IMAGE REGISTRATION AND STEREO MATCHING NONLINEAR STATISTICAL PRECIPITATION RETRIEVALS USING SIMULATED PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY NONLOCAL EFFECTS OF INTERNAL WAVES ON THE OCEAN SURFACE NONSTATISTICAL METHOD OF TEMPERATURE PROFILE RETRIEVAL BY SATELLITE RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS IN OXYGEN SPECTRA NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTIVE PROPAGATION CONSTANT OF A SPACE WHERE SMALL SPHERES WITH HIGH PERMITTIVITY ARE RANDOMLY DISTRIBUTED NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF WAVE SCATTERING FROM A CONDUCTING CYLINDER IN TURBULENT MEDIA NUMERICAL PREDICTION OF SHADOWING IN EM SCATTERING FROM A ROUGH OCEAN WAVE AT GRAZING INCIDENCE NUMERICAL SIMULATION OF OMNIDIRECTIONAL SCATTERING FROM THREE-DIMENSIONAL RANDOMLY ROUGH DIELECTRIC SURFACES Neural Network Inversion of Bidirectional Reflectance OBSERVATIONS AND MODELING OF OCEAN RADIANT HEATING DURING TOGA/COARE OBSERVATIONS OF A MCS WITH A DUAL-POLARIZATION RADAR OBSERVATIONS OF INTERNAL WAVES AT X AND KA BANDS, AND COMPARISON WITH MODEL CALCULATIONS OBSERVATIONS OF STRATOSPHERIC COMPOSITION AND SIRUCTURE BY THE CRYOGENIC LIMB ARRAY ETALON SPECTROMETER (CLAES) ON UARS OBSERVED AND SIMULATED ICE MOTION FOR AN ANNUAL CYCLE IN THE BEAUFORT SEA OBSERVING SEASONAL TRANSITIONS ON SEA ICE IN THE ARCTIC USING THE ERS-1 SAR OCEAN MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM THE LOGAN EXPERIMENT OCEAN SURFACE IMAGING WITH A FOCUSED PHASED ARRAY IMAGING RADAR (FOPAIR) OCEAN WAVE PROPERTIES USING A Ka-BAND 3-BEAM RADAR AND THE LONGUET-HIGGTHS APPROACH OIL LEAKAGE EXPANSION AND SIMULATION MODEL BASED ON FRACTAL TECHNIQUES ON BOARD DATA COMPRESSION DEVICE FOR SAR APPLICATION ON MINIMIZING IMAGING LATENCY TIME FOR RADARSAT III ON OPPORTUNITY OF ASSESSMENT OF UNDERWATER SOLAR RADIATION IN THE GLOBAL OCEAN ON SATELLITE DATA. ON REMOTE SENSING OF SST FROM SPACE ON THE DERIVATION OF COSEISMIC DISPLACEMENT FIELDS USING DIFFERENTIAL RADAR INTERFEROMETRY: THE LANDERS EARTHQUAKE ON THE EFFECT OF SOIL SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON THE RADAR BACKSCATTER RESPONSES TO SOIL MOISTURE ON THE HIGH-CONTRAST SPECTRAL VARIATIONS OF SEA SURFACE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURE AT MM-WAVE ON THE INFORMATION CONTENT OF MULTIPLE VIEW ANGLE (MVA) ASAS IMAGES FOR LAND COVER MAPPING ON THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION FOR INVERTING ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SPECTRA INTO OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA ON THE REMOTE SENSING OF CLOUDS ON THE ROLE OF TARGET HELICITY IN POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATA ANALYSIS AND INTERPRETATION ON THE USE OF THE MULTILOOK AMPLITUDE K DISTRIBUTION FOR SAR IMAGE ANALYSIS ON-LINE COMPLEX PERMITTIVITY MEASUREMENTS FOR GROUND PENETRATING RADAR OPERATING DECAMETER RASS NEAR N.NOVGOROD AND ITS PERSPECTIVES CONNECTED WITH POWERFUL HF-RADAR "SURA" OPERATIONAL PROCESSING OF DMSP SPECIAL SENSOR MICROWAVE,II=GER DATA AT ELEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER (FNMOC): ALGORITHM TRANSITIONS OPERATIONAL USE OF SATELLITE DATA FOR SEA ICE ANALYSIS AT THE US AND CANADIAN NATIONAL ICE CENTERS OPERATIONAL USE OF SSM/I ICE CONCENTRATION IN THE INITIALIZATION OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL OPTICAL AND MICROWAVE RESPONSE TO THERMALLY DYNAMIC SALINE ICE SHEETS OPTICAL AND SEASONAL VARIATIONS ALONG THE US MEXICO BORDER: AN ANALYSIS WITH LANDSAT TM IMAGERY OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MULTIYEAR AND FIRST YEAR SEA ICE OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS OPTIMAL ESTIMATION OF RAIN RATE PROFILES FROM SINGLE-FREQUENCY RADAR ECHOES OPTIMIZATION METHOD FOR B/H RATIO DETERMINATION TAKING OCCLUSION EFFECT AND MTF DEGRADATION DUE TO ATMOSPHERE INTO ACCOUNT OPTIMIZATION OF THE SCAN GEOMETRY OF IMAGING MICROWAVE RADIOMETER OPTIMUM FREQUENCY OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENTS OF ATTENUATION, PATH DELAY AND COLUMNAR CONTENT OF WATER VAPOR OPTIMUM POLARIZATIONS FOR RADAR METEOROLOGY ORBIT REFINEMENT WITH APPLICATIONS TO REMOTE SENSING Observations of Upper Stratospheric Short Period Gravity Waves Using the Jicamarca VHF Radar On the Dependence of Radar Signatures of Surface Current Variations on the Azimuthal Radar Look Direction Operational Atmospheric Correction of AVHRR Visible and Near Infrared Data There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-85IA054-000904-B035-350http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_8.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190322 text/html 21741HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:01:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 8) Document Keyword: Title (Page 8) Select a Title P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA PASSIVE MICROWAVE HUMIDITY PROFILE RETRIEVALS USING NEURAL NETWORKS PASSIVE MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION BIOMASS PECULIARITIES OF THE X-BAND RADAR SIGNAL SCATTERED BY THE SEA SURFACE AT SMALL GRAZING ANGLES PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE SIR-C GROUND DATA PROCESSOR SYSTEM PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF INTERFEROMETRIC SAR IMAGE- REGISTRATION TECHNIQUES PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MULTISPECTRAL ANALYSIS FOR SURFACE MATERIAL CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE VERIFICATION OF SPECTRAL AND PANCHROMATIC MODULES OF THE MOMS-02 SENSOR FLOWN ABOARD STS-55 / D2-MISSION PERFORMANCES OF THE 3D-SAR IMAGERY PHASE CORRECTION ALGORITHMS FOR THE AIRBORNE EMISSIONS SPECTROMETER (AES) PHASE UNWRAPPING FOR SAR INTERFEROMETRY PHASE-UNWRAPPING OF SAR INTERFEROGRAM WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY OR MULTI-BASELINE PHENOLOGICAL CHANGES IN NEEDLE FLUORESCENCE OF DAMAGED AND UNDAMAGED NORWAY SPRUCE TREES PHYSICS BASED ANALYSIS/SYNTHESIS OF INFRARED IMAGERY POINT PROCESS MODELS FOR WEATHER RADAR IMAGES POLARIMETRIC BACKSCATTERING FROM THIN SALINE ICE RELATED TO ICE PHYSICAL AND MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS POLARIMETRIC PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF OCEAN WIND VECTORS POLARIMETRIC RADAR IMAGERY OF THE OCEAN AT LOW GRAZING ANGLES UNDER UNSTABLE ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS. POLARIMETRIC RADAR SIGNATURES OF OIL SLICKS FOR MEASURING SLICK THICKNESS POLARIMETRlC BACKSCATTERING SIGNATURES FROM THIN SALINE ICE UNDER CONTROLLED LABORATORY CONDITIONS POLARIZATION EFFECTS IN RADAR REFLECTION FROM SURFACES WITH PERIODIC ROUGHNESS PRACTICAL USE OF ERS-1 SAR IMAGES IN POLLUTION MONITORING PRECISE GEOMETRIC REGISTRATION OF ASAS AIRBORNE DATA: IMPACTS AND RESULTS PRECISE SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL MEASUREMENT OF GRAVITY-CAPILLARY WAVES AND ASSOCIATED RADAR BACKSCATTER PREDICTING LASFR BACKSCATTER WITH PASSIVE MULTIANGLE MEASUREMENTS OF A PLAYA FOR LITE CALIBRATION PREDICTION OF IMAGE PERFORMANCE AND REAL-TIME QUALITY IMPROVEMENT FOR THE SIR-C/X-SAR SRL-1 MISSION PREDICTIVE MODELING OF TROPHIC STATUS OF A TROPICAL RESERVOIR USING GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS OF CHLORINE MONOXIDE MEASUREMENTS MADE BY THE GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RECEIVER OF THE PLATEAU DE BURE, FRANCE PRESENTING THE NASAGSFC RAIN-SEA INTERACTION FACILITY PRF Ambiguity Determination for Radarsat ScanSAR System PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS FOR CHANGE DETECTION ON POLARIMETRIC MULTITEMPORAL SAR DATA PROFILING THE THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF THE ATMOSPHERE WITH HIGH SPECTRUM RESOLUTION INFRARED RADIANCE MEASUREMENTS PROGRESS IN POLAR OCEANS RESEARCH USING ERS-1 DATA PROGRESS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CCRS ALONG-TRACK INTERFEROMETER PROPOSED ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION FOR THE SOLAR-REFLECTIVE BANDS OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER PULSE BROADENING OF THE ENHANCED BACKSCATTERING FROM ROUGH SURFACES PULSE-BASED INTERNAL CALIBRATION OF POLARIMETRIC SAR Passive Microwave Imagery of Hurricanes Near 118 GHz: Thermal and Precipitation Structure Performance Evaluation of Radio Frequency of Cassini Radar Polarimetric Modeling and Parameter Estimation QUANTIFYING CROP RESIDUE COVER BY FLUORESCENCE IMAGING QUEST: AN ENVIRONMENT FOR CONTENT-BASED ACCESS TO GEOSCIENCE DATASETS Queries and Their Application to Reasoning With Remote Sensing and GIS RADAR BACKSCATTERING STUDIES OF RICE FIELDS USING ERS-1 SAR DATA RADAR CROSS SECTION OF THE OCEAN SURFACE WHEN SURFACE FILMS ARE PRESENT: A MODEL CALCULATION USING MARANGONI WAVE DAMPING THEORY RADAR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND MULTIRESOLUTION ANALYSIS RADAR MEASUREMENTS OVER THE FRENCH GUIANA MANGROVE RADAR OBSERVATIONS OF BREAKING WAVES AT LOW GRAZING ANGLES RADAR SATELLITE SNOWMELT DETECTION IN THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ANTHONY WANKIEWICZ MAXFIELD RADAR SCATTERING BY VOLCANIC DEBRIS FLOW SURFACE ANALOGUES RADAR SENSING OF HYDROCARBON GAS SEEPAGE RADAR TARGET DECOMPOSITION THEOREMS AND UNSUPERVIZED CLASSIFICATION OF FULL POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA RADIATIVE AND MICROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CIRRUS OBSERVED BY REMOTE SENSORS AT FIRE II RADIATIVE TRANSFER IN ANISOTROPICALLY SCATTERING ATMOSPHERES: THE FINITE ELEMENT METHOD RADIATIVE TRANSFER IN SEA ICE AND THE MEASUREMENT OF IN-ICE OFTICAL PROFILES RADIATIVE TRANSFER THEORY FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE RADIOBRIGHTNESS SIGNATURES OF ENERGY BALANCE PROCESSES: MELT/FREEZE CYCLES IN SNOW AND PRAIRIE GRASS COVERED GROUND RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF AIRBORNE SAR IMAGERY RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF FAST-DELIVERY SAR IMAGES RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF THE LANDSAT-7 ENHANCED THEMATIC MAPPER + RADIOSITY BASED MODEL FOR TERRAIN EFFECTS ON MULTI-ANGULAR VIEWS RAIN RATE ESTIMATION FROM ATTENUATION MEASUREMENTS USING A 35 GHZ DUAL POLARIZATION PROPAGATION LINK RAINRATE ESTIMATION IN THE PRESENCE OF HAIL USING S-BAND SPECIFIC DIFFERENTIAL PHASE RAMAN LIDAR PROFILING OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR RAPID LINE-BY-LINE CALCULATION OF SPECTRAL ABSORPTION COEFFICIENTS RAY PATHS IN REFRACTIVE RANDOM MEDIA REAL-TIME HIGH RESOLUTION RESTORATION OF ATMOSPHERICALLY-BLURRED IMAGES RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SUB-MESOSCALE OCEAN CURRENTS FIELD BASED ON ALMAZ-1 SAR DATA RECONSTRUCTION OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL VELOCITY FIELDS THROUGH DOPPLER WEATHER RADAR DATA REGIONALIZATION OF SOIL PHYSICAL PARAMETERS USING ERS-1 PRI SAR DATA RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE RELATIONS BETWEEN OPTICAL AND PASSIVE MICROWAVE VEGETATION INDICES TO CROP BIOMASS CHARACTERISTICS RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST-HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN LEAF CHEMISTRY AND REFLECTANCE FOR PLANT SPECIES FROM JASPER RIDGE, CALIFORNIA RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST. HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL REMOTE MEASUREMENTS AND COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION REMOTE MONITORING OF ARID AND SEMI-ARID LANDS REMOTE MONITORING OF SHIFTING SANDS AND VEGETATION COVER IN ARID REGIONS REMOTE SENSING AND SYNCHRONOUS LAND SURFACE MEASUREMENTS OF SOIL MOISTURE AND SOIL TEMPERATURE REMOTE SENSING NEW TECTONICS DATA OF THE ARABIAN PLATE REMOTE SENSING OF CURRENT-WAVE INTERACTION WITH SIR-C/X-SAR (SRL-I) AT THE GULF STREAM SUPERSITE REMOTE SENSING OF DISTANT OBJECTS IN A RANDOM MEDIUM UNDER DOUBLE PASSAGE CONDITIONS REMOTE SENSING OF FOREST STRUCTURE AND CHANGE USING ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS REMOTE SENSING OF HUMIDITY PROFILES WITH PASSIVE IR SOUNDERS: HIRS AND AIRS REMOTE SENSING OF PAR INTERCEPTION AND NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION IN TREMBLING ASPEN AND BLACK SPRUCE STANDS REMOTE SENSING OF STRATOSPHERIC OZONE BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS REMOTE SENSING OF TROPOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY REMOTE SENSING THROUGH CIRRUS CLOUDS: VISUAL AND SUB-VISUAL REPRESENTING FLUXES IN THE ATMOSPHERIC PLANETARY BOUNDARY LAYER ABOVE HETEROGENE0US SURFACES RESAMPLING METHODS OF STATISTICAL INFERENCE RESULTS FROM AN ERS-1 PILOT APPLICATION PROJECT FOR POLAR OPERATIONS RESULTS FROM THE 1993 LOGAN (LOW GRAZING ANGLE) RADAR EXPERIMENT RESULTS OF 1993 REPEAT-PASS SAR INTERFEROMETRY EXPERIMENTS RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA RETRIEVAL OF MESOSPHERIC OZONE FROM GROUNDBASED MILLIMETER WAVE OBSERVATIONS RETRIEVAL OF PROPAGATION INDUCED ATTENUATION FROM RADAR DERIVED ACCUMULATED DIFFERENTIAL PHASE MEASUREMENTS RETRIEVAL OF RAINRATE OVER ROUGH SEA SURFACES AS MEASURED BY THE ADVANCED MICROWAVE PRECIPITATION RADIOMETER (AMPR) RETRIEVAL OF SEMI-ARID REGION PARAMETERS FROM PASSIVE MEASUREMENTS USING NEURAL NETWORKS WITHIN A BAYESIAN FRAMEWORK RETRIEVAL OF SNOW AND SEA ICE PARAMETERS FROM SSM/I DATA RETRIEVAL OF SURFACE REFLECTANCE AND ATMOSPHERIC PROPERTIES USING ASAS IMAGERY There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-86IA054-000904-B035-386http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_9.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190338 text/html 22088HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:02:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 9) Document Keyword: Title (Page 9) Select a Title RETRIEVAL OF TROPOSPHERIC OZONE FROM SIMULATIONS OF SPECTRAL RADIANCES AS OBSERVED FROM SPACE RETRIEVAL OF WATER VAPOR PROFILES USING MEASUREMENTS FROM A MILLIMETER-WAVE IMAGING RADIOMETER RETRIEVING CIRRUS CLOUD MICROPHYSICAL PARAMETERS FROM LIDAR AND RADAR BACKSCATTER ROBUST WATER TEMPERATURE RETRIEVAL USING MULTISPECTRAL AND MULTI-ANGULAR IR MEASUREMENTS ROBUSTNESS OF A MATHEMATICAL SYMBIOTIC SYSTEM ON SEGMENTING SAR IMAGERY Radar Backscatter Related to Ocean Wave Spectrum Restoration of Textural Properties in SAR Images Using Second Order Statistics Retrieval of Profiles of Carbon Monoxide and Total Methane Columns From Mopitt Measurements SAR Derived Sea Ice Thickness During ICEX92 SAR IMAGE FILTERING WITH THE ICM ALGORITflM SAR SIMULATION OF NATURAL LANDSCAPES SAR TERRAIN CORRECTION FOR IMPROVED SOIL MOISTURE ESTIMATION IN A MOUNTAIN WATERSHED SAT-GIS: A CUSTOMIZED SYSTEM FOR SATELLITE IMAGE PROCESSING, DIGITAL CARTOGRAPHY AND TOPOGRAPHIC ANALYSES IN A GIS ENVIRONMENT, BASED UPON A WORLDWIDE SEAMLESS DATABASE SATELLITE IMAGE CLASSIFICATION BASED ON MULTI-SOURCE INFORMATION-FUSION WITH POSSIBILITY THEORY SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS92 SATELLITE OBSERVATION OF SURFACE FORCING OVER THE WARM POOL SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX92 SCALING EFFECTS ON BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE MEASUREMENTS OVER AGRICULTURAL SURFACES SCAN PREDICTIVE VECTOR QUANTIZATION OF MULTISPECTRAL IMAGES SCANNING RADAR ALTIMETER MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE MEAN SQUARE SLOPE AND DIRECTIONAL WAVE SPECTRA DURING TOGA COARE SCANSAR PROCESSING USING THE FASTSCAN SYSTEM SCANSAR SIMULATION AND PROCESSING USING ERS-1 DATA SCATTERING FROM BURIED DlELECTRIC OBJECTS IN THE PRESENCE OF AN AIR-EARTH INTERFACE: A METHOD OF MOMENTS TECHNIQUE SCATTERING FROM OPEN CAVATIES IN A PERFECTLY CONDUCTING SURFACE SCATTERING OF MILLIMETER RADI0WAVES BY DRY SNOWFLAKES SEA SPIKES: THE EMPIRICAL DEPENDENCE OF K-DISTRIBUTION PARAMETERS ON SYSTEM AND ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS SEASONAL CHANGES OBSERVED IN AVIR1S IMAGES OF JASPER RIDGE, CALIFORNIA SEASONAL EFFECTS ON C- AND X-BAND BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF FINNISH BOREAL FORESTS SEAWIFS INTERCALIBRATION ROUND ROBIN EXPERIMENTS SEAWINDS: A SCANNING SCATTEROMETER FOR ADEOS II-- SCIENCE OVERVIEW SEGMENTATION AND INTERPRETATION OF NOAA-AVHRR MULTI-TEMPORAL NDVI BASED DATA SETS IN TEMPERATE REGIONS SEGMENTATION BASED CHANGE DETECTION IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES SEGMENTATION OF COMBINED HIGH RESOLUTION OPTICAL AND RADAR IMAGERY FOR THE DETERMINATION OF FIELD INHOMOGENITIES SEGMENTATION OF POLARIMETRIC AIRSAR-DATA FOR SOIL MOISTURE DETERMINATION IN AN AGRICULATURAL AREA SELF-CONSISTENT MEASUREMENTS OF DIFFERENTIAL PHASE AND DIFFERENTIAL REFLECTIVlTY IN RAIN SEMI-EMPIRICAL METHOD FOR ESTIMATION OF FOREST BIOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES FROM MULTIFREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR SENSING OF RADIO REFLECTIVITY AND AEROSOL EXTINCTION SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF A DISTRIBUTED FIBER OPTIC SENSOR FOR REMOTE TEMPERATURE MONITORING SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF SHORTWAVE ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION THROUGH COMBINED RADIATIVE TRANSFER AND MULTI-ANGULAR METHODS SENSITIVITY OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTERING TO CROP BIOMASS SENSITIVITY STUDIES ON RETRIEVALS OF TEMPERATURE AND GAS CONCENTRATIONS CARRIED OUT ON SIMULATED AES SPECTRA OF UPWELLING RADIATION ATMOSPHERIC RADIATION SENSOR REQUIREMENTS FOR TREATY VERIFICATION AND CRISIS MONITORING SET THEORETIC ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES FOR INCORPORATING DIFFUSION EFFECTS IN GEOTOMOGRAPHY SHIP BORNE REMOTE SENSING OF SUB-MESOSCALE OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES ALONG THE NORTH BOUNDARY OF THE GULF STREAM. SHIPBOARD DOPPLER RADAR OBSERVATIONS OF CONVECTION OBSERVED DURING TOGA COARE SHIPBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER AND SCATTEROMETER MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE PATTERNS DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT SHIPWAKE DETECTION AND CHARACTERIZATION IN SAR IMAGES USING WAVELET TRANSFORM SIMULATION OF A POLARIMETRIC RANDOM NOISE/SPREAD SPECTRUM RADAR FOR SUBSURFACE PROBING APPLICATIONS SIMULATION OF MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURES USING A COUPLED LAND-SURFACE-CANOPY-ATMOSPHERE MODEL SIMULATION OF RADARSAT SCANSAR FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS SIMULATION OF SAR IMAGES OF SUBMESOSCALE OCEAN PHENOMENA SIMULATION OF SAR RAW DATA USING SISAR SIMULATION OF THE EMERGENT RADIATION FROM THE TOP OF ATMOSPHERE, WERE THE BROKEN CIRRUS LAYER IS CONSIDERED SIMULATION OF THE RADAR PROBING OF THE MARTIAN SUBSURFACE STRUCTURE SIMULATION OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL OCEAN WAVE IMAGING BY AN INTERFEROMETRIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR SIMULATION OF VISIBLE AND IR IMAGERY FOR GOES SIMULATION STUDY OF A MICROWAVE RADIOMETRIC TEMPERATURE PROFILER FOR THE ANTARCTIC ATMOSPHERE SIMULTANEOUS EVALUATION OF SPECTRAL FEATURELESS CONSTITUENTS IN SOILS USING NEAR INFRARED ANALYSIS (NIRA) TECHNIQUE SLICK DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES SMALL CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR HYPERSPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING DATA SMALL SLOPE APPROXIMATION FOR MICROWAVE POLARIMETRIC OBSERVATION OF THE SEA SURFACE SMOOTHING SAR IMAGES WITH NEURAL NETWORKS SNOW COVER CLASSIFICATION USING MlLLIMETER-WAVE RADAR IMAGERY SNOWCOVER MAPPING WITH THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER SOIL MOISTURE MISSION: CONCEPTUAL DESIGN OF AN ACTIVE/PASSIVE SYNTHETIC APERTURE SYSTEM SOIL MOISTURE PROFILE REMOTE SENSING: STABILITY AND OBSERVABILITY OF THE INVERSE-PROBLEM SOIL MOISTURE PROFILE RETRIEVAL BY ASSIMILATION OF MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING AND SURFACE OBSERVATIONS SOIL ROUGHNESS INDEXES USE OF GEOSTATISTIC AND LASER REMOTE SENSING MEASURE SOLAR ACTIVITY, TROPICAL CYCLONES AND EARTHQUAKES SOLAR-RADIATION-BASED ABSOLUTE CALIBRATION OF OPTICAL SENSORS: SeaWiFS AND A DAEDALUS 1268 SOLUTION OF THE RADIO REFRACTION INVERSE PROBLEM AND DETERMINATION OF THE PATH DELAY SOLVING REMOTE SENSING INVERSE PROBLEMS USING BAYESIAN MODELING TO INCORPORATE INFORMATION SOURCES SOME ASPECTS OF CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE APPLICATION IN REMOTE SENSING SOME FEATURES OF THE BACKSCATTERED FROM THE SEA SURFACE RADAR SIGNAL FREQUENCY DOPPLER-SHIFT DISTRIBUTION STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS SPACE AND TIME ALIASING STRUCTURE IN MEAN POLAR-ORBITING SATELLITE DATA SPACE SHUTTLE EARTH OBSERVATIONS DIGITAL DATA BASE SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY ON LASER DISC: A WINNING COMBINATION FOR THE CLASSROOM SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY-A CLASSROOM RESOURCE SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS DESIGNS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR OCEAN WIND REMOTE SENSING SPACEBORNE SAR CALIBRATION STUDIES: PREPARATION FOR RADARSAT SPATIAL AND SPECTRAL DECORRELATION OF LANDSAT-TM IMAGERY FOR LOSSLESS DATA COMPRESSION SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CORRELATION OF LOGAN-1 HIGH-RESOLUTION RADAR SEA CLUTTER DATA SPATIAL TEXTURE IN AIRSAR IMAGE OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET SPATIAL VARIATION OF EVAPORATION OVER THE HAPEX-SAHEL SOUTHERN SUPER SITE DERIVED FROM SATELLITE DATA SPECTRAL BAND AND DETECTOR OPTIMIZATION FOR ATMOSPHERIC SOUNDING INTERFEROMETERS SPECTRAL CALIBRATION OF AN IMAGING SPECTROMETER INFLIGHT USING SOLAR AND ATMOSPHERIC ABSORPTION BANDS SPECTRAL ERROR CHARACTERIZATION AND DATABASE DEVELOPMENT SPECTRAL SCATTERING PROPERTIES OF PINUS SYLVESTRIS SHOOTS AND NEEDLES SPOT3: FIRST IN FLIGHT RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION RESULTS SSM/I CENTER-FIXES AND INTENSITIES OF TROPICAL STORMS STATISTICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE VARIABILITY OF ATMOSPHERIC PROPAGATION EFFECTS IN THE SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA COASTAL AREA STATISTICAL BEHAVIOR OF A MULTIPARAMETER POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATASET STATISTICAL DISTRIBUTIONS OF PARTIALLY DEVELOPED SPECKLE BASED ON A SMALL NUMBER OF CONSTANT SCATTERERS WITH RANDOM PHASE STATISTICAL MODELS FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA STATISTICS OF BACKSCATTERING SOURCE DISTRIBUTION OF BOREAL CONIFEROUS FORESTS AT C- AND X-BAND STATISTICS OF OCEANIC RAINFALL TO HELP INTERPRET TRMM DATA STATUS OF ESTAR VALIDATION: RESULTS FROM WASHITA-92 STEADY-STATE CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE RED/FAR-RED EMISSION RATIO INCREASES DETECTED FROM PINUS STROBUS AFTER SHORT-TERM OZONE EXPOSURE STEREO PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF AEROSOL TRANSPORT AND DIFFUSION STEREO RADAR METEOROLOGY: A NEW APPROACH TO PROCESS DATA FROM AIRBORNE OR GROUND BASED WEATHER RADARS There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-87IA054-000906-B014-20http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_10.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190414 text/html 22554HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:02:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 10) Document Keyword: Title (Page 10) Select a Title STRATOSPHERIC AND MESOSPlHERIC WATER VAPOR DISTRIBUIION OVER NORTHERN EUROPE MEASURED WITH AN AIRBORNE A-WAVE SENSOR STRATOSPHERIC OZONE MEASUREMENTS MADE BY A GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETER AT THE BORDEAUX OBSERVATORY, FRANCE STUDIES OF LARGE SCALE RANDOM ROUGH SURFACE PROBLEMS WITH THE SPARSE-MATRIX FLAT-SURFACE ITERATIVE APPROACH STUDIES OF RADIATIVELY-IMPORTANT CLOUDS WITH 8-MILLIMETER WA=ENGTH DOPPLER RADAR STUDIES ON PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF ICE AND LIQUID WATER PATHS STUDIES ON POLARIZATION SYNTHESIS AND DIFFERENTIAL BACKSCATTER PHASE OBSERVATIONS STUDY OF THE TEMPORAL NATURE OF THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES OF LEADS DURING SPRING SUNGLITTER RADIANCE MODULATION OF SUBMARINE SAND WAVES AND INTERNAL WAVES SURFACE CHARACTERIZATION USING REGULARITY MODELS AND FREQUENCY DIVERSE MEASUREMENTS SURFACE ELEVATION CHANGES OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET FROM AN ANALYSIS OF SEASAT & GEOSAT ALTIMETER DATA SYNERGISTIC USE OF REMOTELY SENSED DATA FOR EVALUATION OF THE BOUNDARY LAYER IN SYNOPTIC STORMS AND FRONTS SYNERGY BETWEEN OPTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING Salsa-Mex: Semi-Arid Land-Surface-Atmospheric Mountain Experiment Sea Ice Characterization With Millimeter Wave Radars and Low Frequency Microwave Radiometers Sea Ice Matching From SAR Arctic Data Using Neural Networks Sea-Ice Velocity Fields Estimation on Ross Sea AVHRR Images Seasonal Changes in Dynamic Heights Based on Altimetric Data Simultaneous Detection of Multiple Greenhouse Gases Using Long-Path Spectrometers Spatial Inhomogeneities of Rain Brightness Temperature and the Effect of Averaging for Observations by Satellite Microwave Radiometers Studies of a C-Band Model Function for Friction for Friction Velocity Using Coincident TEACHING WITH SATELLITE DIRECT READOUT TECTONICS AND GEODYNAMICS OF THE EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN: AN EXAMPLE OF COMPLEX INTERPRETATION OF THE GEOLOGICAL-GEOPHYSICAL DATA TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE PROFILES OF THE MIDDLE ATMOSPHERE RETRIEVED FROM MILLIMETER WAVE ATMOSPHERIC SOUNDER (MAS) ONBOARD THE SPACE SHUTTLE MISSION ATLAS-1 TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TOPOGRAPIlY, ATMOSPIIEUC WATER VAPOR, LIQUID WATER AND ENDMEMBER ABUNDANCES OF VEGETATION DETERMINED USING AVIRIS TEMPORAL EVOLUTIONA OF PHYSICAL PARAMETERS OVER SALT/HAPEX-SAHEL SITE TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN RADAR BACKSCATTER COEFFICIENTS OF VEGETATION AND SOIL MEDIA TERRAIN-ADAPTIVE MULTlSPECTRAL BANDWIDTH COMPRESSION TESTING OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL IN A SEA ICE FORECASTING SYSTEM TESTS OF DISTRIBUTION - FREE NON-GAUSSIAN NOISE REMOVAL IN SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF METEOROLOGICAL RADAR ECHO TESTS OF SOME RADAR BACKSCATTER MODELS WITH MULTIFREQUENCY, POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA FROM THE 1989 NCORDWUK EXPERIMENT TEXTURE ANALYSIS FOR LANDSCAPE RECOGNITION: THE PAPRI METHOD THE ADVANCED SOLID-STATE ARRAY SPECTRORADIOMETER DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM THE AIRSAR-93 AND SAREX-92 CAMPAIGNS IN GUYANA AND COLUMBIA THE ALASKA SAR FACILITY: AN INTRODUCTION THE ATMOSPHERIC TRACE MOLECULE SPECTROSCOPY INVESTIGATION THE ATTRIBUTE "VEGETATION INDEX" IN THE EVALUATION OF PLANT COVER IN THE SOUTH OF THE BRASILIAN PANTANAL THE BRDF EFFECT ON DETERMINATION OF SPECTRAL EMISSIVITIES OF LAND-SURFACE MATERIALS FROM SPECTROMETRRIC MEASUREMENTS THE CHINA GLOBESAR PROGRAMME THE COHERENCE OFWlNDANDRADAR DATA OBTAINED DURING THE JOINT US-RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE EXPERIMENT THE DANISH POLARIMETRIC SAR FOR REMOTE SENSING APPLICATIONS THE DETERMINATION OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOUR CONTENT USING DOUBLE-FREQUENCY RADIOMETER THE DEVELOPMENT OF A LIDAR INSTRUMENT FOR PRECISE TOPOGRAPHIC MAPPING THE DISTRIBUTION OF BIOGENIC MATERIAL IN ARCTIC SEA ICE THE DOPPLER PROPERTIES OF THE ELLIPTICAL ORBITING RADAR THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT THE EFFECT OF INTERNAL WAVES ON DECIMETER AND CENTIMETER SURFACE WAVES FOR VARIOUS ORIENTATIONS OF THEIR DIRECTIONS OF PROPAGATION. THE EFFECT OF SAR BANDWIDTH RATIO AND CURRENT VARIATION ON OCEAN CURRENT MEASUREMENTS BY ALONG-TRACK SAR INTERFEROMETER THE EFFECT OF WAVE BLOCKING ON MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGPAPHY WITH IMAGING RADAR THE EFFECTS OF SUB-VISUAL CIRRUS CLOUDS ON IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA THE ESTIMATION ON WATERSIlED DESIGN PEAK FLOW RATES BASED ON GIS AND REMOTE SENSING TECIINOLOGIES THE FRENCH CONTRIBUTION TO TRMM FOLLOW-ON MISSION THE GENERATION AND PROPAGATION OF INTERNAL WAVE FORMS IN THE STRAIT OF GIBRALTAR STUDIED BY ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY AND A NUMERICAL MODEL THE GERMAN PROCESSING AND ARCHIVING CENTER FOR ENVISAT THE INFLUENCE OF ALTITUDE AND LOOK ANGLE ON SAR OCEAN WAVE IMAGING: A PRACTICAL COMPROMISE THE INFLUENCE OF LAYERING AND GRAIN SIZE OF MICROWAVE EMISSION FROM POLAR FIRN THE JRC OPTICAL GONIOMETRIC FACILITY: TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION AND FIRST EXPERIMENT ON SPECTRAL MIXING. THE LMMSE POLARIMETRIC WISHART AND THE LMMSE TEXTURAL VECTOR SPECKLE FILTERS FOR SAR IMAGES THE OUTCOMES OF EMPLOYMENT OF NEW INSTRUMENT AND SOFTWARE OF THERMAL REMOTE SENSING AT SEARCH OF OIL AND GAS DEPOSITS THE POTENTIAL OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS IN MONITORING FOREST BIOMASS THE POTENTIAL OF SAR IN HYDROLOGY THE PROBLEM OF UNCLASSIFIED PIXELS FOR NONPARAMETRIC-TYPE CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS THE REFLECTION FOR DENSE PLANT CANOPIES FROM THE ONE-ANGLE RADIATIVE TRANSFER EQUATION THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SKIPJACK TUNA FISHERY AND OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES OBSERVED BY INFRARED IMAGERY IN THE SOUTHERN BRAZILIAN COAST THE REMOTE SENSING OF THE OCEAN SURFACE AT THE FRONTAL ZONE THE SAN CLEMENTE OCEAN PROBING EXPERIMENT: A STUDY OF AIR/SEA INTERACTIONS WITH REMOTE AND IN-SITU SENSORS THE SEAWINDS SCATTEROMETER INSTRUMENT THE SIR-C EDUCATION PROGRAM (SIR-CED) THE SMALL SLOPE APPROXIMATION FOR WAVE SCATTERING FROM RANDOMLY ROUGH SURFACES USING A PIER5ON-MOSKOWITZ SPECTRUM THE USE OF DIFFERENTIAL GPS IN FIELD DATA EXTRACTION AND SPATIALLY VARIABLE FERTILIZER APPLICATION THE USE OF POLARIMETRY IN SUBSURFACE RADAR THE UTILIZATION OF MODELED SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN THE ESTIMATION OF SAR BACKSCATTER FROM FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE THE VIERS RADAR BACKSCATTER MODEL DEVELOPMENT FOR WIND FIELD RETRIEVAL THEORETICAL PREDICTION AND MEASUREMENT OF THE SCATTERING FROM THIN WIRES WITH ONE-DIMENSIONAL RANDOM ORIENTATION THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST THREE DIMENSIONAL SURFACE RECONSTRUCTION ON A PARALLEL PROCESSOR THROUGH METEOROLOGICAL RADAR DATA TIKHONOVS METHOD OF THE GROUND-BASED RADIOMETRIC RETRIEVAL OF THE OZONE PROFILE TOWARDS OPERATIONAL USE OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RAOAR CAGES IN SEA ICE MONITORING TRANSMITTED RADIATION OF SEARCHLIGHT IN TURBID ATMOSPHERE TRMM PRECIPITATION RADAR: CALIBRATION AND DATA COLLECTION STRATEGIES TWO-DIMENSIONAL APERTURE SYNTHESIS RADIOMETERS IN A LOW EARTH ORBIT MISSION AND INSTRUMENT ANALYSIS TWO-DIMENSIONAL PHASE UNWRAPPING OF SAR INTERFEROGRAMS BY CHARGE CONNECTION THROUGH NEUTRAL TREES TWO-DIMENSIONAL SIMULATIONS OF SAR IMAGERY OF OCEAN WAVES TWO-WAVELENGTH LIDAR MONITORING OF STRATOSPHERIC PARTICLES AFTER PINATUBO VOLCANO ERUPTION Target Decomposition Theorems Applied to Multiple Scattering of Polarised Waves The Development of Lossless Data Compression Technology for Remote Sensing Applications The EARSEC SAR Processing System The Fluorescence Pulse Method as a Tool to Characterize the Photsynthetic System of Plants and Algae The Modulation and Coherence Functions Between Atmospheric Turbulence at the Sea Surface and the Microwave Radar Cross Section Fluctuations The Scatterometers Processing at the French ERS Processing and Archiving Facility Two Flow Model of Wet Snow Microwave Emissivity UARS MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER OBSERVATIONS OF UPPER ATMOSPHERE OZONE AND CHLORINE MONOXIDE. UHF WIDEBAND SAR DESIGN AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS UNDERSTANDING THE RADIATION REGIME OF A CROP CANOPY: MONTE CARLO RAY TRACING SIMULATIONS UNIFIED APPROACH FOR OBTAINING BEST ESTIMATES OF SPECTRAL OPTICAL DEPTHS AND CALIBRATION INTERCEPTS FROM SUNPHOTOMETER DATA SETS CORRUPTED BY TEMPORAL VARIATIONS USE OF AIRBORNE X/C-BAND SAR DATA FOR THE MONITORING OF TROPICAL FOREST AND SHIFTING CULTIVATION USE OF FUZZY LOGIC FOR UNSUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION OF REMOTELY SENSED IMAGES USE OF TIME-SERIES SAR DATA TO RESOLVE ICE TYPE AMBIGUITIES IN NEWLY-OPENED LEADS USE OF VEGETATION INDICES FOR THE RETRIEVAL OF INFORMATION ON SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF SEMI-ARID REGIONS USING A GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (ARC/INFO) AS A TOOL FOR INTEGRATION OF REMOTE SENSED AND IN-SITU-DATA IN AN ANALYSIS OF THE AIR POLLUTION EFFECTS ON TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS IN VARANGER (NORWAY) AND NIKEL-PECHENGA (RUSSIA) There are more items listed on the next page The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-88IA054-000906-B014-59http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/document/dc4_11.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190454 text/html 8082HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:03:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Document Keyword:  Title  (Page 11) Document Keyword: Title (Page 11) Select a Title USING AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE DATA FOR MULTITEMPORAL STUDIES OF LAND DEGRADATION USING ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY TO MONITOR VARIATIONS IN BURN SEVERITY IN AN ALASKAN FIRE-DISTURBED BOREAL FOREST ECOSYSTEM USING OF GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR OPTIMIZATION OF CROPPING DATES: CASE OF BRAZILIAN SAVANNA AND PANTANAL REGION USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA TO ESTIMATE SURFACE HEMISPHERICAL REFLECTANCE, ALBEDO AND ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETIC ACTIVE RADIATION USING REPEAT TRACK INTERFEROMETRY TO ESTIMATE SMALL SCALE SURFACE CHANGES ON VENUS USING THE MOSART CODE FOR ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION UTILIZING THE DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF SEA ICE FOR DETERMINING ICE THICKNESS DISTRIBUTIONS IN SAR IMAGERY Using Cross-Image Spectra in a SAR Ocean Wave Inversion Scheme Using ERS-1 SAR Data to Monitor the State of the Arctic Ocean Sea Ice Surface Between Spring and Autumn, 1992 Using Polarimetric SAR Data in Morphological Analyses the Island of Ischia (Southern Italy) VAGSAT: A PROPOSAL FOR A SMALL SATELLITE MISSION FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA WITH A REAL-APERTURE RADAR VALIDATING SAR INTERFEROMETRY APPLICATIONS BY USING EMSL VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU VALIDATION OF CANOPY BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE MODELS WITH ASAS IMAGERY OF A SPRUCE FOREST IN MAINE VARIABILITY OF COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTIVITY VARIABILITY OF GLOBAL UPPER-TROPOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR DERIVED FOR SATELLITE INFRARED OBSERVATIONS VARIATIONS IN COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTIVITY INDUCED BY MESOSCALE PROCESSES VARIATIONS IN TOTAL SOLAR IRRADIANCE RELATED TO SOLAR MAGNETIC FIELDS VEERING WIND EFFECTS ON SCATTEROMETRY FROM THE SEA-SURFACE VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA VERY LOW SIDE-LOBE LEVEL PULSE COMPRESSION FOR RAIN RADAR VISIBLE AND NEAR INFRARED (0.4-1.1mu m) ANALYSIS OF ARID AND SEMIARID SOILS VISUALIZATION AND ASSESSMENT OF VOCAR PROPAGATION CONDITIONS VOCAR REFRACTIVE VARIABILITY USING ISENTROPIC CROSS-SECTION ANALYSIS WAVE EVOLUTION IN THE MARGINAL ICE ZONE USING ERS-1 SAR WAVE-CURRENT INTERACTION MODELING INCORPORATING WAVE BLOCKING WAVELETS AND NEURAL NETS FOR STRATIGRAPHIC ANALYSIS WIND MEASUREMENT RESOLUTION FOR SPACEBORNE SCATTEROMETERS WORKING WITH SPACECRAFT DATA: WHERE WE ARE, AND WHERE WE WANT TO GO Water Surface Temperature Estimates Using Active and Passive Microwave Remote Sensing X-SAR DATA AND IMAGE QUALITY X-SAR PRECISION DATA PRODUCTS FROM THE SHUTTLE RADAR LAB YIELD ESTIMATION OF CORN WITH MULTITEMPORAL AND MULTISENSORAL REMOTELY SENSED DATA ZEEMAN SPLITTING OF THE 61 GHZ (9+) 02 LINE IN THE MESOSPHERE iSAR: A MULTISPECTRAL, POLARIMETRIC AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM mm-WAVE SPECTROSCOPY OF STRATOSPHERIC TRACE GASES AT THE SOUTH POLE OVER AN 11-MONTH CYCLE O3, N20, HNO3, ClO and NO2. The IGARSS Home PageWT01-B02-89IA054-000906-B014-104http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorab.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190523 text/html 26631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:04:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: A-B Papers listed by Author: A-B Abdelsayed, S., D. Ionescu and D. Goodenough A Matching Procedure for Remote Sensing Images Abuelgasim, A.A., and S. Gopal A Hybrid Neural Network Model for Classification of Multiangle and Multispectral ASAS Radiance Measurements Ainsworth, T.L., M.E. Cannella, S.R. Chubb, R.A. Fusina, R.W. Jansen, G.O. Marmorino and G.R. Valenzuela INSAR Imagery of Surface Currents, Wave Fields and Fronts Alexander, D.R., R.D. Kubik, D.E. Poulain, M.D. Ahmad and E.R. Cespedes Environmental Monitoring of Sil Contaiminated With Heavy Metals Using Laser-Induced-Breakdown Spectroscopy Allan, N., D. McLaughlin, E. Twarog, D. Trizna, L. Martin and M. Sletten Ship Borne Remote Sensing of Submesoscale Oceanographic Features Along the Northern Boundary of the Gulf Stream Allison, D., M.J. Barnsley, N. Dyble and J.P. Muller Precise Geometric Registration of ASAS Airborne Data: Impacts and Results Alparone, L., S. Baronti, R. Carla and S. Sigismondi Principal Component Analysis for Change Detection on Polarimetric Multitemporal SAR Data Alpers, W. ERS-1 SAR Views the Ocean: An Assessment Amram, O., and G. Flouzat An Efficient Water Concept for Monitoring Vegetation in West Africa Andrade, H.A., and C.A.E. Garcia The Relationship Between Skipjack Tuna Fishery and Oceanographic Features Observed by Infrared Imagery in the Southern Brazilian Coast Anys, H., D.C. He, L. Wang and Q.H.J. Gwyn Classification of Multipolarisation Airborne Radar Images in Agricultural Areas Arai, K., M. Ozawa and Y. Terayama Optimization Method for B/H Ratio Determination Taking Occlusion Effect and MTF Degradation Due to Atmosphere into Account Arai, K., Y. Ueda, Y. Terayama and M. Moriyama Automatic Cloud Classification With Visible and Thermal Infrared Radiometer Data Arai, K., and M. Moriyama An Assessment of SST Estimation Accuracy With ADEOS/OCTS Data Arai, K. A Method for Surface Temperature Retrieval With ASTER/TIR Arakelian, A.K. Efficiency of Simultaneous Doppler-Radar and Dual-Polarization Radiometer Sensing in Environmental Investigations Arakelian, A.K. Some Features of the Backscattered From the Sea Surface Radar Signal Frequency Doppler-Shift Distribution Statistical Characteristics S+Dataviewer: An Advanced Dynamic Graphics Tool for GIS and Remote Sensing Armand, N.A., A.B. Akvilonova, V.V. Efremenko, B.G. Kutuza, B.Z. Petrenko, E.M. Petrov, M.T. Smirnov and Yu.G. Tishchenko International Earth Remote Sensing Project Priroda Scientific Program Arnault, S., Y. Menard and B. Bourles Investigating the Tropical Atlantic Variability From TOPEX/POSEIDON Altimeter Aschbacher, J., R.P. Dipak, A. Pongsrihabulchai, S. Karnchanasutham and C. Rodprom Radar Backscattering Studies of Rice Fields Using ERS-1 SAR Data Ashcroft, P., and B. Morel Limits of Space Based Remote Sensing for Methane Source Characterization Askari, F., and T. Donato Low Grazing Angle Scatter From Wind Waves and Solutions Askne, J., A. Carlstrom, W. Dierking and L. Ulander ERS-1 SAR Backscatter Modelling and Interpretation of Sea Ice Signatures Assad, E.D., E.E. Sano, B. Soriano, S.C. Silva and E.J.V. Lobato Using of Geographic Information System for Optimization of Cropping Dates: Case of Brazilian Savanna and Pantanal Region Atlas, D. Advances in Radar Meteorology: An Overview Atlas, D. Footprints of Storms on the Sea: A View From Spaceborne SAR Attia, M.F. Interpretation of Time-Domain Induced Polarization and Resistivity Data for Earth Modeling Austin, R.L. NIST Traceable Calibration System for Surface and Submersible Sensors Austin, R.T., and A.W. England Radar Scattering by Volcanic Debris Flow Surface Analogues Avissar, R., B. Li, B.H. Lynn, T. Schmidt and F. Zeng Representing Fluxes in the Atmospheric Planetary Boundary Layer Above Heterogeneous Surfaces Avramova, R.P. Estimation of Turbulent Parameters of the Atmospheric Aerosol by Laser Radar Axelsson, S.R.J. Frequency and Azimuthal Variations of Radar Cross-Section and Their Influence Upon Low Frequency SAR-Imaging Axelsson, S.R.J., K.G. Johnsson, B.E. Tullson, A. Carlstrom and J. Kjellgren Comparison of Measured and Predicted Scattering Coefficients at 94 GHz Radar Profiling Above Pine Forests Aydin, K., V.N. Bringi and L. Liu Rainrate Estimation in the Presence of Hail Using S-Band Specific Differential Phase Aydin, K., and C. Tang Millimeter Wave Scattering From Ice Crystal Distributions Bach, H., and W. Mauser Modelling and Model Verification of the Spectral Reflectance of Soils Under Varying Moisture Conditions Bahar, E., and B.S. Lee Full Wave Scatter Cross Sections for Two-Dimensional Random Rough Surfaces Using Joint Conditional Surface height Characteristic Functions Bahar, E., and R.D. Kubik Full Wave Backscatter Predicitons From Layered Stratified Medium Bakhanov, V.V., D.L. Belyakov, A.G. Ryabinin, V.I. Titov and E.M. Zuikova Nonlocal Effects of Internal Waves on the Ocean Surface Bakhanov, V.V., V.I. Titov, D.L. Belyakov, A.G. Ryabinin and E.M. Zuikova The Effect of Internal Waves on Decimeter and Centimeter Surface Waves for Various Orientations of Their Directions of Propagation Balzer, W. Design and Implementation of the GOME Data Processor Bamler, R., H. Breit, M. Eineder, D. Just and U. Steinbrecher X-SAR Data and Image Quality Banninger, C., and E. Chappelle Phenological Changes in Needle Fluorescence of Damaged and Undamaged Norway Spruce Trees Bao, M., C. Bruning and W. Alpers Simulation of Two-Dimensional Ocean Wave Imaging by an Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar Baraldi, A., and F. Parmigiani A Modified Version of the SAR Speckle Filter Based on Detection of Structures Barkstrom, B.R., S. Cady and L. Matthias Global Cloud System Histories Obtained From Earth Radiation Budget (ERBE) Scanner Data Barnsley, M.J., and D. Allison On the Information Content of Multiple View Angle (MVA) ASAS Images for Land Cover Mapping Basili, P., P. Ciotti, G. dAuria, N. Pierdicca and F.S. Marzano Simulation Study of a Microwave Radiometric Temperature Profiler for the Antarctic Atmosphere Basili, P., P. Ciotti, G. dAuria, N. Pierdicca and F.S. Marzano Statistical Behavior of a Multiparameter Polarimetric Radar Dataset Bassiri, S. Analysis of Three Frequency Ranging Systems With Applications to Precise Ionospheric Delay Calibration Bates, J.J. Variability of Global Upper-Tropospheric Water Vapor Derived for Satellite Infrared Observations Baumgartner, M.F., and G. Apfl Monitoring Alpine Snow Cover Variations Using NOAA-AVHRR Data Beaudoin, A., M. Deshayes, T. Le Toan and D. Girou Use of Airborne X/C-Band SAR Data for the Monitoring of Tropical Forest and Shifting Cultivation Beer, R. Remote Sensing of Tropospheric Chemistry Ben-Dor, E., and A. Banin Simultaneous Evaluation of Spectral Featureless Constituents in Soils Using Near Infrared Analysis (NIRA) Technique Ben-Dor, E., and A. Banin Visible and Near Infrared (0.4-1.1m) Analysis of Arid and Semiarid Soils Benediktsson, J.A., K. Arnason, J.R. Sveinsson and A. Eiriksson Classification of AVIRIS Data From Iceland -- Geological Applications Berger, M., and H. Kaufmann Performance Verification of Spectral and Panchromatic Modules of the MOMS-02 Sensor Flown Aboard STS55/D2-Mission Berk, R.A. Resampling Methods of Statistical Inference Bertoia, C.A., and T. Carrieres Operational Use of Satellite Data for Sea Ice Analysis at the U.S. and Canadian National Ice Centers Bertoni, R., and F. Impagnatiello On Board Data Compression Device for SAR Application Bevilacqua, R., T. Pauls, M. Daehler, W.Waltman, J. Olivero, D. Goldizen, D. Kriebel, W. Degenhardt, J. Langen and N. Kaempfer Middle Atmospheric Water Vapor and Ozone Retrievals From the MM-Wave Atmspheric Sounder (MAS) Shuttle Experiment Bhaskar, R., J. Hite and D. Pitts An Iterative Frequency-Domain Technique to Reduce Image Degradation Due to Lens Defocus and Motion Blur Bhattacharjee, P.S. A Broadband Circular Microstrip Antenna Biagini, M., B. Aster, S. Severoni, M. Stefanutti and M. Uliana SAR Wave Application on an Open Image Processing System Bickel, D.L., and W.H. Hensley Interferometric SAR Phase Difference Calibration: Methods and Results Bierens, L. A Subband Algorithm for Real-Time Autofocusing of SAR Images Biggar, S.F., K.J. Thome, P.N. Slater, L.K. Balick and C.J. Golanics Solar-Radiation-Based Absolute Calibration of Optical Sensors: SeaWiFS and Daedalus 1268 Bijker, W., and D. Hoekman A Remote Sensing Monitoring System for a Colonization Area in Tropical Rain Forest Bilal, A. Remote Sensing New Tectonics Data of the Arabian Plate Birer, A., and G. Turhan-Sayan Sensitivity Analysis of a Distributed Fiber Optic Sensor for Remote Temperature Monitoring Blair, D.B., D.B. Coyle, J.L. Bufton and D.J. Harding A Modified Airborne Laser Altimeter for Measurement of Vegetation Structure Blanchard, A.J., and B. Jersak Microwave Measurements of Simulated Atmospheric Particles Blaunshtein, N., and R. Mazar Influence of an Inhomogeneous Ionosphere on Mobile Satellite Communication Blaunshtein, N. Modelling of Radiowave Propagation in a Disturbed Ionosphere During Seismic Activity Bleiweiss, M.P., M. Rollins and C. Chaapel Analysis of Real IR Scenes Acquired for SWOE JT&E Bleiweiss, M.P., W.M. Farmer, K.C. Payne and T.A. King Stereo Passive Remote Sensing of Aerosol Transport and Diffusion Bliven, L., V. Billat, P. Sobieski, A. Guissard, H. Branger and J. Giovanangeli Veering Wind Effects on Scatterometry From the Sea-Surface Bliven, L., and T. Elfouhaily Presenting the NASA/GSFC Rain-Sea Interactive Facility Blonda, P., V. la Forgia, G. Pasquariello and G. Satalino Multispectral Classification by a Modular Neural Network Architecture Blood, D.W., S. McKinley, C.R. Philbrick, R. Paulus and T. Rodgers Lidar Measured Refractive Effects in a Coastal Environment Boardman, J.W. Geometric Mixture Analysis of Imaging Spectrometry Data Boerner, W., H. Mott, E. Luneburg and M. Tanaka Development of Polarimetric Vector Signal and Tensor Image Processing in POL-RAD/SAR Analysis Bongi, G., A. Palliotti, P. Rocchi, I. Moya and Y. Goulas Blue-Green Fluorescence Excited by UV Laser on Leaves of Different Species Originates From Cutin and is Sensitive to Leaf Temperature Borel, C.C., and S.A.W. Gerstl Are Leaf Chemistry Signatures Preserved at the Canopy Level? Borel, C.C., and S.A.W. Gerstl Radiosity Based Model for Terrain Effects on Multi-Angular Views Borgarelli, L., and E. Zampolini Faustini Performance Evaluation of Radio Frequency of Cassini Radar Borgeaud, M., J. Noll and A. Bellini Multi-Temporal Comparisons of ERS-1 and JERS-1 SAR Data for Land Applications Borne, F., and S. Guillobez A New Approach in Remote Sensing Image Analysis for Natural Environment Cartography Borne, F. New Features for Texture Analysis Borne, F. Texture Analysis for Landscape Recognition: The Papri Method Boucher, J.M., and S. Pleihers Radar Image Classification and Multiresolution Analysis Bourgeau-Chavez, L.L., E.S. Kasischke, N.H.F. French, L.H. Szeto and C.M. Kherkher Using ERS-1 SAR Imagery to Monitor Variations in Burn Severity in an Alaskan Fire-Disturbed Boreal Forest Ecosystem Bourissou, A., K. Pham, J. Levy-Vehel and T. Le Toan A Multifractal Approach for Terrain Characterization and Classification on SAR Images Boyarskii, D.A., and V.S. Etkin Two Flow Model of Wet Snow Microwave Emissivity Boyarskii, D.A., and V.V. Tikhonov Microwave Effective Permittivity Model of Media of Dielectric Particles and Applications to Dry and Wet Snow Boyce, J., and W. Emery Ground Truth Studies: Using Remotely Sensed Data in K-12 Education Brandt, P., and W. Alpers The Generation and Propagation of Internal Wave Forms in the Strait of Gibraltar Studied by ERS-1 SAR Imagery and a Numerical Model Bredow, J., A.K. Fung and S. Tjuatja An Experimental Study of Relative Contributions From Surface and Volume Scattering Mechanisms in Saline Ice Bredow, J., A.K. Fung, D. Gibbs and S. Tjuatja A 75-110 GHz Millimeter-Wave Spectrometer for Pollution Studies Brisco, B., G. Huadong and R. Brown The China GlobeSAR Programme Broschat, S.L. The Small Slope Approximation for Wave Scattering From Randomly Rough Surfaces Using a Pierson-Moskowitz Spectrum Browell, E.V., S. Ismail, N.S. Higdon, T.H. Chyba, W.B. Grant and P. Ponsardin Differential Absorption Lidar Measurements of Water Vapor Brown de Colostoun, E.C., C.L. Walthall, C.A. Russell and J.R. Irons Estimating the Fraction of Absorbed Photosynthetically Active Radiation (fAPAR) From Off-NADIR Airborne Measurements Brown, R.J., M. Manore, D. Bedard and C. Hepburn Information Content of Compressed Remotely Sensed Data Brugman, M.M., A. Pietroniro and X. Shi Comparison of Landsat TM and SAR Mapping of Alpine Snow and Glaciers: Results of Recent Crysys Research at Wapta Icefield, Alberta Bruning, C. On the Relative Importance of the Ocean Wave-Radar Modulation Transfer Function for Inverting ERS-1 SAR Image Spectra into Ocean Wave Spectra Bruniquel, J., and A. Lopes Contribution of Multi-Temporal Data to Improve the Radiometric Resolution of SAR Images Buckreuss, S. Motion Compensation for Airborne SAR Based on Inertial Data, RDM and GPS Budenbender, H. First Results of One Pass Airborne Interferometry With the Dornier SAR System Budenbender, H. High Precision Motion Compensation for Multiple Pass Airborne Interferometry Bulatov, M.G., G.A. Bolotnikova, V.S. Etkin, E.I. Skvortsov and Yu.G. Trokhimovski Shipborne Microwave Radiometer and Scattometer Measurements of Sea Surface Patterns During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Burda, N.Yu. Modelling for Ice Events Prediction in Lake Ladoga Burk, S.D., W.T. Thompson, J. Cook and G.G. Love Mesoscale Modeling of Refractive Conditions During the VOCAR Experiment Butler, J.J. Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function Measurements in the NASA/GSFC Diffuser Calibration Facility Byrd, M.J., and A.J. Blanchard Confocal Techniques Applied to Microwave Holographic Synthetic Aperture Radar (HSAR) WT01-B02-90IA054-000906-B014-151http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorc.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190546 text/html 18549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:04:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: C Papers listed by Author: C Cabot, F., A. Chehbouni, E.G. Njoku, Y.H. Kerr and G. Dedieu Combined Use of Spectral Measurements: A Promise for Surface Parameter Retrieval Cabrera-Mercader, C.R., and D.H. Staelin Passive Microwave Humidity Profile Retrievals Using Neural Networks Cai, Y. Artificial Neural Network Model for Recognition About Land Cover Type of Remote Sensing Caldararu, F., M. Caldararu, A. Jelev and A. Iacob Air Pollution Monitoring Using SnO2 Sensors Camenen, L., Y. Goulas, G. Guyot, I. Moya and G. Schmuck Analysis of Time-Resolved Chlorophyll Florescence and Backscattered Signal From Vegetation Campbell, F.H.A., R.J. Brown, M. Kirby and D. Benmouffok Canada's GlobeSAR Program Campbell, W.B., and J.M. Nault Interactive Integration of Infrared Satellite Imagery, Satellite Altimetery, and In Situ Measurements Into the Production of an Operational Ocean Features Analysis Product Carande, R., W. Brown and M. Kubrick Multi-Frequency, Polarimetric and Interferometric SAR Observations of Ocean Features During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Carlstrom, A., L.M.H. Ulander and B.Hakansson Model for Estimating Surface Roughness of Level and Ridged Sea Ice Using ERS-1 SAR Carn, M., C. Jean and A. Pesin Improvement of Rainfall Estimates in Arid Areas Using Meteosat and TOVS Data Remote Sensing Contribution to the Computation of Mean Areal Rainfall in the Senegal River Basin for 1986-1992 Carr, D.B. Algorithms for Exploratory Screening of Data-Density Images Carrere, V. Effects of Change in Spectral Resolution and Channel Position on Radiative Transfer Model Based Atmospheric Correction Techniques Applied to Imaging Spectrometers Carsey, F. Progress in Polar Oceans Research Using ERS-1 Data Carswell, J., and R. McIntosh Backscatter From the Ocean Surface Under Low Wind Conditions Cattabeni, M., A. Monti-Guarnieri and F. Rocca Estimation and Improvement of Coherence in SAR Interferograms Cavalieri, D.J. Early Stages of Sea Ice Growth Observed With Satellite Data Cavanie, A. AMI-Wind Measurements Compared to SSM/I Interpretations Over Arctic Sea Ice Caves, R.G., S. Quegan, R.G. White and R. Cook Comparison of Segmentation Methodologies Applied to ERS-1 SAR Images Caves, R.G., and C. Clark Towards Operational Linear Feature Detection in SAR Imagery Caves, R.G., and S. Quegan Segmentation Based Change Detection in ERS-1 SAR Images Cecchi, G., L. Pantani, M. Bazzani and V. Raimondi High Spectral Resolution Fluorescence Lidar: Three Years of Experiments on Vegetation Cecchi, G. Fluorescence Lidar in Vegetation Remote Sensing: System Features and Multiplatform Operation Cerdan, R. Oil Leakage Expansion and Simulation Model Based on Fractl Techniques Cernieri, P., A. Mariani, C. Tarantino, C. Marzo and G. Milillo The New Geo System for Throughput Enhancement of Geocoded Products Generation Chahine, M., J. Susskind and J. Joiner Remote Sensing of Humidity Profiles With Passive IR Sounders: HIRS and AIRS Chandra, M., A. Schroth and E. Lueneburg Retrieval of Propagation Induced Attenuation From Radar Derived Accumulated Differential Phase Measurements Chang, C.Y. Performance Analysis Results of the SIR-C Ground Data Processor System Chang, P., J. Mead, R. McIntosh, R. Davis and H. Boyne A Detailed Study of the Backscatter Characteristics of Snowcover Measured at 35, 95 and 225 GHz Chapman, B., A. Freeman, R. Zimmermann and R. Oren Validation and Calibration of SAR Imagery of Manu National Park, Peru Chapman, B. Radar Backscatter Related to Ocean Wave Spectrum Charnotskii, M.I. Coherent Channels Expansion in the Theory of Wave Propagation in Turbulence Chauhan, N., D. LeVine, P. ONeill and R. Lang Microwave Brightness Temperature From Bare and Vegetated Terrain: Comparison of Theory With ESTAR Radiometer Data Chauhan, N., R. Lang, J. Ranson, and O.Killic Multi-Stand Radar Modeling From Pre-BOREAS Experiment Chehbouni, A., J.P. Lhomme, E.G. Njoku, D. Nichols, D. Stannard, S.M. Moran and Y.H. Kerr Estimation of Sensible Heat Flux Using a Two- and Three-Component Model During the Monsoon 90 Experiment Chen, K.S., C.F. Chen, J.T. Juang and J.Wu Analysis of Spectral and Fractal Properties of a Nonlinear Sea Surface Chen, K.S., S. Tjuatja and A.K. Fung Analysis of Radar Scattered Signal From Terrain Based on Fractal Characteristics Chen, K.S., W.L. Kao and C.F. Chen A Neural Classifier of Terrain Covers From Polarimetric SAR Data Chen, K.S., and Y.C. Tzeng Inversion of Ocean Wave Spectra by a Dynamic Learning Neural Network Chen, M., D. Cuddy and K. Leung Alsaka SAR Processor Upgrade for RADARSAT Chen, Z., D.T. Davis, L. Tsang, J.N. Hwang and E. Njoku Retrieval of Semi-Arid Region Parameters From Passive Microwave Measurements Using Neural Networks Within a Bayesian Framework Cheng, T., E. Chu and K. Leung ASF SAR Processor Hardware Implementation Study Cherchali, S., and G. Flouzat Linear Mixture Modelling Applied to AVHRR Data for Monitoring Vegetation Cherny, I.V., A.M. Alesin, N.N. Gorobetz, O.P. Ivanov, V.P. Nakonechny, A.A. Pankin, S.Yu. Pantzov and A.I. Zabishny Advanced Airborne Multispectral Dual-Polarization MM-Wave Imaging Technique Cherny, I.V., and V. P. Shevtzov Multispectral MM-Wave Diagnostics of Two Coupled Oceanic Eddies (Rossby Soliton) Cherny, I.V. On the High-Contrast Spectral Variations of Sea Surface Brightness Temperature at MM-Wave Chong-Guang, Z., W. Jun and A.H. Strahler A New Registration Algorithm for of ASAS Multi-Angle Images Choudhury, B.J. Relations Between Optical and Passive Microwave Vegetation Indices to Crop Biomass Characteristics Chrien, N.L., M.L. White, E.C. Hagerott and C.J. Bruegge Contrasting Target, Stray-Light, and Other Performance Metrics for MISR Chrien, T.G., C. Chovit, I.H. Novack and R.O. Green Geometric Calibration of the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS): Technique and Results Chrien, T.G., M.L. Eastwood, C. Chovit, R.O. Green and C. Sarture Improvements to the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) Calibration System Christensen, E.L., S.N. Madsen, J. Dall and N. Skou The Danish Polarimetric SAR for Remote Sensing Applications Calibration of Polarimetric Measurement System Using an Active Calibrator Chu, W.P. Inversion Techniques for Atmospheric Limb Measurements Using the Occultation Approach Cipollini, P., G. Corsini, M. Diani and E. Ferretti Airborne and Satellite TM Data Integration for Water Monitoring Along the Ligurian Coast Cipollini, P., and G. Corsini Interpretation of Parametric Maps Obtained by Means of Blue to Green Ratio Over Coastal Waters Clayton, D., and Y. Kuga Bistatic Scattering Characteristics of Densee Randomly Distributed Cyclinders Cloude, S. Target Decomposition Theorems Applied to Multiple Scattering of Polarised Waves Clough, S.A. Methods for the Retrieval of Atmospheric State Parameters From High Resolution Spectral Radiance Data Clough, S.A. Retrieval of Tropospheric Ozone From Simulations of Spectral Radiances as Observed From Space Cofield, R.E. Field-of-View Calibration of the Microwave Limb Sounder of the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite Collins, M.J., C. Livingstone and R.K. Raney Discrimination Between Young Sea Ice Types From Single Look SAR Image Data Collins, M.J., R.K. Raney and C. Livingstone A Rationale for the Modeling and Measurement of Non-Gaussian SAR Image Texture Colton, M.C. Operational Procesing of DMSP Special Sensor Microwave/Imager Data at Fleet Numberical Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC): Algorithm Transitions Comiso, J.C., and S.F. Ackley Antarctic Passive Microwave Signatures During Summer and Autumn Conterno, B., G. Milillo and F. Selvaggi ACIP the Italian SAR Processor Facility for XSAR Mission Cook, J., G.G. Love, S.D. Burk and W.T. Thompson Visualization and Assessment of VOCAR Propagation Conditions Cooley, T.W., J.A. Reagan, J. Bufton and B. Minster Predicting Laser Bakcscatter With Passive Multiangle Measurements of a Playa for Lite Calibration Coradini, A., R. Camarossa, A. Masdea, G. Picardi, C. Regolo and R. Seu A Trade-Off Between SAR and Optical Interferometry for Topographic Mapping of the Lunar Surface (MORO Mission) Cornette, W.M., D.C. Robertson and G.P. Anderson Using the Mosart Code for Atmospheric Correction Corp, L.A., E.W. Chappelle, J.E. McMurtrey and M.S. Kim Characterization of Compounds Responsible for the Variation in Blue Band Fluorescence From Nitrogen Deficient Soybeans Cosnefroy, H., X. Briottet, M. Leroy, P. Lecomte and R. Santer In-Field Characterization of Saharian Sites for Satellite Calibration Costes, F., S. Raju, A. Chanzy, I. Chenerie and J. Lemorton Microwave Radiometry on Bare Soils: Comparison of Various Emission Models of Layered Media With Measurements Coulter, R.E. Ice Edge Detection and Ice/Water Classification Utilizing the ERS-1 and TOPEX Altimeters Cramblitt, R.M., and M.R. Bell Surface Characterization Using Regularity Models and Frequency Diverse Measurements Crippen, R.E., and R.G. Blom New Perspectives on Active Tectonics: Observing Fault Motion, Mapping Earthquake Strain Fields, and Visualizing Seismic Events in Multiple Dimensions Using Satellite Imagery and Geophysical Data Bases Cuddy, D., T. Bicknell and M. Tankenson ASF Design Considerations for RADARSAT/ERS-2 Cummings, J.A., and R.M. Clancy Global and Regional Sea Surface Temperature Analyses at Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center Cunningham, G.F., R. Kwok and J. Banfield Ice Lead Orientation Characteristics in the Winter Beaufort Sea Curlander, J.C., and A. Thompson FASTSCAN: A Real-Time SAR Processor for Radarsat Ground Stations Curlander, J.C. Automated Multi-Sensor Image Mapping System Cutting, G. Dead Reckoning System Design and Analysis WT01-B02-91IA054-000906-B014-217http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authordf.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190622 text/html 24748HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:04:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: D-F Papers listed by Author: D-F Daba, J.S., and M.R. Bell Statistical Distributions of Partially Developed Speckle Based on a Small Number of Constant Scatterers With Random Phase Dabney, P.W., J.R. Irons, J.W. Travis, M.S. Kasten and S. Bhardwaj Impact of Recent Enhancements and Upgrades of the Advanced Solid-State Array Spectroradiometer (ASAS) Daida, J., N. French, R. Onstott, F. Tanis and J. Vesecky Extracting Seasonal Parameters of Sea Ice Morphology From SAR Imagery: Size Distributions of First-Year Ice Daida, J.M., P.B. Russell, T.L. Crawford and J.F. Vesecky An Unmanned Aircraft Vehicle System for Boundary-Layer Flux Measurements Over Forest Canopies Daida, J.M. Robustness of a Mathematical Symbiotic System on Segmenting SAR Imagery Dall, J., N. Skou and E.L. Christensen Pulse-Based Internal Calibration of Polarimetric SAR Daughtry, C.S.T., J.E. McMurtey III and E.W. Chappelle Quantifying Crop Residue Cover by Fluorescence Imaging Daum, D.R., W.B. Davis and D.G. Long Enhanced Resolution Imaging From Spaceborne Microwave Sensors Davidheiser, R.A., K.E. Yokoyama and B.H. Stark Results of a Laboratory Synthetic Aperture Millimeter Wave Radiometer Davis, C.H. Surface Elevation Changes of the Greenland Ice Sheet From an Analysis of Seasat & Geosat Altimeter Data Davis, D.T., J.N. Hwang and L. Tsang Solving Remote Sensing Inverse Problems Using Bayesian Modeling to Incorporate Information Sources Davis, J., M. Rankin, A. Ochadlick, W. Everett, J. Krauss, A. Siegel, T. Webster, C. Rino and J. Lyden Sea Spikes: The Empirical Dependence of K-Distribution Parameters on System and Environmental Parameters Dawson, M.S., F. Amar, V. Rawat, A.K. Fung and M.T. Manry Land Use Classification Using Fast Learning Neural Networks and Topology Selection Algorithms De Carolis, G., T. Le Toan, G. Pasquariello, F. Posa and P. Smacchia On the Effect of Soil Surface Roughness on the Radar Backscatter Responses to Soil Moisture De Vliegher, B.M., and P.S. Basigos Elaboration of a Wild Fire Hazard Model for the Eparchy of Pylias (SW-Messinia, Greece) Based Upon Remote Sensing and GIS Dechambre, M. Radar Measurements Over the French Guiana Mangrove Dicken, H.D., A. Berg and J. Langen Calibration of MAS Antenna Using Radiation of the Lunar Surface Dickinson, S. Synergistic Use of Remotely Sensed Data for Evaluation of the Boundary Layerin Synoptic Storms and Fronts Dieterle, G. The ERS-1 Payload After 3 Years in Orbit: A Health and Performance Assessment Dikshit, O. Effects of Resolution and Spatial Properties on Textural Classification Diner, D.J., and S.R. Beutelschies Development of an Aerosol Opacity Retrieval Algorithm for Use With Multi-Angle Land Surface Images Direskeneli, H. User Interactions and Data Access Patterns With the LARC DAAC Data and Information System Divakaria, M.G., J.M. Norman and L.M. Murdock Estimation of Net Carbon Flux Over the FIFE Site by Combining Satellite and Insitu Observations With Models Using GIS The Thailand GlobeSAR Program Demircan, A., and W. Mauser Application of an Agrometeorological Model and Landsat-TM Data to Estimate Actual Transpiration of Corn Demircan, A., and W. Mauser Yield Estimation of Corn With Multitemporal and Multisensoral Remotely Sensed Data Dionisio, C., and A. Torre High Resolution Multifrequency SAR System for Spaceborne Applications Dionisio, C., and E. Zampolini Frequency Selection and Multipolarimetry for Hard Target Detection Dobson, M.C., L.L. Pierce and F.T. Ulaby Empirical Method for Estimation of Forest Biophysical Properties From Multifrequency Polarimetric SAR Doerry, A., B. Brock, B. Boverie and D. Cress Imaging Targets Embedded in a Lossy Half-Space With Synthetic Aperture Radar Doka, T., S. Mihaly, E. Godor, I. Bozsoki, B. Farkas and R. Seller The Detection of Soil Moisture Content Change by Analysing of ERS-1 SAR Multi-Temporal Data Donato, T.F., F. Askari, O.M. Griffin and R. Peltzer Radar Observations of Breaking Waves at Low Grazing Angles Donohue, D.J. Application of a Stochastic Variational Principle to Random Rough Surface Scattering Drinkwater, M.R., D.S. Early and D.G. Long ERS-1 Investigations of Southern Ocean Sea Ice Geophysics Using Combined Scatterometer and SAR Images Drinkwater, M.R., and C. Kottmeier Satellite Microwave Radar- And Buoy-Tracked Ice Motion in the Weddell Sea During WWGS92 Drummond, J.R., G.V. Bailak and G. Mand Measurements of Carbon Monoxide and Methane From Space Du, L., J.S. Lee, D.L. Schuler and S.A. Mango Shipwake Detection and Characterization in SAR Images Using Wavelet Transform Dubois, P.C., and J. van Zyl An Empirical Soil Moisture Estimation Algorithm Using Imaging Radars Duchossois, G. Overview of Scientific and Pre-Operation Exploitation of ERS-1 After 3 Years in Orbit Dulov, V., S. Grodsky and V. Kiufryavtsev Effect of the Ocean Medium Non-Uniformities on Wave Breaking and Microwave Brightness Sea Temperature Dulov, V., S. Grodsky and V. Kudryavtsev Wind Waves in the Gulf Stream Frontal Zone: Observations and Analysis Duncan, J., and J. Franklin Estimation Fractional Vegetation Cover at the Subpixel Scale in a Semiarid Region Using a Statistical Mixture Model and Remotely Sensed Data Durden, S., E. Im, F. Li, A. Tanner and W. Wilson ARMAR Observations During TOGA/COARE Early, D.S., D.G. Long and M.R. Drinkwater Comparison of Enhanced Resolution Images of Greenland From the ERS-1 and SeaSAT Scatterometers Eatock, R., and M.R. Inggs The Use of Differential GPS in Field Data Extraction and Spatially Variable Fertilizer Application Eberhard, W.L., J.M. Intrieri and G. Feingold Radiative and Microphysical Properties of Cirrus Observed by Remote Sensors at Fire II Eberhard, W.L. CO2 Lidar: A Somewhat Different View of Clouds Edelsohn, C.R. Applications of Synthetic Aperture Radiometry Ehsani, A.R., J.M. Simpson and J.A. Reagan Example Applications of Automated Sun-Tracking Solar Radiometers X-SAR Data Screening at the German PAF El Saleous, N., E. Vermote and J.C. Roger Operational Atmospheric Correction of AVHRR Visible and Near Infrared Data El Saleous, N., J.C. Roger and E. Vermote Atmospheric Corrections of MAS Data El-Shenawee, M., and E. Bahar Multiple Scattering From Random Rough Surfaces Based on a Deterministic Full Wave Model Eldhuest, K., P.A. Valand, Y.L. Desnos and J.L. Marchand ScanSAR Simulation and Processing Using ERS-1 Data Eldhuset, K. A SAR Processor Based on Two Dimensional Exact Transfer Function Elfouhaily, T., B. Chapron, K. Katsaros and L. Bliven Microwave Scattering Distributions From a Rain-Roughened Water Surface: Measurements and Modeling Ellis, G.A., and I.C. Peden Scattering From Buried Dielectric Objects in the Presence of an Air-Earth Interface: A Method of Moments Technique Ellis, J., M.Warner and R. White Smoothing SAR Images With Neural Networks Eloranta, E.W. Ground Based Lidar Characterization of Cirrus Clouds Emery, W.J., Y. Yu, G.A. Wick, P. Schluessel and R.W. Reynolds Correcting Infrared Satellite Estimates of Sea Surface Temperature for Atmospheric Water Vapor Attenuation Emmons, L.K., and R. de Zafra Accuracy of Profile Retrievals From MM-Wave Spectra of CLO and N2O Engen, G., and H. Johnsen Using Cross-Image Spectra in a SAR Ocean Wave Inversion Scheme England, A.W., and J.F. Galantowicz A Scattering Model for the Radiobrightness of Prairie Grass Engman, E.T. The Potential of SAR in Hydrology Epiphanio, J.C.N., A.R. Huete and H. Liu Influence of Sun-View Geometries on the Relationships Among Vegetation Indices LAI, and Absorbed PAR Escadafal, R. Monitoring Arid Land Surfaces Changes: Optical Remote Sensing of the Non-Vegetated Component Etkin, V.S., A.V. Kuzmin, M.N. Pospelov, A.I. Smirnov and Yu.G. Trokhimovski Investigation of Sea Surface Temperature and Wind Fields in the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Etkin, V.S., M.S. Dzura, Yu.P. Perfiliev and Yu.G. Trokhimovsky The Determination of Atmospheric Water Vapour Content Using Double-Frequency Radiometer Etkin, V.S., Yu.G. Trokhimovski, V.V. Yakovlov and R.F. Gasparovic A Comparison Analysis of Ku-Band SLAR Sea Surface Image at VV and HH Polarizations Obtained During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Evans, C., S. Haimov and R.K. Moore Ocean Wave Properties Using a Ka-Band 3-Beam Radar and the Longuet-Higgins Approach Ewe, H.T., M.E. Veysoglu, C.C. Hsu, R.T. Shin and J.A. Kong Radiative Transfer Theory for Remote Sensing of Sea Ice Fabregas, X., A. Broquetas, J. Romeu and L. Jofre Monostatic Polarimetric Calibration Via Target Spinor Falkov, E., V. Kosinov, N. Maljarov and E. Medvedev Metrology of Airborne Thermal Images Farrand, W.H., and J.C. Harsany Detection of Heavy Metal Contaminated Sediments Using Imaging Spectrometer Data Fedor, F.S., and V. Irisov Airborne Dual-Channel Radiometric Ocean Surface Observations During SCOPE 93 Feigels, V.I., and Yu.I. Kopilevich Lasers for Lidar Bathimetry and Oceanological Research: Choice Criteria Feingold, G., A.S. Frisch, B. Stevens and W.R. Cotton Evaluation of Remote Sensing Techniques for Measuring Cloud Water and Drizzle in Marine Stratocumulus Clouds Ferraro, E.J., and C.T. Swift Mapping the Diagenetic Zone Transitions of Greenland Using the AAFE Radar Altimeter Ferrazzoli, P., L. Guerriero and D. Solimini Comparison Between Predicted Performances of Bistatic and Monostatic Radar in Vegetation Monitoring Ferri, M., L. Castellano, A. Siciliano, R. Vigliotti and P. Murino Using Polarimetric SAR Data in Morphological Analyses the Island of Ischia (Southern Italy) Fierens, F., I. Kanellopoulos and G.G. Wilkinson Comparison and Visulatizatio of Feature Space Behavior of Statistical and Neural Classifiers of Satellite Imagery Filho, B.S.S. Environmental Impact Evaluation of the Iron Ore Mining Activities in Minas Gerais State, Brazil, Using Orbital Remote Sensing and GIS Flower, D.A., L. Froidevaux, W.G. Read and J.W. Waters UARS Microwave Limb Sounder Observations of Upper Atmosphere Ozone and Chlorine Monoxide Flower, D.A., R.F. Jarnot and J.W. Waters Microwave Limb Sounding of the Earths Atmosphere: UARS Results and EOS Plans Folkman, M., P. Jarecke, T.Hedman, S. Carmen, L. Avis, B. Barkstrom, J. Cooper, L. Kopia, W. Lawrence, R. Lee and L. Smith Cross Calibration of a Blackbody Standard With an Active Cavity Radiometer Ford, S.J., and D.M. McKeown, Jr. Performance Evaluation of Multispectral Analysis for Surface Material Classification Formaggio, A.R., J.C.N. Epiphanio and M. de Morrison Valeriano Spectroradiometric Studies (450-2500 NM) of 14 Brazilian Tropical Soil Classes Forster, R.R., A.G. Klein, T.A. Blodgett and B.L. Isacks AIRSAR/TOPSAR Studies of Tropical Glaciers in the Cordillera Real, Bolivia Forte, A., and F. Vinelli A 2-D SPECAN SAR Processor Fortuny, J., E. Ohlmer, A.J. Sieber, P. Pasquali, C. Prati and F. Rocca Validating SAR Interferometry Applications by Using EMSL Fowler, C., J. Maslanik and W. Emery Observed and Simulated Ice Motion for an Annual Cycle in the Beaufort Sea Fraiser, S.J., Y. Liu and R.E. McIntosh Ocean Surface Imaging With a Focused Phased Array Imaging Radar (FOPAIR) Franceschetti, G., D. Lustrini, M. Migliaccio and D. Riccio SAR Simulation of Natural Landscapes Franceschetti, G., G. Fornaro, and E.S. Marzouk A New Approach for Image Rgistration in Interferometric Processing Franceschetti, G., M. Migliaccio and D. Riccio A Fractal-Based Approach to Electromagnetic Modelling Franceschetti, G., M. Migliaccio and D. Riccio An Ocean SAR Simulator Based on the Distributed Surface Model Frankot, R.T. Noise Resistant Estimation Techniques for SAR Image Registration and Stereo Matching Freeman, A., C. Kramer and B. Chapman Classification of the Amazon Rain Forest Using JERS-1 SAR Data Freeman, A., J. Cruz, B. Chapman, M . Alves, M. Azeem and S. Shaffer First Results From SIR-C Calibration Freeman, A., and K. Crandall The SIR-C Education Program (SIR-CED) Freeman, A. Mapping Vegetation Types Using Polarimetric Radar Freilich, M.H., D.G. Long and M.W. Spencer Seawinds: A Scanning Scatterometer for ADEOS II -- Science Overview French, N.H.F., E.S. Kasischke, L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez, P.A. Harrell and N.L. Christensen Jr. Relating Soil Water Measurements at Fire Disturbed Sites in Alaska to ERS-1 SAR Image Signature Friedl, M.A., F.W. Davis, J. Michaelsen and M. Moritz Modeling Sources of Uncertainty in Satellite-Based Estimates of Leaf Area Index Using a Scene Simulation Model Frison, P.L., E. Mougin and A. Lopes Contribution of ERS-1 Wind Scatterometer Data to the Study of Terrestrial Vegetation Fu, L.L., and R. Davidson Linear Response of Sea Level to Wind Forcing Determined From TOPEX/POSEIDON Altimeter Data Fujimoto, T., M.Tanaka and I. Takanami A Precise Navigation Procedure for Automatic Picture Transmission APT Imagery of Meteorological Satellite NOAA Fung, A.K., S. Tjuatja and C. Terre Numerical Simulation of Omnidirectional Scattering From Three-Dimensional Randomly Rough Dielectric Surfaces Fung, A.K., S. Tjuatja, S. Beaven, S.P. Gogineni, K. Jezek, A.J. Gow and D.K. Perovich Modeling Interpretation of Scattering From Snow-Covered Sea Ice Fusina, R.A., R.W. Jansen, S.R. Chubb, F. Askari, J.A.C. Kaiser, A. Cooper and G.R. Valenzuela Comparison of Data and Model Slope Statistics for a Current Convergence Feature WT01-B02-92IA054-000906-B014-256http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorg.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190712 text/html 16068HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:05:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: G Papers listed by Author: G Gabella, M., and G. Perona A Geographical Information System Finalised to the Gome Instruments (ERS-2 Mission) Gaikovich, K.P. Nonstatistical Method of Temperature Profile Retrieval by Satellite Radiometric Measurements in Oxygen Spectra Gaikovich, K.P. Solution of the Radio Refraction Inverse Problem and Determination of the Path Delay Gaikovich, K.P. Tikhonovs Method of the Ground-Based Radiometric Retrieval of the Ozone Profile Gaiser, P.W., C.T. Swift and D.M. Le Vine L-Band Synthetic Aperture Radiometers for Earth Remote Sensing Galantowicz, J.F., and A.W. England Radiobrightness Signatures of Energy Balance Processes: Melt/Freeze Cycles in Snow and Prairie Grass Covered Ground Gambotto, J.P. Physics Based Analysis/Synthesis of Infrared Imagery Gampe, F., M. Rast, P. Mancini, J.M. Pieplu and Am. Schipper Future Mission Concepts for Low and High Frequency SAR Satellite Ganapol, B.D. The Reflection for Dense Plant Canopies From the One-Angle Radiative Transfer Equation Garin, Sh.N., V.M. Pankov, and Yu.G. Shkurkin Solar Activity, Tropical Cyclones and Earthquakes Gasiewski, A.J., D.M. Jackson, J.R. Wang, P.E. Racette and D.S. Zacharias Airborne Imaging of Tropospheric Emission at Millimeter and Submillimeter Wavelengths Gasparovic, R.F., and V.S. Etkin An Overview of the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Gasster, S.D., D. Rudy, D.L. Glackin, M. Colton and G. Poe Analysis of Multi-Incidence Angle Satellite Microwave Radiometer Data From the DMSP SSM/I Gastellu-Etchegorry, J.P., F. Zagolski, V. Pinel, G. Giordano, J. Romier, G. Marty, E. Mougin, R. Joffre and B. Lacaze Assessment of Forest Canopy Chemistry With ISM Gauthier, R.P., K. Staenz, P.M. Teillet and D.J. Williams Influence of Scale Change on Bidirectional Reflectances of a Pecan Orchard Derived From ASAS Image Data Gelbwachs, J.A. Iron Boltzmann Factor Lidar: Proposed New Remote Sensing Techniques for Mesospheric Temperature Geling, G., and D. Ionescu A Kalman Filter for Speckle Reduction in SAR Data Genovese, G., M. Millot, and R.P.H.M. Schoenmakers Segmentation and Interpretation of NOAA-AVHRR Multi-Temporal NDVI Based Data Sets in Temperature Regions Gerald, V., and W.J. Pierson Jr. Comparisons of Data Buoy Winds Speeds to the Wind Speeds of a Marine Boundary Layer Model Gerber, L, and N. Kampfer Millimeterwave Measurements of Trace Gases at the Jungfraujoch Station Gerstl, S.A.W., and C.C. Borel Angular Signatures Gibbs, D.P., C.L. Betty, A.K. Fung, H. Dibas and J.R. Irons An Experimental Study of Light Scattering Mechanisms From Soils Using Polarized Bidirectional Reflectance Gibbs, D.P., M. Dolaty, C.L. Betty, J. Skelton and Z. Zepeda Simultaneous Detection of Multiple Greenhouse Gases Using Long-Path Spectrometers Gille, J.C., L. Pan, M.D. Smith and P.L. Bailey Retrieval of Profiles of Carbon Monoxide and Total Methane Columns From Mopitt Measurements Gineris, D.J., and F.M. Fetterer An Examination of the Radar Backscatter of Sea Ice i nthe East Siberian and Chukchi Seas Giuli, D., L. Baldini, L. Facheris, M. Mecacci and E. Palmisano Methodologies for Estimating the Vertical Profile of Reflectivity Through C-Band Dual Polarization Radar Giuli, D., L. Facheris, L. Baldini and E. Palmisano Reconstruction of Two-Dimensional Velocity Fields Through Doppler Weather Radar Data Giuli, D., L. Facheris, L. Baldini, P. Mazzetti and E. Palmisano Spatial and Temporal Sampling Errors in Rainfall Fields Reconstruction Through Meteorological Radar Data Givri, J.R. Assessing the Land Surface Temperature and Moisture With Infrared and Microwave Data Glazman, R., A. Fabrikant and A. Greysukh Accounting for Regional Factors of the Altimeter Sea State Bias Gloersen, P., E.G. Josberger, N.M. Mognard and O.M. Johannessen Active/Passive Observations of a Polynya Area in the Beaufort Sea Goddard, J.W.F., J.D. Eastment and J. Tan Self-Consistent Measurements of Differential Phase and Differential Reflectivity in Rain Goetz, A.F.H. The Effects of Sub-Visual Cirrus Clouds on Imaging Spectrometry Data Goetz, S.J., F.G. Hall, K.F. Hummerich and J.E. Nickeson Remote Sensing of PAR Interception and Net Primary Production in Trembling Aspen and Black Spruce Stands Goldsmith, J.E., and S.E. Bisson Raman Lidar Profiling of Atmospheric Water Vapor Goldstein, R., P. Rosen and C. Werner ERS-1 Bistatic Radar Images Golynski, S.M., and V.D. Gusev Normalization Area in Free Space Golynski, S.M. Ray Paths in Refractive Random Media Gond, V., F. Cabot, A. Chehbouni and J.C. Meunier Temporal Evolution of Physical Parameters Over SALT/HAPEX-SAHEL Site Goodenough, D., D. Charlebois, S. Matwin and D. MacDonald Queries and Their Application to Reasoning With Remote Sensing and GIS Goodrich, D.C. Salsa-Mex: Semi-Arid Land-Surface-Atmospheric Mountain Experiment Goossens, R., M. De Dapper, A. Gad, T.K. Ghabour and M. El Badawi A Model to Simulate and Predict Soil Salinity and Water Logging (Elaborated for the Nile Delta Fringes, Egypt) Gopal, S., and C. Woodcock Remote Sensing of Forest Structure and Change Using Artificial Neural Networks Gorbunov, M.Yu, and A.M. Chekalyuk Lidar Implementation of Pump-and-Probe Technique for Remote Sensing Estimates of Photosynthesis Efficiency in Plants Gotwols, B.L., M.J. Jose, R.E. Sterner II, D.R. Thompson, E.M. Zuikova, V.I. Titov and V.V. Bakhanov Observations of Internal Waves at X and Ka Bands, and Comparison With Model Calculations Gower, J.F.R. Mapping Coastal Currents With SAR, Using Naturally-Occurring Surface Slick Patterns Graetz, R.D., M.A. Wilson, A.J. Prata, I.J. Barton and R.M. Mitchell A Continental Instrumented Ground Site Network (CIGSN, Australia): A Prerequisite for the Detection, Interpretation and Quantification of Global Change Graetz, R.D., and M.A. Wilson Characterising the Landcover of the Australian Continent for Incorporation into High Spatial Resolution GCMs Graetz, R.D., and M.A. Wilson The Detection and Interpretation of Landcover Change Using Both Fine and Coarse Scaled Space Data Graham, D., W. Kovalick and P. Dabney Calibration of the Advanced Solid-State Array Spectroradiometer Grandell, J., and M. Hallikainen Retrieval of Snow and Sea Ice Parameters From SSM/I Data Granger, S.L., R.D.Haskins and A.J. Pursch A Quick Access Data Management System for In-Situ Data for EOS AIRS Product Validation Gray, A.L., M.W.A. van der Kooij, K.E. Mattar and P.J. Farris-Manning Progress in the Development of the CCRS Along-Track Interferometer Green, R., D. Roberts and J. van den Bosch Leaf Area Index Estimation Derived From Differential Vegetation Liquid Water Absorption Measured by an Imaging Spectrometer Green, R.O., J.E. Conel, J. Margolis and T.G. Chrien Spectral Calibration of an Imaging Spectrometer Inflight Using Solar and Atmospheric Absorption Bands Greidanus, H. Wave-Current Interaction Modeling Incorporating Wave Blocking Grenfell, T.C., M.R. Wensnahan and D.K. Perovich Microwave Emission From New and Young Congelation Saline Ice Grenfell, T.C., and D.K. Perovich Analysis of Subsurface-Based Passive Microwave Observations During LEADEX 92 Grigoriev, P.V., A.M. Lomonosov and V.G. Mikhalevich Measurement of Glitter Points Velocities on the Sea Surface Using a Scanning Laser Probe Grodsky, S.A., and S.V. Stanichny Joint Analysis of Satellite Infrared- and SAR-Images in the Vicinity of Main Black Sea Current Jet Grossman, Y.L., E.W. Sanderson, S.L. Ustin and Q.J. Hart Relationships Between Leaf Chemistry and Reflectance for Plant Species From Jasper Ridge, California Grover, K.D., S. Quegan, P. Tissi and A.H. Alves Image Quality, Statistical and Textural Properties of SAREX Data From the Tapajos Test Site Gu, Z., J.Q. Lu, A.A. Maradudin and E.R. Mendez Enhanced Backscattering From 1-D Free Standing Dielectric Film Guarino, C.R. A Novel Method for Two-Dimensional Phase Estimation Guillemin, G., P. Ricaud, J. de La Noe and R. Lauque Stratospheric Ozone Measurements Made by a Ground-Based Microwave Radiometer at the Bordeaux Observatory, France Guillobez, S., and M. Arnaud Soil Roughness Indexes Use of Geostatistic and Laser Sensing Measure Guissard, A., and J.L. Fernandez An Application Example of Cloude Approach in Radar Polarimetry Guneriusssen, T., H. Johnsen and K. Sand DEM Corrected ERS-1 Data for Snow Monitoring in Alpine Regions Gunson, M.R. The Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy Investigation Gunther, J.H., and D.G. Long Modeling the Near-Surface Oceanic Wind Velocity WT01-B02-93IA054-000906-B014-306http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorhj.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190734 text/html 22643HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:06:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: H-J Papers listed by Author: H-J Haddad, Z.S., E. Im and S.L. Durden Optimal Estimation of Rain Rate Profiles From Single-Frequency Radar Echoes Haddad, Z.S., P. Dubois, J. van Zyl Bayesian Estimation of Soil Parameters From Remote Sensing Data Hafemeister, L., and J.P. Cocquerez Detection, Estimation of Directional Features on Ocean Surface Images Haferman, J.L., T.F. Smith and W.F. Krajewski Multi-Dimensional Radiative Transfer Computations Using a Scalable Parallel Implement of the Discrete-Ordinates Method Hagan, D. Airborne Radiometer for Sea Surface Temperature Measurements During TOGA COARE Hagen, M., J. Hubbert, C. Richter, V.N. Bringi and P.F. Meischner Melting Layer Observation With Radar and Aircraft Hagg, W. Efficient Speckle Filtering of SAR Images Hagolle, O., J.M. Martinuzzi and C. Latry How to Double the Spatial Resolution of a Push-Broom Instrument Haimov, S., B. Gotwols, W. Plant and R.K. Moore Ka-Band Ocean Wave-Radar Modulation Transfer Function: A Comparative Study Hamilton, M., and C.O. Davis Determination of Particulate Resuspension and Mixing Near an Ocean Outfall Using Hyperspectral Ocean Color Imagery Han, Y., J.B. Snider, E.R. Westwater, S.H. Melfi and R.A. Ferrare Comparison of Water Vapor Measurements by Ground-Based Microwave Radiometers and Raman Lidar Han, Y., J.H. Churnside and J.A. Shaw A Comparison of Measured and Calculated Spectral Radiance Hanaizumi, H., R. Takesaki and S. Fujimura An Automated Method for Making Mosaic Out of NOAA/AVHRR Images for Global Monitoring Hardesty, R.M., R.M. Banta, M.J. Post and W.L. Eberhard A Decade of Atmospheric Studies Using a Pulsed CO2 Doppler Lidar Harding, D.J., J.B. Blair, J.B. Garvin and W.T. Lawrence Laser Altimetry Waveform Measurement of Vegetation Canopy Structure Hart, Q.J., S.L. Ustin, G. Scheer and L. Duan Estimating Dry Grass Biomass Residues Using AVIRIS Image Analysis Hartmann, G.K., W. Degenhardt, R. Zwick, H.J. Liebe, G.A. Hufford and M.G. Cotton Zeeman Splitting of the 61 GHz (9+) O2 Line in the Mesosphere Hartogh, P., and C. Jarchow Millimeter Wave Detection of Mesospheric Ozone Using a High Resolution Chirp Transform Spectrometer Backend Hauser, D. Measurements of Surface Wind on the Ocean Using an Airborne Radar Looking at Small Incidence Angles Hauser, D. VAGSAT: A Proposal for a Small Satellite Mission for the Measurement of Ocean Wave Spectra With a Real-Aperture Radar Haverkamp, D, and C. Tsatsoulis Utilizing the Dynamic Behavior of Sea Ice for Determining Ice Thickness Distributions in SAR Imagery Heilimo, J., J. Talvela and M. Hallikainen Monitoring the Stratospheric Ozone Profile With Ground-Based Microwave Radiometer Heiska, K. Diurnal Variations of Backscattering Properties of Pine Trees at C- and X-Bands Hellwich, O. Detection of Linear Features in ERS-1 SAR Images Using Neural Network Technology Helmlinger, M., R. Green, J. Conel and J. van den Bosch Acquisition of In-Situ Surface and Atmospheric Measurements for AVIRIS Data Validation and Analysis Objective and Subjective Techniques for Estimation of Elevated Duct Characteristics Over the Northeastern Pacific Ocean From Weather Satellite Imagery Helvey, R. VOCAR Refractive Variability Using Isentropic Cross-Section Analysis Hendricks, J.R., R.R. Leben, G.H. Born and C. Koblinsky Detection of Oceanic Steric Height Change Using TOPEX/Poseidon Satellite Altimetery Hennings, I., M. Metzner and J. Matthews Sunglitter Radiance Modulation of Submarine Sand Waves and Internal Waves Hensley, S., P. Rosen and H. Zebker Generation of High Resolution Topographic Maps of the Galapagos Islands Using TOPSAR Data Hensley, S., S. Shaffer and R. Goldstein Using Repeat Track Interferometry to Estimate Small Scale Surface Changes on Venus Hensley, S., and F. Webb Comparison of Long Valley TOPSAR Data With Kinematic GPS Survey Measurements Hensley, S., and S. Shaffer Automatic DEM Generation Using Magellan Radar Stereo Data Hernandez, P., L.V. Dutra, K. Grover, S. Amaral and S. Quegan Land Cover Discrimination Using SAREX Data Hess, L.L., J.M. Melack and F.W. Davis Mapping Floodplan Inundation With Multi-Frequency Polarimetric SAR: Use of a Tree-Based Model Hildebrand, P.H., and C.A.Walther The NCAR Eldora Airborne Doppler Weather Radar: Goals, Design and First Field Tests Hildebrand, P.H. Estimation of Sea-Surface Winds in TOGA COARE Using Backscatter Cross Section Measurements From Airborne Research Weather Radar Hiltbrunner, D., C. Matzler and A. Wiesmann Monitoring Land Surfaces With Combined DMSP-SSM/I and ERS-1 Scatterometer Data Hinds, N., and A.W. England A High-Level Protocol for Configuring Information System User Interfaces Hitney, H.V. Modeling Surface Effects With the Prabolic Equation Method Hochwald, B., and A. Nehorai Polarimetric Modeling and Parameter Estimation Hoekman, D.H., J.J. van der Sanden and W. Bijker Results of the SAREX-92 Campaign in Guyana and Colombia Hoffbeck, J.P., and D.A. Landgrebe Effect of Radiance-to-Reflectance Transformation and Atmosphere Removal on Maximum Likelihood Classification Accuracy of High-Dimensional Remote Sensing Data Hogan, D.B. Compression of Satellite Multispectral Imagery for Applications Requiring High-Quality Radiometry Holecz, F., E. Meier, J. Piesbergen and D. Nuesch Radiometric Calibration of Airborne SAR Imagery Holt, B. Analysis of ERS-1 SAR Ice Type Signatures and Products Based on LEADEX Measurements Holt, H., and H.D. Maney NDS, A Portable Software Tool for Visualization and Analysis of 3D Radar Images Hook, S.J., and K. Okada In-Flight Wavelength Calibration of Multispectral Thermal Infrared Data Hoque, E., and G. Remus 3D-Reconstruction of Laser-Induced Chlorophyll-Fluorescence of Beech (Fagus Sylvatica L.) Leaves Hori, K., T. Hoshi, G. Tong, and K. Shimokouji Application of Equivocation Quantification to Fuzzy Data Horrell, J.M., A.R. Knight and M.R. Inggs A Quicklook Processor for an Airborne SAR Hovland, H.A., J.A. Johannessen and G. Digranes Slick Detection in SAR Images Hsu, S.S., and S.Ashton Simulation of Visible and IR Imagery for GOES Hubbert, J., V.N. Bringi, H. Holler and P. Meischner Optimum Polarizations for Radar Meteorology Huete, A.R., H. Liu, G.R. de Lira, K. Batchily and R. Escadafal A Soil Color Index to Adjust for Soil and Litter Noise in Vegetation Index Imagery of Arid Regions Huete, A.R., and H. Liu Directional Vegetation Index Interactions in ASAS Imagery Huhnerfuss, H., A. Gericke, W. Alpers, M. Gade and V. Wismann Classification of Sea Slicks by Multi-Frequency Radar Techniques: A Revisit in the Light of the Morphology Effect Huynen, J.R. A New Extended Target Decomposition Scheme Hyyppa, J., J. Pulliainen, K. Heiska and M. Hallikainen Statistics of Backscattering Source Distribution of Boreal Coniferous Forests at C- and X-Band Hyyppa, J., and J. Pulliainen Inventory by Compartments Using Radar-Derived Stand Profiles Hyyppa, J., and M. Hallikainen Feasibility of a Scanning Ranging Radar to Forest Inventory Ignatov, A.M., I.L. Dergileva, Yu.B. Ratner, S.M. Sakerin and D.M. Kabanov Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval From Sun Photometer Measurements Ignatov, A.M., L.L. Stowe and R.R. Singh Comparing Numberical and Analytical Schemes for Aerosol Retrieval From the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer Ignatov, A.M., S.M. Sakerin, L.L. Stowe, D.M. Kabanov, I.L. Dergileva and Yu.B. Ratner Statistical Examination of Aerosol Optical Thickness Derived From Sun Photometer Measurements Ignatov, A.M., and I.L. Dergileva Model Approximation of Angular Dependence of the AVHRR Brightness and Temperatures Ilyin, V.A., S.V. Slobodchikova and V.S. Etkin Laboratory Investigation of Agreement Between Dielectrical and Radiation Properties of Freezen Sand Ilyin, V.A., V.Yu. Raizer and V.G. Irisov Study of Water Surface Perturbations Using Highly Sensitive Superconducting Radiometers Ilyin, V.A., and S.V. Slobodchikova Experimental Discovery of Segnetoelectrical Ice in the Freezen Sand Ilyin, V.A., and Yu.M. Sosnovsky Laboratory Studies of Salinity Influence on Dielectric Characteristics of Sand Im, E., W.T.K. Johnson and K. Wheeler Development Status of Cassini Radar for Remote Sensing of Titan Inggs, M.R., J. Horrell, A. Knight and P. Koeppen iSAR: A Multispectral, Polarimetric Airborne SAR System Intrieri, J.M., W.L. Eberhard and G. Feingold Retrieving Cirrus Cloud Microphysical Parameters From Lidar and Radar Backscatter Irisov, V.G. Small Slope Approximation for Microwave Polarimetric Observation of the Sea Surface Isham, J., and C.T. Swift Sea Ice Characterization With Millimeter Wave Radars and Low Frequency Microwave Radiometers Ishimaru, A., L. Ailes-Sengers, P. Phu and D. Winebrenner Pulse Broadening of the Enhanced Backscattering From Rough Surfaces Ivanov, A.Yu., P.A. Shirokov, K.Ja. Kondratyev and M.A. Naumenko Observation and Estimation of Internal Waves in Lake Ladoga Using COSMOS-1870 and ALMAZ-1 SAR Data Ivanov, A.Yu., P.A. Shirokov, V.E. Shkarin and I.G. Avenarius Interpretation of Tidal Geomorphological Features at the Elbe Estuary Using ALMAZ-1 SAR Data Ivanov, A.Yu., V.V. Zaytsev, V.V. Bakhanov and G.A. Grodsky ALMAZ-1 SAR Ocean Wave Imaging -- First Results Jackson, T.J., J. Aleksa, C.T. Swift, P.E. ONeill and K. Kostov Diurnal Observations of Soil Moisture With Passive Microwave Radiometers Jacob, D.J. Export of Ozone and Its Precursors From North America to the Global Troposphere Jacobson, A.S., and A.L. Berkin Linkwinds, A Visual Data Analysis System and Its Application to Remote Sensed Data Jacquemoud, S., J. Verdebout, G. Schmuck, G. Andreoli, B. Hosgood and S.E. Hornig Investigation of Leaf Biochemistry by Statistics and Models Jansen, R.W., T.L. Ainsworth, R.A. Fusina, S.R. Chubb and G.R. Valenzuela Hydrodynamic and Radar Modeling of Surface Features Observed in Gulf Stream Boundary Regions Jarchow, C., and P. Hartogh Retrieval of Mesosphere Ozone From Goundbased Millimeter Wave Observations Jarecke, P., M. Frink, M. Folkman, S. Carmen, L. Avis, B. Barkstrom, J. Cooper, L. Kopia, W. Lawrence, R. Lee and L. Smith End-to-End Spectral Response Characterization of the Clouds and the Earths Radiant Energy System Sensors From 0.3 to 200 Microns Jarnot, R.F. Calibration of the Microwave Limb Sounder on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite Jean, C., and P. Agna Relationships Between Western Africa ITCZ and St. Helena Anticyclone Suggested by a Watch of Meteosat-WV Channel Jhung, Y., and P.H. Swain A Contextual Classifier Based on Markov Random Fields and Robust M-Estimates Jia, X., and J.A. Richards Small Class Classification for Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Data Jimenez, L., and D. Landgrebe High Dimensional Feature Reduction via Projection Pursuit Jin, M.Y. PRF Ambiguity Determination for Radarsat ScanSAR System Johannessen, J.A., R.A. Shuchman, G. Digranes, C. Wackermann and O.M. Johannessen Detection of Surface Current Features With ERS-1 SAR Imaging Radar Johannessen, O.M., and E. Bjoergo No Significant Trend in Arctic and Antarctic Ice Concentrations From 1973 to 1991 Johansen, M.E., H. Tommervik and J.P. Pedersen Using a Geographic Information System (ARC/INFO) as a Tool for Integration of Remote Sensed and In-Situ-Data in an Analysis of the Air Pollution Effects on Terrestrial Ecosystems in Varanger (Norway) and Nikel-Pechenga (Russia) Johnson, L.F., and D.L. Peterson Estimation of Forest Canopy Leaf Area Index Using Directional ASAS Measurements Jorquera, C.R., V.G. Ford, V.G. Duval and C.J. Bruegge Design of New Photodiode Standards for Use in the MISR In-Flight Calibrator Josberger, E.G., M.A. True, S.M. Hodge, R.M. Krimmel and R.A. Shuchman Determination of Surface Features on Glaciers in Alaska From ERS-1 SAR Observations Joughin, I.R., and D.P. Winebrenner Effective Number of Looks for a Multilook Interferometric phase Distribution Jouny, I. Neural Network Adaptive Wavelet Classification of Radar Targets Judge, J., J.F. Galantowicz and A.W. England An Evaluation of BATS as a Basis for a Radiobrightness Model for Northern Prairie WT01-B02-94IA054-000906-B014-347http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authork.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190754 text/html 16725HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:06:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: K Papers listed by Author: K Kabeche, A., and J. Testud Stereoradar Meteorology: A New Unified Approach to Process Data From Airborne or Ground Based Weather Radars Kabutz, M., M.R. Inggs and A. Langman Hardware Cancellation of the Direct Coupling in a Stepped CW Ground Penetrating Radar Kahn, R., and R. Haskins Working With Spacecraft Data: Where We Are, And Where We Want to Go Kampfer, N., C. Aellig, C. Rudin, R. Bevilacqua, Ph. Schwartz, W. Degenhardt, G. Hartmann, J. Langen and K. Kunzi First Results of Zonally Averaged CLO Concentrations as Measured by MAS on ATLAS-1 Kane, T.J., S. Rajan, C.R. Philbrick, S. Keihm, S. Walter and M.J. Mahoney Comparisons of Lidar and Microwave Radiometer Measurements of Atmospheric Water Vapor and Temperature Karam, M.A. The Potential of Microwave Radiometers in Monitoring Forest Biomass Karna, J.P., and K. Makisara Geometric Correction of Airborne Imaging Spectrometer Data Kasilingam, D. Low Grazing Angle Backscatter From the Ocean -- The Effects of Shadowing and Multiple Scattering Kasilingam, D. Neural Network-Based Inversion Technique for SAR Images of Ocean Surface Waves Kasilingan, D. Polarimeteric Radar Signatures of Oil Slicks for Measuring Slick Thickness Kasischke, E.S., L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez, N.H.F. French, S.L. Ustin and N.L. Christensen Monitoring of Carbon Release in Alaskan Boreal Forests Katsaros, K., Y. Quilfen, B. Chapron and H. Zhao Tropical Cyclone Surface Winds and Waves From the Advanced Microwave Instrument of the ERS-1, Comparison to Special Sensor Microwave/Imager Observations Kawamura, M., and Y. Tsujiko An Approach to Geographic Pattern Recognition Using a Mathematical Morphology Kawata, Y., A. Yamazaki, K. Takemata, T. Kusaka and S. Ueno Aerosol Retrieval From Airborne Polder Data by Multiple Scattering Model Keller, M.R., B.L. Gotwols, W.J. Plant and W.C. Keller Comparison of Microwave Backscatter With Optically-Derived Cross Sections From Wind-Generated Waves in a Wavetank Kemppinen, M., J. Pallonen and M. Hallikainen Construction of an Airborne 93 GHz Imaging Radiometer Kemppinen, M., and M. Hallikainen Optimization of the Scan Geometry of Imaging Microwave Radiometer Kenyi, L.W. Performance Evaluation of Interferometric SAR Image Registration Techniques Kerekes, J.P., and H.J. Jimenez-Gonzalez Spectral Band and Detector Optimization for Atmospheric Sounding Interferometers Kerekes, J.P. NDVI Sensitivity to Atmospheric Water Vapor as a Function of Spectral Bandwidth Kerr, Y., and R.D. Magagi On the Use of the ERS-1 Wind Scatterometers Over Land Surfaces Kess, B., D. Steinwand and S.E. Reichenbach Lossless Compression and Multiresolution Decompression of the Global AVHRR 1 KM Data Set Key, J., A. Schweiger, R. Stone and M. Haefliger Estimating High-Latitude Radiative Fluxes From Satellite Data: Requirements, Problems, and Possibilities Key, J., R. Stone and J. Maslanik Retrieval of Lead Characteristics Using Visible and Thermal AVHRR Imagery: Validation of Theory With Leadex Data Kharuk, V.I., V.N. Morgun, B.N. Rock and D.L. Williams Some Aspects of Chlorophyll Fluorescence Application in Remote Sensing Khazenie, N., and R. Price An Early EOS Progress Report Kim, C. Estimating of Surface Temperatures on Forest Stands Using Airborne MSS Emittance Data Kim, E.J., J.F. Galantowicz and A.W. England An Enhanced Radiobrightness and Surface Energy Balance Monitoring System for Studies of Land-Atmosphere Interactions Kim, K.O., Y.K. Yang, J.H. Lee, H.O. Nam, D.J. Seo and T.H. Kang Development of a Tactical Terrain Analysis System With GIS Technique Kim, M.S., C.S.T. Daughtry, E.W. Chappelle and J.E. McMurtrey Assessment of Absorbed Photosynthetically Active Radiation (Apar) Using High Spectral Resolution Reflectance Bands Kisselev, V.B., L. Roberi and G. Perona Radiative Transfer in Anisotropically Scattering Atmospheres: The Finite Element Method Kitichotpanit, B., and Y. Kuga Applications of Angular and Frequency Correlation Functions for Detecting the Characteristics of Geophysical Media at Millimeter Wavelengths Klaus, F., M. Wagner and O. Loffeld Simulation of SAR Raw Data Using SISAR Klein, J., S. Hensley, S. Madsen and F. Webb Results of 1993 Repeat-Pass SAR Interferometry Experiments Knight, A.R., and M.R. Inggs A SAR Processor Implemented on a Transputer Ring Koechler, C., B. Hosgood, G. Schmuck, J. Verdebout, J. Hill, W. Mehl, D. Roberts and M. Smith The JRC Optical Goniometric Facility: Technical Description and First Experiment on Spectral Mixing Kogan, F., J. Sullivan and B. Pu Improvement in 1985-1993 NDVI Time-Series for World Desert Targets Using Post-Launch Calibration Koh, G., and R.E. Davis Effect of Snow Stereology on Millimeter Wave Extinction Kohl, H.G., E.Nezry, H. de Groof and G. Kattenborn Monitoring Agricultural Surfaces Using ERS-1 Multitemporal SAR Data Kohl, H.G. An Evaluation of ERS-1 PRI Data in the Context of the Rapid Estimation of Crop Acreages in Europe Kolarov, G.V., A.D. Deleva and Ts.A. Mitsev Lidar Sounding of the Atmosphere With Tunable Acousto-Optical Filter as Spectral Element in Receiver Kolev, N.V., K. Penev, Y. Kirkova, T. Nazurski, E. Rumenina, G. Kamenov and C. Levchev Remote Sensing and Synchronous Land Surface Measurements of Soil Moisture and Soil Temperature Komiyama, K., Y. Kato and T. Iwasaki Indoor Experiment of Two-Dimensional Supersynthesis Radiometer Koopman, N., and G.G. Lemoine Radar Image Analysis Software: Results of the ICT/WRS Market Survey Kopelevich, O.V., and P.P. Shirshov On Opportunity of Assessment of Underwater Solar Radiation in the Global Ocean on Satellite Data Kornienko, S.G., and A.V. Savin The Outcomes of Employment of New Instrument and Software of Thermal Remote Sensing at Search of Oil and Gas Deposits Koskinen, J., L. Kurvonen, V.Jaaskelainen and M. Hallikainen Mapping of Snow With ERS-1 SAR and Airborne Microwave Sensors Kosov, A.S., V.D. Gromov, S.S. Kiselev and D.P. Skulachev Hydrometeors Investigation by Means of 3 Millimeter Coherent Radar Kovalick, W., D. Graham and M. Bur The Advanced Solid-State Array Spectroradiometer Data Processing System Kovalick, W., D. Graham, M. Bur and P. Dabney Data Processing and Calibration of the Advanced Solid State Array Spectroradiometer Kozlov, A.I., and A.I. Logvin Identification of the Phase of Hydrometeors by Jinear Depolarisation Method Kozu, T., T. Kawanishi, K. Oshimura, M. Satake and H. Kamagai TRMM Precipitation Radar: Calibration and Data Collection Strategies Krabill, W.B., R.H. Thomas, R.N. Swift and S. Manizade Greenland Ice Sheet Topographic Mapping Using Combined Airborne Laser and GPS Technology Kraft, U.R. Two-Dimensional Aperture Synthesis Radiometers in a Low Earth Orbit Mission and Instrument Analysis Krogager, E., and A. Freeman Feature Extraction From POL-SAR Imagery for Radar Target Identification and Classification Krogager, E., and W.M. Boerner A Revisition of Some Basic Formulations in Radar Polarimetry Krogager, E. On the Role of Target Helicity in Polarimetric Radar Analysis and Interpretation Kropfli, R.A., S.Y. Matrosov, T. Uttal, A.S. Frisch and J.B. Snider Studies of Radiatively-Important Clouds With 8-Millimeter Wavelength Doppler Radar Kropfli, R.A., and S.F. Clifford The San Clemente Ocean Probing Experiment: A Study of Air/Sea Interactions With Remote and In-Situ Sensors Kudoh, J., H. Kawamura and Y. Nemoto A Study on Whole Three Years Data Analysis of NOAA AVHRR Images Kuemmrich, K.F., and F.G. Hall Considerations in Using Spectral Vegetation Indices to Determine Biophysical Variables in the Boreal Forest Kunkee, D.B., and A.J. Gasiewski Airborne Passive Polarimetric Measurements of Sea Surface Anisotropy at 92 GHz Kurvonen, L., M. Toikka and M. Hallikainen Airborne Microwave Radiometer Measurements of Baltic Sea Ice Kusaka, T., and Y. Kawata Atmospheric and Topographic Correction of Satellite Data Over Mountainous Terrain Kushardono, D., K. Fukue, H. Shimoda and T. Sakata A Landcover Classification Method With the Aid of Spatial Information Using Neural Network Kutuza, B.G., A. Hornbostel and A. Schroth Spatial Inhomogeneities of Rain Brightness Temperature and the Effect of Averaging for Observations by Satellite Microwave Radiometers Kux, H.J.H., and G.M. Henebry Multi-Scale Texture in SAR Imagery: Landscape Dynamics of the Pantanal, Brazil Kux, H.J.H., and R.G.I. Arakaki Evaluation of Microwave Scattering Models for Remote Sensing of Soil Moisture in Tropical Agricultural Soils Kuzmina, A.M., and V.V. Yutsis Earth Crust Tension and Recent Geodynamics Activity of the Strait of Sicily Kwoh, L.K., E.C. Chang, W. Cheng, A. Heng and H. Lim DTM Generation From 35-Day Repeat Pass ERS-1 Interferometry Kwok, R., D.A. Rothrock, G.F. Cunningham and H. Stern Determination of Ice Age: A Proposed Scheme for a RADARSAT Sea Ice Geophysical Processor System Kwok, R., and G.F. Cunningham Use of Time-Series SAR Data to Resolve Ice Type Ambiguities in Newly-Opened Leads Shallow Freshened Ocean Surface Lens Formation by Heavy Rain Over the Western Pacific Warm Pool During TOGA COARE WT01-B02-95IA054-000906-B014-404http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorl.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190822 text/html 14472HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:06:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: L Papers listed by Author: L Lakshmi, V., E.F. Wood and B.J. Choudhury Simulation of Microwave Brightness Temperatures Using a Coupled Land-Surface-Canopy-Atmosphere Model Lanari, R. A New Method for Wide Field Synthetic Aperture Radar Processing Landry, J.C., and A.W. England Far-Infrared Absorption of CO2 Clathrate Hydrate Langen, J., A. Berg, H.D. Dicken, T. Wehr, K. Kuenzi, W. Degenhardt, N. Kaempfer and R. Bevilacqua Temperature and Pressure Profiles of the Middle Atmosphere Retrieved From Millimeter Wave Atmospheric Sounder (MAS) Onboard the Space Shuttle Mission Atlas-1 Langman, A., N.R. Ballard and M.R. Inggs On-Line Complex Permittivity Measurements for Ground Penetrating Radar Langman, A., and M.R. Inggs A Novel Stepped CW Ground Penetrating Radar Langman, A., and M.R. Inggs The Use of Polarimetry in Subsurface Radar Lannes, A., and E. Anterrieu Image Reconstruction Methods for MIRAS Larsen, M. Point Process Models for Weather Radar Images Laursen, B., and N. Skou A Spaceborne Synthetic Aperture Radiometer Simulated by the TUD Demonstration Model Lavrenov, I., T. Belonenko and Y. Sharikov The Remote Sensing of the Ocean Surface at the Frontal Zone Lazarev, A.A. Precursors of Typhoon Development Determined by Microwave Soundings of Atmosphere Le Vine, D., M. Kao, T.J. Jackson, A. Griffis and C.T. Swift Status of ESTAR Validation: Results From Washita-92 Leberl, F. Geometric Processing of Dissimilar Magellan Radar Images Lee, D.C.L., P.H. Filho and Y.E. Shimabukuro Forest Timber Inventory of Brazilian Amazon Region: A Case Study of Tapajos National Forest Lee, J.S., D.L. Schuler, R.H. Lang and K.J. Ranson K-Distribution for Multi-Look Processed Polarimetric SAR Imagery Lee, P.H.Y., J.D. Barter, D.L. Hindman, B.M. Lake and H. Rungaldier Angle and Polarization Dependent Microwave Backscatter From Ocean Waves Lee, S., and M.M. Crawford Adaptive Reconstruction of Sequential AVHRR Imagery of Texas Via Dynamic Compositing Using Expoentially Weighted Polynomial Function Lee, S., and M.M. Crawford Multitemporal Classification of Texas AVHRR Imagery Using Harmonic Components Legeley-Padovani, A., C. Mering, D. Huaman and R. Guilande Automatic Mapping of Lava Flows of Active Volcanoes in South Peru -- The Example of Sabancaya Leger, D., J. Duffaut and F. Robinet MTF Measurement Using Spotlight Lemoine, G.G., J.G.M. Bakker and E.J. Huising An Integrated Data Base Approach in Support of Remote Sensing Studies of Agricultural Areas Lemonnier, B., C. Lopez, E. Duporte and R. Delmas Multiscale Analysis of Shapes Applied to Thermal Infrared Sea Surface Images Leu, C.H., and L.J. Chen The Estimation on Watershed Design Peak Flow Rates Based on GIS and Remote Sensing Technologies Leung, K., D. Cuddy and M. Chen ASF SAR Processing System Overview Lewicki, S.A., V.M. Jovanovic, M.M. Smyth, E.G. Hansen and K.L. Jones A Simulation of EOS MISR Data and Geometric Processing for the Prototyping of the MISR Ground Data System Lewis, P. Understanding the Radiation Regime of a Crop Canopy: Monte Carlo Ray Tracing Simulations Lhomme, J.P., and A. Chehbouni A Survey of Techniques to Aggregate Energy Balance Controlling Parameters Over Heterogeneous Landscape Li, F., S. Durden, E. Im and W. Wilson Airborne and Spaceborne Cloud Radar Designs Li, L., J. Vivekanandan, C.H. Chan and L. Tsang Studies on Passive Remote Sensing of Ice and Liquid Water Paths Li, X., A.H. Strahler and C.E. Woodcock A Hybrid Geometric-Optical Radiative-Transfer Model for the Directional Reflectance of Discontinuous Vegetation Canopies Li, Z., S. Tjuatja, A.K. Fung and D. Gibbs A Modeling Study of Bidirectional Reflectance From Soil Surfaces Li, Z., S. Tjuatja, A.K. Fung, D. Gibbs, C.L. Betty, H. Dibas and J.R. Irons A Modelling Study of Bidirectional Reflectance From Soil Surfaces and an Experimental Study of Light Scattering Mechanisms From Soils Using Polarized Bidirectional Reflectance Li, Z. Desampling Fir Filters in Real-Time Imaging Techniques Liang, S., and A.H. Strahler A Stochastic Radiative Transfer Model of a Discontinuous Vegetation Canopy Liang, S. Angular Characteristics of Pathfinder AVHRR Land Thermal Imagery and Radiative Transfer Modeling Lightstone, L. Antenna Distortions in Multiple Phase Centre Interferometric Systems Lin, C.C., and P.L. Mancini A SAR Instrument for Global Monitoring of Land Surfaces and Polar Ice Lin, D.S., and E.F. Wood Development and Testing of a Remote Sensing Based Hydrologic Model Lin, I-I, and W.G. Rees Spatial Texture in AirSAR Images of the Greenland Ice Sheet Lin, Y.Ch., and K. Sarabandi Electromagnetic Scattering Model for a Tree Trunk Above a Ground Plane Linganagouda, K., P. Nagabhushan, K.C. Gowda A New Approach for Feature Transformation to Euclidian Space Useful in the Analysis of Multispectral Data Liou, Y.A., and A.W. England Effect of Latent Heat Transfer on Diurnal and Annual Prediction of Temperature and Radiobrightness of Northern Prairie Liu, A.K. Wave Evolution in the Marginal Ice Zone Using ERS-1 SAR Liu, H., and A. Huete A Systems Based Modification of the NDVI to Minimize Soil and Atmospheric Noise Liu, J., R. Ellefsen and D. Costanzo Urban Terrain Zone Based Spatial Data Management Liu, W.T., C.S. Hsu and W. Tang Satellite Observation of Surface Forcing Over the Warm Pool Llewellyn-Jones, D.T., C.T. Matlow and P.J. Barton Global Sea-Surface Temperature, and Properties of the Atmosphere and of the Land Surfaces, Measured by ATSR on the ERS-1 Satellite - A Survey of Scientific Results Assessing the Complementarity of Microwave and Optical Satellite Data for the Monitoring of Vegetation in Semi-Arid Regions Lobanov, V.A. Modeling of Meteorological Index Fields in Northern Hemisphere by Decompositional Methods Loffeld, O. Phase Unwrapping for SAR Interferometry Logvin, A.I., and A.I. Kozlov The Theory of Radiopolarimetry of Thermal Radiation of Surfaces Lohanick, A.W. Does Snow Cover Mask the Microwave Signature of Sea Ice? Loizzo, R., M. Pappalepore, P. Pieri, G. Pasquariello and P. Blonda Multitemporal Analysis of ERS-1 SAR and Landsat TM Data for Geologic Studies Lombardo, P., A. Blake, D. Blacknell and C.J. Oliver Comparison of Simulation Techniques for Correlated Gamma and K Distributed Images for SAR Application Long, D.G., D.S. Early and M.R. Drinkwater Enhanced Resolution ERS-1 Scatterometer Imaging of Southern Hemisphere Polar Ice Long, D.G. Wind Measurement Resolution for Spaceborne Scatterometers Longacre, J.R., and M.A. Landry Laser Propagation in Salt Water Ice Lopes, A., and F. Sery The LMMSE Polarimetric Wishart and the LMMSE Textural Vector Speckle Filters for SAR Images Lu, L., F. Luo and N.J. Mulder The Integration of GIS and Remote Sensing Data Through Object Based Analysis Luciani,S., S. Paloscia, P. Pampaloni, G. Schiavon, S. Sigismondi and D. Solimini Sensitivity of Microwave Backscattering to Crop Biomass Luckman, A., G. Groom and J. Baker Forest Age Discrimination From Texture Measures of SAR Imagery Luo, F., L. Lu and N.J. Mulder An Approach for Change Detection Through Cost Minimization and the Integration of GIS Lure, F.Y.M., and Y.C. Rau Detection of Ship Tracks in AVHRR Cloud Imagery With Neural Networks Lysak, D.B, Jr., T.J. Kane, C.R. Philbrick, R.A. Helvey, L.W. Eddington, D. Lea and J. Rosenthal Atmospheric Horizontal and Vertical Structure Observations Lytle, V.I., K.M. Golden and S.F. Ackley Experimental Measurements and Theoretical Bounds on the Complex Permittivity of Sea Ice at Ka Band (26.5-40 GHz) Lyzenga, D., and C. Wackerman Simulation of SAR Images of Submesoscale Ocean Phenomena WT01-B02-96IA054-000906-B014-455http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorm.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190847 text/html 19875HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:07:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: M Papers listed by Author: M Macelloni, G., S. Paloscia, P. Pampaloni, R. Ruisi and C. Susini Passive Microwave Remote Sensing of Vegetation Biomass Macklin, J.T. Tests of Some Radar Backscatter Models With Multifrequency, Polarimetric SAR Data From the 1989 Noordwijk Experiment Madsen, S.N., and E.L. Christensen Research at the Danish Center for Remote Sensing Madurasinghe, D., and G.R. Haack Induced Electromagnetic Field Associated With Wakes -- Signal Processing Aspects Maekawa, Y., S. Fukao, M. Yamamoto, M.D. Yamanaka, T. Tsuda, S. Kato and R.F. Woodman Observations of Upper Stratospheric Short Period Gravity Waves Using the Jicamarca VHF Radar Maekawa, Y., S. Fukao, Y. Sonoi and K. Masukura Height Distribution of Ice Particles in Wintertime Thunderclouds Observed by a Dual Polarization Radar Maffione, R.A., C.D. Mobley, W.S. Pegau and J.R.V. Zaneveld Radiative Transfer in Sea Ice and the Measurement of In-Ice Optical Profiles Maier, M. A Method for Assessing the Locating Accuracy and Detection Efficiency of Operational Lightning Surveillance Systems Makisara, K., J.P. Karna and A. Lohi A System for Geometric and Radiometric Correction of Airborne Imaging Spectrometer Data Malinas, N.P., R.A. Shuchman and C.C. Wackerman SAR Derived Sea Ice Thickness During ICEX92 Malinovsky, V.V. Peculiarities of the X-Band Radar Signal Scattered by the Sea Surface at Small Grazing Angles Mametsa, H.J., P.F. Combes, J.M. Lopez and H. Moreau Artificial Distributed Targets for the Calibration of Imaging Radar Systems Manore, M., T. Heacock, K. Porter and T. Bretz Simulation of RADARSAT ScanSAR for Sea Ice Applications Mantovani, J.E., M.P. de F. Costa and E.M.L. de M. Novo Spectral Library of Water Masses and Aquatic Macrophytes of Tucurui Reservoir in the Amazon (Brazil) Laboratory Determination of the Performance of the AES Margolis, J.S., S. Nandi and L.C. Sparks Sensitivity Studies on Retrievals of Temperature and Gas Concentrating Carried Out on Simulated AES Spectra of Upwelling Radiation Atmospheric Radiation Marinov, S.M. About the Using of Modular Structured Systems by the Scientific Measurements for Remote Sensing Marinov, S.M. Application of the GPIB in Data Acquisition Systems for Measurements of the Lidar Parameters of the Phenomena Markham, B.L., S.P. Ahmad, J.R. Irons and D.L. Williams Radiometric Calibration of the Landsat-7 Enhanced Thematic Mapper Markus, T., and B.A. Burns Antarctic Polynya Areas Derived With Satellite Passive Microwave Imagery and Their Impact on Ocean and Atmosphere Martin-Neira, M., Y. Menard, J.M. Goutoule and U. Kraft MIRAS, A Two-Dimensional Aperture Synthesis Radiometer Martonchik, J.V., and J.E. Conel Retrieval of Surface Reflectance and Atmospheric Properties Using ASAS Imagery Marzo, C., G. Milillo, A. Bicci, B. Casali and R. Cioni A SW Product for SAR Raw-Data Simulation Mascarenhas, N.D.A., and A.C. Frery SAR Image Filtering With the ICM Algorithm Mascarilla, J., and J. Desachy Learning of Fuzzy If-Then Rules by Neural Networks in Remote Sensing Images Massonnet, D. Recent Advances in SAR Interferometry Mathieu, S., P. Leymarie and M. Berthod Determination of Proportions of Land Use Blend in Pixels of a Satellite Image Mattar, K.E., A.L. Gray, M.W.A. van der Kooij an dP.J. Farris-Manning Airborne Interferometric SAR Results From Mountainous and Glacial Terrain Mattikalli, N.M., B.J. Devereux and K.S. Richards An Integrated Geographical Information Systems Approach to Land Cover Change Assessment Mavrocordatos, C., J. Richard, N. Suinot and E. Thouvenot The French Contribution to TRMM Follow-On Mission Mavrocordatos, C., J. Richard, N. Suinot and P. Mancini Very Low Side-Lobe Level Pulse Compression for Rain Radar Maybee, H., and J. Maslanik Assimilating Remotely Sensed Data Into a Dynamic-Thermodynamic Ice Model Mazar, R., L. Kodner and A. Brohshtein Remote Sensing of Distant Objects in a Random Medium Under Double Passage Conditions Mazely, T.L., R.R. Fridl, S.L. Nickolaisen and S.P. Sander Mechanisms for the Photodissociation of Tropospheric and Stratospheric Nitrates Mazzinghi, P. Interpretation and Physiological Significance of Blue-Green and Red Vegetation Fluorescence McCarthy, J.C., P.B. Budni, G.W. Labrie and E.P. Chicklis 2.0 Micron Solid State Source Technology McDermid, I.S., E.F. Fishbein, L. Froidevaux, E.W. Sirko and T.D.Walsh Lidar Measurements of Stratospheric Ozone and Temperature at Table Mountain, CA, and Mauna Loa, HI, and Comparison With UARS Results McDonald, K.C., R. Zimmermann, J.Way and E. Rignot Characterization of Canopy Physiology at BOREAS With SAR McGill, M.J., W.R. Skinner, T.D. Irgang and K.W. Fischer Incoherent Doppler Lidar for Continuous Measurement of Wind and Aerosol Profiles McKay, M.F., and K.J. Willis Space Shuttle Photography on Laser Disc: A Winning Combination for the Classroom McMurtrey, J., III, E. Chappelle, M. Kim, L. Corp, C. Daughterty and J. Kalshovan Field and Leaf Level Fluorescence for Distinguishing Plant Growth Differences Due Nitrogen Fertilization in a Corn Canopy McNeill, S., S. Belliss and T. Barnes Orbit Refinement With Applications to Remote Sensing McNeill, S. Improving DEM Generation With Additional Constraint Information Melack, J.M., and M. Gastil Detection of Temporal and Spatial Variations of Chlorophyll in Lakes With Airborne Imaging Spectrometry Melfi, S.H., D. Whiteman, R. Ferrare and K. Evans Atmospheric Water Vapor Profiles Using a Raman Lidar Memon, N.D., and K. Sayood Scan Predictive Vector Quantization of Multispectral Images Menard, Y., P. Escudier, E. Jeansou, O. Zanife and P. Vincent Evaluation of the SSALT Poseidon Altimeter Meneghini, R., J. Wang and H. Kumagai Description of a Radar/Radiometer Method and Its Application to Airborne Measurements Over Stratiform Rain in the Western Pacific Meneghini, R., and T. Iguchi Analysis of Convective Storms Using Dual-Wavelength, Polarimetric Airborne Radar Data Menichetti, F., A. Spinelli, C. Tarantino, R. Loizzo and G. Milillo SAR Geocoding Algorithms an dGeopositional Accuracy of I-PAF Geocoded Products Mering, C., and Y. Poncet Automatic Mapping of the Various Types of Ligneous Vegetation Covers According to Their Density Mesrobian, E., E. Shek, R. Muntz and W. Cheng Quest: An Environment for Content-Based Access to Geoscience Datasets Meyer, P., R.O. Green, K. Staenz and K.I. Itten Georadiometric Corrections of AVIRIS Data in Rugged Terrain as a Basis for Quantitative Data Analysis Meygret, A., O. Hagolle, P. Henry, M. Dinguirard, R. Santer and J.L. Deuze SPOT 3: First in Flight Radiometric Calibration Results Mikhalevich, V. Lidar Measurements of Wave-Heights Spectra in the Ocean Milillo, G., G. Riccobono and F. Marini X-SAR Data Processing First Results at the I-PAF Milillo, G., G. Riccobono and F. Marini X-SAR Data Processing System at the Italian PAF Milillo, G., G. Riccobono, F. Marini and F. Selvaggi X-SAR Raw Data Screening and Survey Product Generation Facility at the Italian PAF Mills, F., K. Okada, Y.Kannari, S.H. Chang, H. Watanabe, H. Fujisada, T. Ezaka, T. Narita, T. Osanai and G. Hoover 1993 Laboratory and Flight Test Results for an Airborne ASTER Simulator Milman, A.S. Statistics of Oceanic Rainfall to Help Interpret TRMM Data Milroy, S. Remote Sensing Technologies: The Educational Implications and Effectiveness of Student Data Acquisition and Assimilation Ming, H., Z. Kai, S. Zhifu and Z. Junrong Development of Multi-Band Microwave Radiometer Minna, L., C. Ottonello, S. Pagnan and G. Tacconi Emissions From Orbiting Tethered Satellite Systems to the Earths Surface: Data Analysis Mitev, V.A., and G.I. Sokolinov New Arrangement for Remote Velocity Measurements of Atmospheric Inhomogeneities by Imaging and Data Processing Mo, T. A Study of the Microwave Sounding Unit On the NOAA-12 Satellite Moctezuma, M., H. Maitre, and F. Parmiggiani Sea-Ice Velocity Fields Estimation on Ross Sea AVHRR Images Moghaddam, M., and S. Saatchi Forest Modeling of Jack Pine Trees for BOREAS Monaldo, F., and R. Beal The Influence of Altitude and Look Angle on SAR Ocean Wave Imaging: A Practical Compromise Monaldo, F.M., R.F. Gasparovic and R.E. Sterner II ERS-1 SAR Observations of Internal Waves During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Monteiro, A., and C.A.E. Garcia Evaluation of the Multichannel Sea Surface Temperature Algorithm Along the Brazilian Coast Moody, A., S. Gopal and A.H. Strahler Neural Networks for Coarse-Scale Land-Cover Characterization Using Multisource Data: Assessment and Comparison to a Biophysical Thresholding Techniques Moon, W.M., M. Lamontagn, Y. Yamaguchi, V. Snghroy and R. Kuoda Integrated Imaging of JERS-1 and ERS-1 SAR Data for Earthquake Tectonic Investigation of the Nahanni Earthquake Area in Northwest Territories, Canada Moon, W.M., X.G. Miao, V. Singhroy and P.D. Lowman Jr. Integrated Geophysical Imaging of the Sudbury Structure Using ERS-1 SAR and Other Airborne Geophysical Data Moreira, A., R. Spielbauer and W. Potzsch Conceptual Design, Performance Analysis and Results of the High Resolution Real-Time Processor of the DLR Airborne SAR System Moreira, A., and R. Scheiber Doppler Parameter Estimation Algorithms for SAR Processing With the Chirp Scaling Approach Moreira, J.R., and A. Moreira Limitations of the Conventional Motion Compensation for Airborne SAR Systems Moreira, J.R. A New MTI-SAR-Approach Using the Reflectivity Displacement Method Moreno, J.F., S.S. Saatchi, R.O. Green and A.M. Jochum Optical-Microwave Data Synergism to Provide Parameters Required as Inputs by Surface Energy Balance Models Moreno, J.F., and J. Melia NOAA AVHRR Data Processing: Requirements and Limitations in Operational Algorithms Mouat, D., J.Lancaster and T. Minor Comparison of Time Series AVHRR NDVI Values With Ecosystem Parameters for the Assessment of Land Degradation in the Arid United States Mouat, D., and J. Lancaster A Desertification Susceptibilty Index: Use of GIS to Assess Potential Desertification Mouchot, M.C., B. Solaiman and A. Parra Use of Fuzzy Logic for Unsupervised Classification of Remotely Sensed Images Mougenot, B., M. Loireau and J.M. DHerbes Use of Satellite Data for Seasonal Monitoring of a Degraded Sahelian Landscape Mueller, J.L. SeaWIFS Intercalibration Round Robin Experiments Mukai, S., I. Sano, T. Takashima and Y. Yamaguchi Aerosol Retrieval Based on Photopolarimetry Muller, H.J. K-Statistics of Terrain Clutter in High Resolution SAR Images Mullins, D.W., and T.J. Pultz Evaluation of a Multitemporal ERS-1 Dataset for Hydrologic Application The Field Model: A Data Model for Large Geoscience Data Sets WT01-B02-97IA054-000906-B015-28http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorno.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190905 text/html 11493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:07:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: N-O Papers listed by Author: N-O Naboko, V.N., and S.V. Noboko Multicanal Data Acquisition System for Remote Sensing of the Phenomena Naeije, M.C., E. Wisse, K.F. Wakker and B.A.C. Ambrosius Seasonal Changes in Dynamic Heights Based on Altimetric Data Nakamura, H., D. Entekhabi and E. Njoku Soil Moisture Profile Remote Sensing: Stability and Observability of the Inverse-Problem Nakamura, H., D. Entekhabi and E. Njoku Soil Moisture Profile Retrieval by Assimilation of Multispectral Remote Sensing and Surface Observations Wave Field as Thermal Hot Area Monitored by Satellite Nannemann, J., M. Wolff and H. Nagel SAT-GIS: A Customized System for Satellite Image Processing, Digital Cartography and Topographic Analyses in a GIS Environment, Based Upon a Worldwide Seamless Database Narayanan, R.M., Y. Xu and D.W. Rhoades Simulation of a Polarimetric Random Noise/Spread Spectrum Radar for Subsurface Probing Applications Narayanan, R.M., and S.R. Jackson Snow Cover Classification Using Millimeter-Wave Radar Imagery Narumalani, S., R. Naryanan and D. Rundquist The Future of Remote Sensing Education: What Lies Ahead? Nashashibi, A., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Estimation of Penetration Depth in a Random Media Using Frequency Decorrelation of Backscattered Field Nedoluha, G.E., R.M. Bevilacqua, W.B. Waltman, R.M. Gomez and D.L. Thacker Ground-Based Monitoring of Water Vapor in the Middle Atmosphere Netterstrom, A., and E.L. Christensen Correction for Quadrature Errors Neville, R.A., J. Schwarz and N. Rowlands Laboratory Calibration of Electro-Optical Imagers at CCRS Newkirk, M.H., G.S. Brown and D.C. Vandemark Detection of Volume Scattering Effects in Beamwidth Limited Altimetry Data Nezry, E., H.G. Kohl and H. de Groof Restoration of Textural Properties in SAR Images Using Second Order Statistics Ngai, F.M., J.C. Curlander and A.D. Stocker Model-Based Feature Classification and Change Detection Nghiem, S.V., F.K. Li, S.H. Lou and G. Neumann Azimuth Modulations in Ocean Radar Backscatter Observed by Airborne Ku-Band Scatterometer Nghiem, S.V., R. Kwok, S.H. Yueh, J.A. Kong, M.A. Tassoudji, C.C. Hsu, A.J. Gow and D.K. Perovich Polarimetric Backscattering From Thin Saline Ice Related to Ice Physical and Morphological Characteristics Nghiem, S.V., R. Kwok, S.H. Yueh, J.A. Kong, M.A. Tassoudji, C.C. Hsu, A.J. Gow and D.K. Perovich Polarimetric Backscattering Signatures From Thin Saline Ice Under Controlled Laboratory Conditions Nilson, T., and U. Peterson Analysis of Main Driving Factors in Successional Changes of Reflectance in Northern Temperate Forests Njoku, E.G., A. Chehbouni, F. Cabot, B. Rague, K. Fleming and Y.H. Kerr An Approach to Estimating Surface Parameters and Fluxes Using Modeling and Multispectral Remote Sensing Nolin, A.W., K. Steffen and J. Dozier Measurement and Modeling of the Bidirectional Reflectance of Snow Nolin, A.W. Snowcover Mapping With the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer Norman, J.M., and W.P. Kustas A Simple Model Relating Directional Radiative Temperatures to Aerodynamic Temperature and Surface Energy Fluxes North, P.R., S.A. Briggs, S.E. Plummer, A.K. Wilson, C. Godsalve, J.J. Settle and S.M. Singh Sensitivity Analysis of Shortwave Atmospheric Correction Through Combined Radiative Transfer and Multi-Angular Methods North, P.R., and S.E. Plummer Estimation of Conifer Bi-Directional Reflectance Using a Monte Carlo Method Novo, E.M., F. Lobo, M.C. Calijuri and J.G. Tundisi Predictive Modeling of Trophic Status of a Tropical Reservoir Using Geographical Information Systems Nystrom, A., A. Stjernman and J. Vivekanandan Temporal Variations in Radar Backscatter Coefficients of Vegetation and Soil Media Ochadlick, A., Jr., J. Davis, W. Everett, J. Kraus, M. Rankin, A. Siegel, T. Webster, J. Morrison, J. Lyden and C. Rino Results From the 1993 LOGAN (Low Grazing Angle) Radar Experiment O'Neill, P.E., A.Y. Hsu and M.S. Seyfried SAR Terrain Correctio for Improved Soil Moisture Estimation in a Mountain Watershed O'Neill, P.E., N.S. Chauhan, T.J. Jackson and D.M. Le Vine Microwave Soil Moisture Prediction Through Corn in Washita '92 Ochiai, S., Y. Irimajiri and H. Masuko Ground Based Millimeter Wave System for CLO and Other Minor Constituents Observation Developed in CRL Odhiambo, G.S.O. untitled Oh, Y., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby An Inversion Algorithm for Retrieving Soil Moisture and Surface Roughness From Polarimetric Radar Observations Ojima, T. Optimum Frequency of Microwave Radiometry for Measurements of Attenuation, Path Delay and Columnar Content of Water Vapor Okada, K., T.Narita, t. Ezaka, F. Mills, S. Rokugawa, H. Watanabe, Y. Kannari, T. Osanai and S.H. Chang Geological Mapping of Death Valley Using an Airborne ASTER Simulator Onstott, R.G., M. Perlin and H. Lin Precise Spatial and Temporal Measurement of Gravity-Capillary Waves and Associated Radar Backscatter Onstott, R.G., and M.P. Madden Microwave Study of the Formation of Brine Layers on Homogeneous Saline Ice Sheets Onstott, R.G. In-Situ Observation of the Microwave Response of Lead Evolution Onstott, R.G. Study of the Microwave Signature of Multiyear Ice and Its Relationship to Ice Sheet Properties and Total Ice Thickness Onstott, R.G. Study of the Temporal Nature of the Microwave Signatures of Leads During Spring Orban-Ferauge, F., J.P. Rasson and V. Granville Discussion of Different Solutions to the Problem of Unclassified Pixels Osaki, K. Extract of Polluted Area in Industrial Complex by MOS-1 (MESSR) Image Data O'Neill, K. A Review of Modeling for Millimeter Wave Remote Sensing of Snow Osharin, A.M. Scattering of Millimeter Radiowaves by Dry Snowflakes Otten, M.P.G., J.S. Groot and H.C. Wouters Development of a Generic SAR Processor in the Netherlands Ouchi, K., and D.A. Burridge Cross-Track and Proposed Multi-Frequency SAR Interferometry: Comparisons With Optical Holographic Interferometry Ouchi, K. The Effect of SAR Bandwidth Ratio and Current Variation on Ocean Current Measurements by Along-Track SAR Interferometer Identification of Barchan Dunes and Computation of Their Rate of Displacement by Diachronistic Analysis of a Spot Panchromatic Images in the Cape Juby's Area (North-Western Sahara) WT01-B02-98IA054-000906-B015-97http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorpq.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210190953 text/html 13182HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:08:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: P-Q Papers listed by Author: P-Q Pak, K., L. Tsang and C.H. Chan Studies of Large Scale Random Rough Surface Problems With the Sparse-Matrix Flat-Surface Iterative Approach Pallikala, S., and R.K. Moore A Combined IR-Microwave Spaceborne Cloud Profiler Pallikala, S., and R.K. Moore Determining Winds Aloft With a Radar Wind Sensor: Accounting for Rain-Drop Fall Speed Palmer, R.D., A. Bhattacharyya, S. Fukao, M. Yamamoto and T. Nakamura High-Resolution Measurements of Atmospheric Turbulent Layers Using Frequency Domain Interferometry Palmer, R.D., Y. Lei, P. Solanki, S. Fukao, M. Yamamoto and T. Nakamura Improvements in Atmospheric Wind Profiling Using Imaging Doppler Interferometry Pan, J.J., and S.T. Li A Study of Linearized Index Generation Using Multi-Spectral Image for Environmental Monitoring Pan, L., and J. Gille CO Profile Retrieval Experiments for the MOPITT Instrument Pantani, L. Fluorescence Lidar Remote Sensing of Vegetation: Research Advances in Europe Paola, J.D., and R.A. Schowengerdt Comparisons of Neural Networks to Standard Techniques for Image Classification and Correlation Pap, J.M., R.C. Willson and A. Ruzmaikin Variations in Total Solar Irradiance Related to Solar Magnetic Fields Parmeter, M.M. Global Production of Multi-Channel Sea Surface Temperatures Using the Naval Oceanographic Offices Satellite Processing System Partington, K.C., C.J. Willis, A.J. Sephton, N.P. Walker & C.J. Oddy Results From an ERS-1 Pilot Application Project for Polar Operations Pasquali, P., R. Pellegrini and C. Prati Combination of Interferograms From Ascending and Descending Orbits Patsayeva, S.V., and V.I. Yuzhakov Fluorescent Spectroscopy of Oil Pollutions and Dissolved Organic Substance in Natural Water Paudyal, D.R., A. Eiumnoh, J. Aschbacher and R. Schumann A Knowledge Based Classification of Multitemporal ERS-1 and JERS-1 SAR Data Over the Tropics Paulus, R.A. Variability of Coastal Atmospheric Refractivity Pazmany, A., D. Moller, J. Galloway, R. McIntosh and H.B. Bluestein A 95 GHz Doppler Radar for Tornado Measurements Pazmany, A., J. Mead, J. Galloway, R. McIntosh, R. Kelly and G. Vali A 95 GHz Airborne Radar for High Resolution Polarimetric Cloud Measurements Theory and Design of an Experimental Aperture Synthesis Radiometer (ASR) Pelevin, V., O. Abramov and G. Karlsen Laser Probing of the Sea in the Section of Atlantic Multisource Data Classification by Structured Neural Networks Pellegretti, P., L. Bruzzone and S.B. Serpico Feature-Selection for Remote-Sensing Data Classification Pellicori, S.F., M. Pavlov and J.W. Figoski Component and System Measurement of the MODIS Spectral Bands Pereslegin, S.V., A.M. Korolev, M.N. Marov and A.Yu. Ivanov Analysis of Doppler and Correlation on Radar Methods for Ocean Currents Velocity Mesoscale Field Reconstruction Pereslegin, S.V., A.M. Korolev, S.A. Mishin and V.V. Zaytsev Reconstruction of the Sub-Mesoscale Ocean Currents Field Based on ALMAZ-1 SAR Data Peter, R., and N. Kampfer Stratospheric and Mesospheric Water Vapor Distribution Over Northern Europe Measured With an Airborne MM-Wave Sensor Petrenko, B.Z., and M.T. Smirnov Adaptive Algorithms for Satellite Passive Microwave Data Processing Philbrick, C.R. Lidar Measurements of Water Vapor Concentrations in the Troposphere Philpot, W. Comparison of Two Spectral-Texture Classification Algorithms Phinn, S.R. Imaging Classification and Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis Techniques Piau, P. Performance of the 3D-SAR Imagery Pichel, W., J. Sapper, C. Duda, E. Maturi, K. Jarva and J. Stroup Coastwatch Operational Mapped AVHRR Imagery Pierce, L.E., F.T. Ulaby and M.C. Dobson Classification of ERS-1/JERS-1 Composite SAR Images Pietroniro, A., E.D. Soulis and N. Kouwen Deriving Antecedent Moisture Conditions From Airborne SAR for Input Into a Flood Forecasting Model Pilant, D. Field Passive Microwave Observations of Snowpack at 37 GHz Pinty, B., and M.M. Verstraete Use of Vegetation Indices for the Retrieval of Information on Some Characteristics of Semi-Arid Regions Pitts, D.E., M.R. Helfert, K. Lulla, J.M. Bremer, C.A. Evans, J. Heydom, C. Dardano and K.J. Willis Space Shuttle Earth Observations Digital Data Base Planes, J.G., M. Deschaux-Beaume and M. Busson LOCOSAR: A SAR Image Simulator Plant, W.J., W.C. Keller, A.T. Jessup, K.W. Hoppel and E.Z. Uliana Microwave Backscatter, Surface Fluxes, and Infrared Imagery Measured From a Blimp Over the Ocean Polatin, P.F., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Monte Carlo Simulation of Electromagnetic Scattering From a Heterogeneous Two-Component Medium Poncet, F.V., C. Prietzsch and M. Tapkenhinrichs Regionalization of Soil Physical Parameters Using ERS-1 PRI SAR Data Porco, R., J. Bredow, S. Tjuatja and A. Fung Fully Polarimetric Measurements of Robotically Fabricated Dense Media Targets Porter, D.L., R.D. Chapman, D.R. Thompson, R.F. Gasparovic and V. Paka Comparisons of Internal Waves as Observed by a Towed CTD and Radar Posey, P.G., and R.H. Preller Operational Use of SSM/I Ice Concentration in the Initialization of a Coupled Ice-Ocean Model Post, M.J. Development of Coherent Laser Radar Pottier, E. Radar Target Decomposition Theorems and Unsupervized Classification of Full Polarimetric SAR Data Preller, R.H., and P.G. Posey Testing of a Coupled Ice-Ocean Model in a Sea Ice Forecasting System Prevot, L., Y. Brunet and B. Seguin Modelling Canopy Radiative Temperature Surface and Flux Estimation Price, J.A., and Z.H. Allen Altimetrically Derived Front and Eddy Positions for Operational Nowcasts Priebe, C.E., G.W. Rogers and J.L. Solka Change Point Analysis With Adaptive Mixture Models Prietzsch, C., and H. Gro Segmentation of Polarimetric AIRSAR-Data for Soil Moisture Determination in an Agricultural Area Prisco, G. Sensor Requirements for Treaty Verification and Crisis Monitoring Provvedi, F., and G. Levrini Implementation of a Rain Measurement Mode Into RA-2 Radar Altimeter Pulliainen, J., K. Heiska, J. Koskinen, T. Tares and M. Hallikainen Seasonal Effects on C- and X-Band Backscattering Properties of FinnishBoreal Forests Purdy, C.L., D.W. Hancock III and G.S. Hayne Engineering Performance Analysis of the TOPEX Radar Altimeter Qi, J., M.S. Moran and F. Cabot Biophysical Parameter Retrievals Using ASAS Bidirectional Measurements Qi, J., M.S. Moran and F. Cabot Scaling Effects on Bidirectional Reflectances Measurements Over Agricultural Surfaces Quegan, S., and I. Rhodes Statistical Models for Polarimetric SAR Data Quilfen, Y., A. Bentamy, P. Queffeulou and B. Chapron Calibration/Validation of ERS-1 Wind Scatterometer Precision Products Quilfen, Y., P. Farcy and J.P. Marlarde The Scatterometers Processing at the French ERS Processing and Archiving Facility WT01-B02-99IA054-000906-B015-134http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorr.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191018 text/html 13504HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:08:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: R Papers listed by Author: R Raghavan, R., J. Turk and J. Vevekanandan Investigation of the Vertical Profiles of Linear Depolarization Ratio and Reflectivity at S, X and K Band Wavelengths Rahman, A.F., J.C. Washburne, M.S. Moran, A.K. Batchily, M.A. Weltz, A.R. Huete and M. Hodshon Yates Mapping Surface Energy Fluxes of a Semiarid Region in Arizona Raizer, V.Yu., A.I. Smirnov and V.G. Irisov Microwave Emission From Ocean at L-S-Bands Raizer, V.Yu. Application of Multi-Layer model in Microwave Remote Sensing of Ocean Surface Phenomena Rambal, S., M. Methy and C. Damesin Fluorescence Signatures Applied to Climate Change Effects: Case Studies With Mediterranean Oak Ecosystems Ramsay, B.R., and T. Hirose Automatic Synthetic Aperture Radar Information Extraction Algorithms for Sea Ice Applications Raney, R.K., A. Freeman, R.W. Hawkins and R. Bamler A Plea for Radar Brightness Raney, R.K., and R. Bamler Comments on SAR Signal and Noise Equations Raney, R.K. Beyond the Obvious: Some Reflections Rapley, C.G. Altimetry of Ice, Inland Water and Land With ERS-1 Rapoport, V.O., N.I. Belova, Yu.G. Fedoseev, Yu.A. Sazonov and V.A. Zinichev Application of Parametric Methods Spectrum Estimation for Radio Acoustic Sounding Rapoport, V.O., Yu.G. Fedoseev, N.I. Belova, Yu.A. Sazonov and V.A. Zinichev Operating Decameter Rass Near N. Novgorod and Its Perspectives Connected With Powerful VHF-Radar SURA Last Developments of the Behavioral Approach to Classification Rasson, J.P., F. Orban-Ferauge and V. Granville The Problem of Unclassified Pixels for Nonparametric-Type Classification Algorithms Rast, M. ESAs Future Plans for Earth Observation From Polar Orbit Rau, Y.C., F.Y.M. Lure and J.C. Comiso Application of Artificial Neural Networks for Detection of Sea Ice Coverage and Movements From Satellite Imagery Rau, Y.C., and C.R. Philbrick Two-Wavelength Lidar Monitoring of Stratospheric Particles After Pinatubo Volcano Eruption Ray, T.W., B. Murray and C.O. Davis Remote Sensing of Arid and Semi-Arid Lands Ray, T.W., T.G. Farr, R.G. Blom, R.E. Crippen and E.M. De Jong Using Airborne and Satellite Data for Multitemporal Studies of Land Degradation Ray, T.W., and B.C. Murray Remote Monitoring of Shifting Sands and Vegetation Cover in Arid Regions Ray, T.W., and J.J. van Zyl Polarization Effects in Radar Reflection From Surfaces With Periodic Roughness Reagan, J.A., and W.H. Erxleben A Unified Approach for Obtaining Best Estimates of Spectral Optical Depths and Calibration Intercepts From Sunphotometer Data Sets Corrupted by Temporal Variations Reed, R., D.G. Long, D.V. Arnold and R.S. Collyer Initial Results From the Deployment of an Ultra-Wideband Scatterometer Rehmeyer, D.L., and J.L. Aravena Wavelets and Neural Nets for Stratigraphic Analysis Reilly, J.P., and C.C. Lin A Radar Land Clutter Model and Its Verification Remus, M., and K. Sayood Accessing Portions of Losslessly Compressed Multiband Data Ricaud, Ph., J. de La Noe, R. Lauque, A. Parrish, J.W. Barrett and P.M. Solomon Preliminary Analysis of Chlorine Monoxide Measurements Made by the Ground-Based Microwave Receiver of the Plateau De Bure, France Richard, J., C. Mavrocordatos, N. Suinot, P. Raizonville and P. Escudier A Compact Dual-Frequency Altimeter for TOPEX-POSEIDON Follow On Mission Richter, J.H. Sensing of Radio Refractivity and Aerosol Extinction Riggs, G.A., D.K. Hall and V.V. Salomonson A Snow Index for the Landsat Thematic Mapper and Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer Rignot, E., C. Williams, J. Way, K. McDonald, J. Yarie and L. Viereck P-Band Radar Mapping of Forest Biomass in Boreal Forest of Interior Alaska Rignot, E., K. McDonald, J. Way, R. Zimmermann, C. Williams and L. Viereck Monitoring of Environmental Conditions in Taiga Forests Using ERS-1 SAR Rignot, E., and J. van Zyl Circular Polarization for Mapping Forest Biomass at P-Band? Rijckenberg, G.J., H.J.C. van Leeuwen and M.A.M. Vissers Analysis of Polarimetric Radar Data From Vegetated Areas Rino, C., E. Eckert, A. Siegel, T. Webster, A. Ochadlick, M. Renkin, W. Everett, J. Kraus and J. Davis Ocean Microwave Backscatter From the Logan Experiment Roberts, D.A., R.O. Green, J.B. Adams, D.E. Sabol and M.O. Smith Temporal and Spatial Relationships Between Topography, Atmspheric Water Vapor, Liquid Water and Endmember Abundances of Vegetation Determined Using AVIRIS Robin, E., and A. Guissard A Parametric Study of the Trunk-Ground Corner Effect in Forest Remote Sensing Roche, A.E., J.B. Kumer and J.L. Mergenthaler Observations of Stratospheric Composition and Structure by the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer (CLAES) on UARS Roesler, C.S. The Distribution of Biogenic Material in Arctic Sea Ice Rogers, P.G., L.A. Brandt and J.A. Young Set Theoretic Estimation Techniques for Incorporating Diffusion Effects in Geotomography Rogers, T. Statistical Assessment of the Variability of Atmospheric Propagation Effects i the Southern California Coastal Area Romanov, P. Deriving Cloud Parameters From AVHRR NOAA Data Romeiser, R. Doppler Spectra of the Radar Backscatter From the Sea Surface Obtained From a Three-Scale Composite Surface Model Romeiser, R. On the Dependence of Radar Signatures of Surface Current Variations on the Azimuthal Radar Look Direction Rosen, P.A., A. Hiramatsu and C.L. Werner Two-Dimensional Phase Unwrapping of SAR Interograms by Charge Connection Through Neutral Trees Rosenkranz, P.W. A Rapid Transmittance Algorithm for Microwave Sounding Frequencies Rosenthal, J., and R. Helvey Guidance for an Expert System Approach to Elevated Duct Assessment Over the Northeastern Pacific ocean Rosenthal, W., and J. McConnell Mapping Montane Snow Cover at Subpixel Resolution From the Landsat Thematic Mapper Using a Neural Network Simulator Ross, J., O. Meinander and M. Sulev Spectral Scattering Properties of Pinus Sylvestris Shoots and Needles Rossi, E., and M. Hallikainen Simulation of the Radar Probing of the Martian Subsurface Structure Roux, L., J. Desachy and L. Mascarilla Satellite Image Classification Based on Multi-Source Information-Fusion With Possibility Theory Ruf, C.S, and K. Aydin Rain Rate Estimation From Attenuation Measurements Using a 35 GHz Dual Polarization Propagation Link Ruf, C.S., W.J. Wilson, K.M. Chandra and A.B. Tanner Digital Correlator Performance Analysis for a Synthetic Aperture Imaging Radiometer Rundquist, D., C. Keithley and B. Leavitt Identifying and Mapping Wetlands Using Combined SAR and Landsat Thematic Mapper Data Runge, H., P. Secchi, A. Roth, U. Steinbrecher, H. Breit, M. Eineder, D.Just and R. Bamler X-SAR Precision Data Products From the Shuttle Radar Lab Rusakov, M. Image Processing on PC-Class Workstation Ruth, B. The Fluorescence Pulse Method as a Tool to Characterize the Photsynthetic System of Plants and Algae Rutledge, S.A. Shipboard Doppler Radar Observations of Convection Observed During TOGA COARE Ryzhkov, A.V., and D.S. Zrnic Heavy Precipitation Measurements at S-Band With a Polarimetric Radar Ryzhkov, A.V., and D.S. Zrnic Observations of a MCS With a Dual-Polarization Radar WT01-B02-100IA054-000906-B015-160http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authors.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191042 text/html 25703HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:09:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: S Papers listed by Author: S Saatchi, S., M. Moghaddam, K. McDonald and S. Durden Microwave Scattering From Forest Canopies Saatchi, S.S., B. Rague and R. Zimmermann Analysis of NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHz Data Over Vegetated Land Surfaces: Theory and Examples Saatchi, S.S., R. Treuhaft and M.C. Dobson Estimation of Leaf Area Index Over Agricultural Areas From Polarimetric SAR Images Sabburg, J.M. Evaluation of an Australian ERS-1 SAR Scene Pertaining to Soil Moisture Measurement Saether, B., H. Rueslatten and A. Gronlie Application of the Hough Transform for Automated Interpretation of Linear Features in Imageries Safavian, S.R. Improving Performance of Supervised Classifiers Using a Simple Iterative Estimation Procedure and Its Convergence Issues Saghri, J.A., A.G. Tescher and J.T. Reagan Terrain-Adaptive Multispectral Bandwidth Compression Sakuma, F., M. Kobayasi and A. Ono ASTER Round-Robin Radiometers for the Preflight Cross-Calibration of EOS AM1 Instruments Sanchez, V.D. Three Dimensional Surface Reconstruction on a Parallel Processor Sandlin, G.D. SSM/I Center-Fixes and Intensities of Tropical Storms Sandmeier, S., P. Meyer and K.I. Itten A Shortwave Radiation Model for Radiometric Correction of Optical Satellite Data in Rugged Terrain Sandven, S., O.M. Johannessen and K. Kloster Towards Operational Use of Synthetic Aperture Radar Images in Sea Ice Monitoring Santanam, K., B. Lakshmi, K.C. Shet and R. Vaithiyanathan New Criteria for Evaluation of Filters Used for Speckle Removal in SAR Images Using Fuzzy Logic Sarabandi, K., and R.S. Li Characterization of Soil Moisture Using a Microstrip Resonator An Optimum Corner Reflector for Calibration of Imaging Radars Sarazin, M. An Astronomical Site Monitor for the ESO Very Large Telescope Satake, M., M. Fujita, H. Hanado, H. Horie, K. Sato and S. Ochiai Calibration Experiments of ERS-1 SAR With Active Radar Calibrator in Japan Savorskij, V.P., and L.V. Kozlova International Project PRIRODA IRE RAS Data Processing and Archiving Center Savorskij, V.P. Microwave Spatial Spectra of Ocean-Atmosphere System Schaaf, C.B., X. Li and A.H. Strahler Validation of Canopy Bidirectional Reflectance Models With ASAS Imagery of a Spruce Forest in Maine Schatzman, J.C., and B. Chen Comprehensive Modeling of the Wind Wave System With Wind-Wave Interaction and Dissipation Schiavone, G.A., K. ONeill and K.D. Paulsen Scattering From Open Cavities in a Perfectly Conducting Surface Schmid, B., R. Peter, C. Matzler and J. Sekler A High Precision Sun Photometer for Determination of Aerosol Optical Depth, Columnar Water Vapor and Ozone Schmid, B., and C. Wehrli High Precision Calibration of a Sun Photometer Using Langley-Plots Performed at Jungfraujoh (3580 M) and Standard Irradiance Lamps Crop Monitoring With Multi-Temporal Airborne DLR E-SAR and ERS-1 Image Data: Potentials for SIR-C/X-SAR Data Schoenmakers, R.P.M.H., G.G. Lemoine and H.J.C. van Leeuwen Segmentation of Combined High Resolution Optical and Radar Imagery for the Determination of Field Inhomogenities Schott, J.R. Analysis of Error Sources in Thermal Infrared Calibration of Aerial and Satellite Images Schrader, M., C. Croskey, and J. Olivero Latitude Structure of Middle Atmospheric Water Vapor Revealed by Shipboard Microwave Spectroscopy Schreier, G., and W. Markwitz The German Processing and Archiving Center for ENVISAT Schwaab, G.W., U. Klein, K. Kunzi and U. Raffalski Millimeter-Wave Measurements at the Arctic NDSC Station NY - Alesund in the Winters 1992/93 and 1993/94 Schwartz, K.R., M.O. Jeffries and S. Li Detection of Spring Melting and Fall Freeze-Up in the Arctic Ocean Using ERS-1 SAR Data Schwartz, M.J., J.W. Barrett, P.W. Rosenkranz and D.H. Staelin Atmospheric Transmittance Measurements Near 54 and 118 GHz Schwartz, M.J., J.W. Barrett, P.W. Rosenkranz, M.S. Spina and D.H. Staelin Passive Microwave Imagery of Hurricanes Near 118 GHz: Thermal and Precipitation Structure Seidel, K., W. Brusch and Ch. Steinmeier Experiences From Real Time Runoff Forecasts by Snow Cover Remote Sensing Sekelsky, S.M., A.L. Pazmany and R.E. McIntosh A Millimeter-Wave Cloud Profiling Radar System (CPRS) Serbin, A., V. Feigels, A. Shalamyansky and V. Privalov Automatic Filter Ozonometer Seryakoff, G. Multiscale Objects Detecting in the MM-Wave Imaging of Ocean Surface Seshamani, R., M. Shashikala, T.K. Alex, Y.K. Jain and K. Kasturirangan Horizon Sensor-Based 14-16 Micron Radiation Measurements From IRS-1B Seshamani, R., T.K. Alex, Y.K. Jain and K. Kasturirangan Airborne Lidar Payload for Primary Productivity and Related Parameter Sensing in Coastal Waters Seymour, M.S., and I.G. Cumming Maximum Likelihood Estimation for SAR Interferometry Shaffer, S., S. Hensley and R. Frankot An Automated Matching Algorithm for Magellan Stereo Data Shanks, J.G., and D.K. Lynch Remote Sensing Through Cirrus Clouds: Visual and Sub-Visual Sheen, D.R., C.M. Strawitch and T.B. Lewis UHF Wideband SAR Design and Preliminary Results Shemer, L. An Approximate Analytical model for the SAR or Interferometric SAR Imaging of a Monochromatic Ocean Wave Shi, G., P. Gong and C.F. Chung Implementation of Evidential Reasoning in Integrated Analysis of Multisource Spatial Data Shi, Z., and K.B. Fung A Comparison of Digital Speckle Filters Real-Time On-Board SAR Processor Shmalenyuk, A.S., Yu.G. Tishchenko, N.A. Armand and V.M. Poyakov Detection of Shallowly Buried Dielectric Objects With Microwave Radiometers Shuchman, R., J. Johannsessen, C. Rufenach, K. Davidson and C. Wackerman Determination of Wind Speed, Wind Direction and Atmospheric Structure Using ERS-1 SAR Data During NORCSEX91 Shuchman, R.A., R.G. Onstott, R.W. Fett and C.C. Wackerman Satellite Remote Sensing of the Beaufort Sea During LEADEX '92 Shupiatsky, A., and F.J. Yanovsky Some Results of Souding of Thunderstorm and Hail Clouds by Dual-Polarisation Airborne Radar Sieber, A.J., C. Lavalle and D.R. Sloggett The EARSEC SAR Processing System Sieber, A.J., C. Lavalle, G. De Grandi and D. Sloggett The EARSEC Information and Data Fusion Environment Sieber, A.J., C. Lavalle, G. De Grandi and D.R. Sloggett The EARSEC SAR Geophysical Processor: Design and Implementation Siegel, D.A., L. Washburn, and J.C. Ohlmann Observations and Modeling of Ocean Radiant Heating During TOGA/COARE Silberstein, R.P., R. Haberstroh, D. DiMarzio, J.R. Baker and J.W. Salisbury Spectral Error Characterization and Database Development Skofronick-Jackson, G.M., and A.J. Gasiewski Nonlinear Statistical Precipitation Retrievals Using Simulated Passive Microwave Imagery Skriver, H., J. Dall and S.N. Madsen External Polarimetric Calibration of the Danish Polarimetric C-Band SAR Sloggett, D., C. Gurney, R. Gooding , I. Dowman and W. Newton An Automated Change Detection System Smirnov, A., and R. Kropfli Polarimetric Radar Imagery of the Ocean at Low Grazing Angles Under Unstable Atmospheric Conditions Smith, J.A., and J.A. Pedelty Neural Network Inversion of Bidirectional Reflectance Smith, M., D. Roberts, J. Hill, W. Mehl, B. Hosgood, J. Verdebout, G. Schmuck and C. Koechler A New Approach to Determining Spectral Abundances of Mixtures in Multispectral Images Smith, M.A. Band Pass Optimization for Total Column Measurements of Atmospheric CO and CH4 Using a Length Modulated Gas Filter Correlation Radiometer Smith, W.L., H.E. Revercomb, H.B. Howell, H.L. Huang, R.O. Knuteson and X.L. Ma Profiling the Thermodynamic Properties of the Atmosphere With High Spectral Resolution Infrared Radiance Measurements Snel, J.F.H., H. Schroote, M.E. Bossen, B.w.A. van Hove, G.W. Lucassen and A. Rosema Analysis of Active Chlorophyll Fluorescence From Douglas Fir Effects of Air Pollutants on Fluorescence Yield and Fluorescence Band Ratio Snoeij, P., P. Hoogeboom, P.J. Koomen, B.C.B. Vermeulen, M. Paquay and H. Pouwels Internal Calibration Schemes for a Polarimetric Phased Array Airborne SAR Snoeij, P., P.A.E.M. Janssen, H.A.M. Janssen, E. van Halsema, W.A. Oost, C.J. Calkoen and J. Vogelzang The VIERS Radar Backscatter Model Development for Wind Field Retrieval Snoeij, P., P.J. Koomen, P. Hoogeboom and H. Pouwels C-Band Solid State Dual Polarizatin T/R Modules for Airborne SAR Applications Snyder, W. A General In-Scene Parameter Estimation Method for Quantitative Image Analysis Solaiman, B., and M.C. Mouchot A Comparative Study of Conventional and Neural Network Classification of Multispectal Data Solberg, R., A.H.S. Solberg and G. Storvik Classification of Combined Remote Sensing Imagery and GIS Data Using Markov Chain Simulation Solberg, R., T. Egeland and E. Bolviken A Test of Automatic Feature Selection in AVIRIS Data Solberg, R., and T. Andersen An Automatic System for Operational Snow-Cover Monitoring in the Norwegian Mountain Regions Investigation of Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Multisensoral and Multipolarimetric Remotely Sensed Data Souyris, J.C., L. Wang, C.C. Hsu, J.A. Kong, T. Le Toan, N. Boudier, S.H. Yueh, U. Wegmuller and C. Matzler Inversion of Soil Moisture With Radar Backscattering Data Sparks, L. Rapid Line-by-Line Calculation of Spectral Absorption Coefficients Spina, M.S., M.J. Schwartz, D.H. Staelin and A.J. Gasiewski Images of Convective Cell-Top Altitudes Using 118-GHz Spectral Data Srivastava, S.K., N.W. Shepherd, R.K. Hawkins and T.I. Lukowski Calibration for RADARSAT St. Germain, K.M. A Two-Phase Algorithm to Correct for Atmospheric Effects on the 85 GHZ Channels of the SSM/I in the Arctic Region Stacy, N.J.S., and M.P. Burgess INGARA: The Australian Airborne Imaging Radar System Stanichnava, R.R., and V.P. Vastreb The Restoration of the Satellite Black Sea Temperature Images on Purposes to Investigation Time Parameters Stanichny, S.V., I.L. Dergileva and D.M. Solovev SST and Wind Velocity Estimation Using the AVHRR Data for the Black Sea Aquatory Steele, W.G., C.H. Chen, P.S. Lee, P.J. Moffa and R.A. Wrape A Conceptual Design of an Aircraft-Based Synthetic Aperture Millimeter Wave Radiometer Stephens, G. On the Remote Sensing of Clouds Stetina, F., J. Hill and T. Kunz The Development of a Lidar Instrument for Precise Topgraphic Mapping Stevens, D.R., I.G. Cumming, M.R. Ito and A.L. Gray Motion Compensation for Airborne Interferometric SAR Stewart, J.B. Spatial Variation of Evaporation Over the HAPEX-SAHEL Southern Super Site Derive From Satellite Data Stewart, R.J., F.Y.M. Lure and J.C. Liou Adaptive Maximization of Lossless Image Compression of Satellite Images Stewart, W.K., X. Tang an dH. Singh Discrete Feature Analysis of Sidescan-Sonar Under-Ice Imagery Stiles, J.M., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Microwave Scattering Model for Grassland and Short Vegetation Canopies Stjernman, A., J. Vivekanandan and A. Nystrom Studies on Polarizatin Synthesis and Differential Backscatter Phase Observations Storzer, H.D., and A. Beyer A Contribution to the Inverse Magnetic Field Problem of Magnetized Bodies Strahler, A.H., and S. Liang Comparisons of Radiative Transfer Models of Vegetation Canopies With Laboratory Measurements Strodl, K., U. Benz, F. Blaser, T. Eiting and A. Moreira A Comparison of Several Algorithms for On-Board SAR Raw Data Reduction Sudbin, A.I., and A. Volynsky A New Method for Inherent Hydro-Optical Characterisitcs Evaluation Suitz, T., K. Okamoto, H. Maeno and S. Uratsuka Development of a High Resolution Ice Echo Sounder for Arctic Ice Sheet Swart, P.J.F., and P. Snoeij Theoretical Prediction and Measurement of the Scattering From Thin Wires With One-Dimensional Random Orientation Swift, C.T., J. Aleksa and T.M. Scheve Design of a KA Band Polarimetric Radiometer Sadot, D., and N.S. Kopeika Real-Time High Resolution Restoration of Atmospherically-Blurred Images Saich, P.J., and R.A. Cordey Model Validation for Polarimetric SAR Imagery of Crops at Fetwell, UK Sanchez-Gil, J.A., A.A. Maradudin and J.Q. Lu New Features in the Transmission of Light Through Thin Metal Films With Randomly Rough Surfaces Sano, I., and S. Mukai Environmental Monitoring Over the Osaka Bay Area by Satellite Saper, R., B. Neville and S. Dapollonia On Minimizing Imaging Latency Time for RADARSAT III Schuler, D.L., J.S. Lee, L.J. Du, S.A. Mango and M.R. Grunes Algorithms for the Detection of Ships and Ship Wakes in SAR Images Schuler, D.L., and J.S. Lee Measurement of Topographic Surface Slopes in Polarimetric SAR Images Schultheis, A.C., A. Siegel, T. Webster, A. Ochadlick Jr., J. Davis, W. Everett, J. Kraus and M. Rankin Enhanced MK-IV Radar Capabilities for Clutter Experiments Shi, J., J. Dozier and H. Rott Active Microwave Measurements of Snowcover: Progress in Polarimetric SAR Application of Decomposition Theorem in Radar Scattering Mechanism of Dry Snowcover Shi, J., and J. Dozier Estimating Snow Particle Size Using TM Band-4 Shifrin, K.S., and I.G. Zolotov Microwave Radiation Pulse Scattering by a Water Drop in the Atmosphere Logan-1 Radar Calibration Procedures Silveira, P.E., M. Van Dyne and C. Tsatsoulis Sea Ice Matching From SAR Arctic Data Using Neural Networks Sivaprasad, K., and R.L. Bolus Delineation of 1993 Midwest Flooding Using ERS-1 SAR and Spot Imagery Soares, J.V., and M. de Avila Chaves Computation of Carbon and Water Cycles in Forest Ecosystems From a Biogeochemical Model With Remotely Sensed Data Solaiman, B., M.C. Mouchot and R.Koffi Multispectral Landsat Images Segmentation Using Neural Networks and Multi-Experts Approaches Stapleton, N.R. Backscatter Modelling of Ship-Generated Internal Wave Wakes Observed During the Loch Linnhe Series of Experiments Sylvester, W.B. High Wind Study: A Validation Wind Data Base for AMI on ERS-1 T.I. Lukowski, I.A. Neeson, T.C. Khandelwal, and R.Z. Moucha Spaceborne SAR Calibration Studies: Preparation for RADARSAT WT01-B02-101IA054-000906-B015-253http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authort.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191140 text/html 9158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:10:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: T Papers listed by Author: T Takahashi, A., K. Cho, H. Shimoda, T. Sakata, F. Nishio and K. Watanabe A Study on Glacier Movement Using Satellite SAR and Visible/Near-IR Imagery Takashima, T., and K. Masuda Simulation of the Emergent Radiation From the Top of Atmosphere, Where the Broken Cirrus Layer is Considered Tang, C., and K. Aydin A Formulation of Millimeter Wave Scattering Amplitude Matrices for Ice Crystals Tang, C.L., and Q. Gui A Coupled Ice-Ocean Model for the Labrador Pack Ice Tang, S., J.Wang and K. Zhang Spatial and Spectral Decorrelation of LANDSAT-TM Imagery for Lossless Data Compression Tanis, F.J., L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez and M.C. Dobson Application of ERS-1 SAR for Coastal Inundation Tanis, F.J., and R.G. Onstott Optical Properties of Multiyear and First Year Sea Ice Tanis, F.J., and R.G. Onstott Optical and Microwave Response to Thermally Dynamic Saline Ice Sheets Tanner, A.B., W.J. Wilson and S.S. Saatchi Soil Moisture Mission: Conceptual Design of an Active/Passive Synthetic Aperture System Tapley, B.D., J.C. Ries and C.K. Shum Global Verification Results for TOPEX/Poseidon and ERS-1 Altimetry Tarayre, H., and D. Massonnet Effects of a Refractive Atmosphere on Interferometric Processing Tateiba, M., H. Koga and Z.Q. Meng Numerical Analysis of Wave Scattering From a Conducting Cylinder in Turbulent Media Tateiba, M., and Y. Nanbu Numerical Analysis of the Effective Propagation Constant of a Space Where Small Spheres With High Permittivity are Randomly Distributed Taylor, G.R., and A. Mah Dielectric Properties of Saline Soils and Their Use in Modelling Radar Signatures Theisen, A.F., B.N. Rock and R.T. Eckert Steady-State Chlorophyll Fluorescence Red/Far-Red Emission Ratio Increases Detected From Pinus Strobus After Short-Term Ozone Exposure Thome, K.J., S.F. Biggar, D.I. Gellman and P.N. Slater Absolute-Radiometric Calibration of Landsat-5 Thematic Mapper and the Proposed Calibration of the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer Thome, K.J. Proposed Atmospheric Correction for the Solar-Reflective Bands of the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer Thompson, A.A., N.S. McLagan, T.E. Feather, J.C. Curlander, M. DIorio and J. Lam ScanSAR Processing Using the Fastscan System Thompson, D.R., H.C. Graber and R.E. Carande Measurements of Ocean Currents With SAR Interferometry and HF Radar Thompson, W.T., S.D. Burk, J. Cook and G.G. Love Variations in Coastal Atmospheric Refractivity Induced by Mesoscale Processes Thurai, M., and J. Vivekanandan Estimation of IceWater Content Using Multi-Parameter Radar Measurements Tikhonov, V.V. Model of Complex Dielectric Constant of Wet and Frozen Soil in the 1-40 GHZ Frequency Range Tilton, J.C., and E. Seiler Crush: A Comparative Lossless Compression Package Timchenko, A.I. Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves From Rough Surfaces With Complicated Form Titov, V.I., V.V. Bakhanov, G.N. Balandina, D.L. Belyakov, O.N. Kemarskaya and E.M. Zuikova Investigation of Variations of Long Surface Wave Parameters by Optical Techniques During JUSREX 1992 Tjuatja, S., and A.K. Fung Backscattering From Sea Ice With Vertical Structural Variation: A Model Analysis Toll, D.L., D. Shirey and D. Kimes Using Remotely Sensed Data to Estimate Surface Hemispherical Reflectance, Albedo and Absorbed Photosynthetic Active Radiation Tommervik, H., A.M. Odasz and K. Skevik Measurements of Chlorophyll Fluorescence in Several Plant Species in Different Air Pollution Affected Sites in Varanger, Northern Norway, Compared with Remote Sensing Data Tomppo, E., P. Mikkela, H. Henttonen, M. Katila, M. Hallikainen, J. Hyyppa, J. Pulliainen, K. Heiska and T. Tares Application of ERS-1 SAR Data in Large Area Forest Inventory Toon, G.C., J.F. Blavier, B. Sen and J.T. Szeto Balloon-Borne Measurements of Stratospheric Trace Gases by FTIR Solar Absorption Spectrometry Tornow, C., C.C. Borel and B.J. Powers Robust Water Temperature Retrieval Using Multi-Spectral and Multi-Angular IR Measurements Tough, R., D. Blacknell and S. Quegan Estimators and Distributions in Single and Multi-Look Polarimetric and Interferometric Data Touzi, R., and R.K. Raney Effect of Doppler Centroid MIS-Tracking on the Parameter Estimation of Point Target Complex Signals Trokhimovsky, Y., V. Yakovlev, R.D. Chapman and D.R. Thompson The Coherence of Wind and Radar Data Obtained During the Joint US-Russia Internal Wave Experiment Trush, D.S. Operational Use of SSM/I Winds Data Tsang, L., Z. Chen, K.H. Ding, C. Hsu and G. Zhang Collective Scattering Effects in Vegetation Canopies at Microwave Frequencies Based on Monte Carlo Simulations Tseng, W.Y., and L.S. Chiu AVHRR Observations of Persian Gulf Oil Spills Turk, J., J. Beaver and V.N. Bringi Ka-Band Propagation Measurements From the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) WT01-B02-102IA054-000906-B015-290http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authoruv.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191156 text/html 5887HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:10:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: U-V Papers listed by Author: U-V Ulaby, F.T., L. Pierce, C. Dobson, S. Chacon and K. Sarabandi Land Cover Classification by SAR Ulander, L.M.H., and H. Hellsten Calibration of the CARABAS VHF SAR System Ulander, L.M.H., and P.W. Vachon Radiometric Calibration of Fast-Delivery SAR Images Urkowitz, H., and J.D. Nespor Test of Distribution -- Free Non-Gaussian Noise Removal in Spectral Analysis of Meteorological Radar Echo Ustin, S.L., L. Duan and Q.J. Hart Seasonal Changes Observed in AVIRIS Images of Jasper Ridge, California Ustin, S.L., L.H. Szeto, Q.F. Xiao, Q.J. Hart and E.S. Kasischke Vegetation Mapping of Forested Ecosystems in Interior Central Alaska Vachon, P.W. ERS-1 SAR Images of Atmospheric Gravity Waves Valenzuela, G.R., S.A. Mango, G.O. Marmorino, F. Askari and J.S. Lee Remote Sensing of Current-Wave Interaction With SIR-C/X-SAR (SRL-1) at the Gulf Stream Supersite Van Baelen, J., C.L. Holloway and S.B. Copeland Atmospheric Boundary Layer Investigations With a UHF Doppler/Interferometric Wind Profiler Vargova, E., P.J. Safarik, H.D. Storzer and A. Beyer A Method for the Calculation of the Field of Three-Dimensional Bodies With a Homogeneous Magnetization Verdebout, J., S. Jacquemoud, G. Andreoli, B. Hosgood and G. Schmuck Investigations on the Biochemical Components NIR Absorption Features in AVIRIS and Laboratory Reflectance Spectra of Vegetation Verdi, J., S. Krasznay, F. Ilseman, J.G. Teti and W.M. Boerner Application of the Polarimetric Matched Image Filter to the Assessment of SAR Data From the Mississippi Flood Region Vesecky, J.F., R.G. Onstott, N.Y. Wang, E. Lettvin, J. Slawski and R.A. Shuchman Water Surface Temperature Estimates Using Active and Passive Microwave Remote Sensing Vesecky, J.F. Radar Cross Section of the Ocean Surface When Surface Films are Present: A Model Calculation Using Marangoni Wave Damping Theory Veysoglu, M.E., H.T. Ewe, A.K. Jordan, R.T. Shin and J.A. Kong Inversion Algorithms for Remote Sensing of Sea Ice Viehoff, T., A. Li, C. Oelke and H. Rebhan Characteristics of Winter Sea Ice Conditions in the Southwestern Weddell Sea in 1992 as Derived From Multi-Sensor Observations Vila da Silva, J.S., M. de Moura Abdon, A. Boock and M. Pereira da Silva Dominant Plant Physiognomies in the South of the Brasilian Pantanal Viter, V.V., V.A. Gurenko, V.V. Zaytsev, I.V. Yelizavetin, E.A. Ksenofontov, G.V. Lebedev and P.A. Shirokov Complex of ALMAZ-1 SAR Image Processing Vivekanandan, J., and J. Turk High Resolution Microwave Radiometric Signatures of Mid-Latitude and Tropical Rainfall Vivekanandan, J., and J. Turk K-Band Model Computations of Propagation Effects in Precipitation Vogelzang, J., G.J. Wensink, M.v.d. Kooij, W. Alpers, I. Hennings and J. Matthews Mapping of Sea Bottom Topography in a Multi-Sensor Approach Vogelzang, J. The Effect of Wave Blocking on Mapping of Sea Bottom Topography With Imaging Radar Vogt, J.V., and M.M. Verstraete Analyzing Spatio-Temporal Characteristics of Surface Parameters From NOAA/AVHRR Data Volynsky, V.A., A.I. Sud'bin and P.P. Shirshov Evaluation of Ozone Concentration in Atmosphere Based on Measurements in Visible Area WT01-B02-103IA054-000906-B015-328http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorw.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191218 text/html 12510HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:11:02 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: W Papers listed by Author: W Wackerman, C., R. Shuchman and F. Fetterer Estimation of Wind Speed and Wind Direction From ERS-1 Imagery Wade, R.H., and W.F. Weeks The Utilization of Modeled Salinity and Temperature Profiles in the Estimation of SAR Backscatter From First Year Arctic Sea Ice Wagner, A., and B. Aster Prediction of Image Performance and Real-Time Quality Improvement for the X-SAR/SIR-C SRL-1 Mission Wagner, T.W., and J.H. Gibson Teaching With Satellite Direct Readout Wahl, T., T. Anderssen and A. Skoelv Practical Use of ERS-1 SAR Images in Pollution Monitoring Wahl, T., and A. Skoelv ERS-1 SAR Imaging of Ocean Features in the Vestfjorden Area Waite, W.P.,V.H. Kaupp, H.C. MacDonald, L. Gournay, J. Sandy and G. Hawkins Radar Sensing of Hydrocarbon Gas Seepage Wales, C. The Alaska SAR Facility: An Introduction Walsh, E.J., D. Vandemark, D.E. Hines, R.N. Swift and J.F. Scott Scanning Radar Altimeter Measurements of Sea Surface Mean Square Slope and Directional Wave Spectra During TOGA COARE Wan, A., and J. Davis The BRDF Effect on Determination of Spectral Emissivities of Land-Surface Materials From Spectrometric Measurements Wan, W., D. Fraser and B. Lees A Self-Organising Map Model for Remote Sensing Imagery Analysis Wang, A.P., S. Ueno and M. Toho Transmitted Radiation of Searchlight in Turbid Atmosphere Wang, D., and D.C. He Classification of Remotely Sensed Images Using Mathematical Morphology Wang, H.T., O.M. Griffin and G.A. Meadows Extraction of Hull Characteristics From SAR Images of Ship Wakes Wang, J., and W. Liu A Multi-Band Road Extraction Scheme for LANDSAT-TM Imagery Wang, J.R., P. Racette and L.A. Chang Retrieval of Water Vapor Profiles Using Measurements From a Millimeter-Wave Imaging Radiometer Wang, Y., F.W. Davis, J.M. Melack, E.S. Kasischke and N.L. Christensen Jr. Effects of Variation in Soil Moisture on ERS-1 SAR Backscatter From Loblolly Pine Forests Wang, Y., S. Filoso and J.M. Melack Detecting Flooded or Nonflooded Ground Underneath Floodplain Forests in Amazon by Radar Backscatter: Modeling Results Wang, Y., and J.M. Melack Canopy Penetration Study for Tropical Rainforests: Modeled Radar Backscatter From Amazon Floodplain Forests at C-, L-, and P-Band Wang, Z-S., Z-Q.Wang and J. Xu The Doppler Propoerties of the Elliptical Orbiting Radar Wankiewicz Maxfield, A. Radar Satellite Snowmelt Detection in the Canadian Rocky Mountains Wash, C.H., and K.L. Davidson Remote Measurements and Coastal Atmospheric Refraction Washburne, J. First-Order 4-D Data Assimilation in a Distribution Model of Surface Temperature and Energy Fluxes Watson, S.M. Atmospheric Properties Measurements and Data Collection From a Manned Hot Air Balloon Webster, T., A. Siegel, A. Ochadlick Jr., J. Davis, W. Everett, J. Kraus, M. Rankin, J. Morrison and J. Lyden Spatial and Temporal Correlation of LOGAN-1 High-Resolution Radar Sea Clutter Data Wegmuller, U., C.L. Werner, D.R. Nuesch and A. Sieber Interferometric Signatures of Temperate Forest From ERS-1 SAR Data Wegmuller, U., F.Holecz, Y. Wang and G. Kattenborn Theoretical Sensitivity of ERS-1 SAR Backscatter Over Forest Wehr, T., S. Crewell, K. Kunzi and H. Nett Detection of Atmospheric Chlorine-Compounds with an Airborne Submillimeter Receiver Weinman, J.A., and J.L. Schols Maritime Precipitation Distributions Determined From Airborne Radar and Multi-Frequency Radiometric Measurements Weissman, D.E., W.J. Plant and S. Stolte The Modulation and Coherence Functions Between Atmospheric Turbulence at the Sea Surface and the Microwave Radar Cross Section Fluctuations Weissman, D.E. Studies of a C-Band Model Function for Friction for Friction Velocity Using Coincident, Simultaneous Ku-Band Scatterometer Measurements Wendling, L., J. Desachy and M. Zehana Fuzzy Segmentation and Sample-Based Object Recognition in Remote Sensing Images Wentz, F.J. Measurement of Oceanic Wind Vector Using Satellite Microwave Radiometers Werner, C.L., P.A. Rosen and A.K. Gabriel Interferometric Signatures of Freezing and Thawing Permafrost in Alaska With ERS-1 West, J.C., and R. Chen Analysis of Scattering From Rough Surfaces at Small Grazing Angles Using a Periodic-Surface Moment Method West, J.C. Numerical Prediction of Shadowing in EM Scattering From a Rough Ocean Wave at Grazing Incidence West, R., D.P. Winebrenner and L. Tsang The Influence of Layering and Grain Size on Microwave Emission From Polar Firn White, R.G. Cross-Section Estimation by Simulated Annealing Wiesbeck, W. Wide Band Polarimetric Scattering Matrix Metrology and Calibration Williams, B., A. Blanchard and B. Krenek High Resolution Three Dimensional Imaging of Complex Reflective Structures Williams, C., K. McDonald, E. Rignot, L. Viereck and J. Way An Ecological Approach to Radar Mapping of Biomass in Interior Alaska Boreal Forests Willis, K., and M.F. McKay Space Shuttle Photography -- A Classroom Resource Willis, K.J., W.J. Daley, F.R. Brumbaugh, M.J. Wilkinson and J.M. Bremer NASA-Sponsored Educational Outread Initiative Willson, R.C., J.M. Pap and R.S. Helizon Monitoring the Total Solar Irradiance of the Geosphere Winebrenner, D.P., B. Holt and E.D. Nelson Observing Seasonal Transitions on Sea Ice in the Arctic Using the ERS-1 SAR Winebrenner, D.P., R.D. West and L. Tsang Estimating Firn Temperatures in Greenland and Antarctica From Dual Polarization C-Band Microwave Emission Observations Winebrenner, D.P., T.C. Grenfell, J. Sylvester and L. Tsang Forward and Inverse Signature Modeling for Congelation Ice Winningham, J.D., R.A. Frahm, R. Link, and D.A. Siskind A Proxy Method of Solar Soft X-Ray Determinations and Resultant No Production and Transport Wismann, V.R., J. Aschbacher and A. Poniman Radar Signature Studies of Coastal Environments in Indonesia Using ERS-1 SAR Wismann, V.R., K. Boehnke and C. Schmullius Global Land Surface Monitoring Using the ERS-1 Scatterometer Woodcock, C.E. Estimation of Forest Stand Structure From Landsat TM Through Inversion of the Li-Strahler Model Wooding, M.G., A.D. Zmuda and A.J. Batts Crop Discrimination Using Multi-Temporal ERS-1 SAR Data Worden, H., J. Fanselow and R. Beer Phase Correction Algorithms for the Airborne Emissions Spectrometer (AES) Wu, C., J. Graf, M. Freilich, D. Long, M. Spencer, W. Tsai and C. Winn The Seawinds Scatterometer Instrument Wu, S.T.S. Retrieval of Rainrate Over Rough Sea Surfaces as Measured by the Advanced Microwave Precipitation Radiometer (AMPR) Wurman, J. A Bistatic Dual-Doppler Radar to Measure Vector Winds Using One Transmitter and a Low-Gain Passive Receiver WT01-B02-104IA054-000906-B015-362http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/authorxz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191235 text/html 10937HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:11:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Papers listed by Author: X-Z Papers listed by Author: X-Z Xu, L., J. Zhang and G. Zhang On Remote Sensing of SST From Space Xu, W., E.C. Chang, L.K. Kwoh, H. Lim, W. Cheng and A. Heng Phase-Unwrapping of SAR Interferogram With Multi-Requency or Multi-Baseline Yamashita, K., and A. Yasuda A Technique for Lossless Compression of GMS Images Yanasse, C.C.F., A.C. Frery, S.J.S. SantAnna and L.V. Dutra On the Use of the Multilook Amplitude K Distribution for SAR Image Analysis Yang, Y.E., H.T. Ewe, C.C. Hsu, L. Wang, J.A. Kong, R.T. Shin, H. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, J.Y. Ho and K. ONeill A GIS-Driven Interactive Radar Image Simulation Using EMSARS Model Yanovsky, F.J. Dual-Parameter Methods of Radar Turbulence Detection Yeh, P.S., and W.H. Miller The Development of Lossless Data Compression Technology for Remote Sensing Applications Yelizavetin, I.V. The Digital Elevation Models of Earth Surface Obtained From ALMAZ-1 SAR Overlapping Images Yokota, T., N. Katatani, T. Nakajima, S. Mukai, M. Suzuki and Y. Sasano Operational Data Retrieval Algorithms for the Improved Limb Atmospheric Spectrometer (ILAS) on ADEOS Satellite Yoshimori, K., K. Itoh and Y. Ichioka New Statistical Formulation for an Inhomogeneous Ocean Surface Young, J., L. Peters, P. Gogineni, and K. Jezek Application of a Compact Range Antenna for Accurate Measurement of Microwave Scattering From Sea Ice Young, J.A., P.G. Rogers, P.P. Jordan and L.A. Brandt A Computer-Aided Geological Interpretation System for Subsurface Imaging Yueh, S.H., S.V. Nghiem and R. Kwok Comparison of a Polarimetric Scattering and Emission Model With Ocean Backscatter and Brightness Measurements Yueh, S.H., W.J. Wilson, F.K. Li and S.V. Nghiem Spaceborne Microwave Radiometers Designs and Performance Evaluation for Ocean Wind Remote Sensing Yueh, S.H., W.J. Wilson, S.V. Nghiem, F.K. Li and W.B. Ricketts Polarimetric Passive Remote Sensing of Ocean Wind Vectors Yuhas, R.H., and A.F.H. Goetz Monitoring and Modeling Semi-Arid Landscape Response to Climate Change Yutsis, V.V., M.K. Ivanov and A.F. Limonov Tectonics and Geodynamics of the Eastern Mediterranean: An Example of Complex interpretatin of the Geological-Geophysical Data Zagolski, F., and J.P. Gastellu-Etchegorry Atmospheric Corrections of AVIRIS Images With a Procedure Based on the Inversion of 5S Model Zalewski, E., and P. Petrone Electrically Based Absolute Spectral Radiance Calibrations for Remote Sensing Application of AVIRIS Imagery to Enhance Resource Management in the Florida Keys Zaytsev, V.V., L.B. Neronsky, V.G. Kobernichenko and A.R. Teterin Analysis of ALMAZ-1 SAR Doppler Parameter Zebker, H.A., and P. Rosen On the Derivation of Coseismic Displacement Fields Using Differential Radar Interferometry: The Landers Earthquake Zehana, M., D. Saint-Joan and J. Desachy Fuzzy Set Technique for Spatial Problem Solving Zeisse, C.R. Marine Modification to LOWTRAN Radiance Predictions Zeng, L., and G. Levy Space and Time Aliasing Structure in Mean Polar-Orbiting Satellite Data Zhan, C. Generalization of Classified Images for GIS Zhang, D.B., L. Van Gool and A. Ooserlinck Coast Line Detection From SAR Images Zhang, L., and T. Hoshi A Fuzzy Neural Network Model (FNN Model) for Classification Usin g LANDSAT-TM Image Data Zheng, X., G. Shi and P. Gong Statistical and Evidential Reasoning for Integrated Analysis of Multisource Data Zhifu, S., H. Ming, Z. Kai and S. Yuanfu Airborne Remote Sensing Experiments of Marine Monitoring Zimmermann, R., K. McDonald, J. Way and R. Oren Microclimate, Water Potential, Transpiration, and Bole Dielectric Constant of Conifers and Deciduous Tree Species in the Continental Boreal Ecotone in Central Alaska Zink, M. Calibration and Performance Analysis of the X-SAR System Zurek, R.W., M.R. Schoeberl, A.R. Douglass and C.H. Jackman A Brief Review of the UARS Mission and Correlative Measurements Campaign Zurk, L., K.H. Ding, L. Tsang and D.P. Winebrenner Monte Carlo Simulations of the Extinction Rate of Densely Packed Spheres With Clustered and Non-Clustered Geometries Based on Solution of Maxwells Equations Zurk, L., and W.J. Plant Two-Dimensional Simulations of SAR Imagery of Ocean Waves de La Noe, J. Remote Sensing of Stratospheric Ozone by Ground-Based Microwave Radiometers de Lira, G.R., K. Batchily, J. Hongtao and A. Huete Optical and Seasonal Variations Along the U.S. Mexico Border: An Analysis With Landsat TM Imagery de Moura Abdon, M., and J.S. Vila da Silva Analysis of the Spectral Behavior of the Vegetation in the South of the Brasilian Pantanal de Moura Abdon, M., and J.S. Vila da Silva The Attribute Vegetation Index in the Evaluation of Plant Cover in the South of the Brasilian Pantanal de Zafra, R.L., C. Trimble, J.M. Reeves, D. Cheng and D Shindell mm-Wave Spectroscopy of Stratospheric Trace Gases at the South Pole Over an 11-Month Cycle: O3, N2O, HNO3, CLO and NO2 van Halsema, D., and M.W.A. van der Kooij Measurements of Land Subsidence With SAR Interferometry van Leeuwen, H.J.C., J.G.P.W. Clevers and G.J. Rijckenberg Synergy Between Optical and Microwave Remote Sensing for Crop Growth Monitoring van Leeuwen, W.J.D., A.R. Huete and C.L. Walthall Biophysical Interpretation of Spectral Mixture Models Based on Radiative Transfer Models and Observational Data van Oevelen, P.J., and D.H. Hoekman Estimation of A Real Soil Water Content During HAPEX-Sahel and EFEDA-Spain van den Bosch, J., and R.O. Green Imaging Spectrometer Measured Leaf Water and Cellulose in the San Gabriel Mountains Prior to the 1993 Altadena Fire van der Kooij, M.W.A., A.L. Gray, M. Manore, K.E. Mattar, C.E. Livingstone, and P.J. Farris-Manning Height and Large-Scale Height Roughness Information From CCRS interferometric SAR Data of Arctic Sea Ice Back to IGARSS 94 Home Page IGARSS 94 (igarss@starhawk.jpl.nasa.gov) Generated on June 30,1994WT01-B02-105IA054-000906-B015-393http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mi1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191248 text/html 2550HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:11:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 1: Atmospheric Sounding and Monitoring Monday Interactive, August 8 Area 1: Atmospheric Sounding and Monitoring CO Profile Retrieval Experiments for the MOPITT Instrument Pan, L., and J. Gille Millimeter Wave Detection of Mesospheric Ozone Using a High Resolution Chirp Transform Spectrometer Backend Hartogh, P., and C. Jarchow Atmospheric Transmittance Measurements Near 54 and 118 GHz Schwartz, M.J., J.W. Barrett, P.W. Rosenkranz and D.H. Staelin Rapid Line-by-Line Calculation of Spectral Absorption Coefficients Sparks, L. Solution of the Radio Refraction Inverse Problem and Determination of the Path Delay Gaikovich, K.P. Application of Parametric Methods Spectrum Estimation for Radio Acoustic Sounding Rapoport, V.O., N.I. Belova, Yu.G. Fedoseev, Yu.A. Sazonov and V.A. Zinichev Limits of Space Based Remote Sensing for Methane Source Characterization Ashcroft, P., and B. Morel Atmospheric Properties Measurements and Data Collection From a Manned Hot Air Balloon Watson, S.M. Air Pollution Monitoring Using SnO2 Sensors Caldararu, F., M. Caldararu, A. Jelev and A. Iacob Estimation of Turbulent Parameters of the Atmospheric Aerosol by Laser Radar Avramova, R.P. WT01-B02-106IA054-000906-B015-419http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mi2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191300 text/html 2294HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:11:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 2: Radar Meteorology and Storms Monday Interactive, August 8 Area 2: Radar Meteorology and Storms Heavy Precipitation Measurements at S-Band With a Polarimetric Radar Ryzhkov, A.V., and D.S. Zrnic Optimal Polarization for Radar Meteorology Hubbert, J., V.N. Bringi, H. Holler and P. Meischner Point Process Models for Weather Radar Images Larsen, M. Height Distribution of Ice Particles in Wintertime Thunderclouds Observed by a Dual Polarization Radar Maekawa, Y., S. Fukao, Y. Sonoi and K. Masukura Estimation of IceWater Content Using Multi-Parameter Radar Measurements Thurai, M., and J. Vivekanandan and K.L. Morgan Test of Distribution -- Free Non-Gaussian Noise Removal in Spectral Analysis of Meteorological Radar Echo Urkowitz, H., and J.D. Nespor A Method for Assessing the Locating Accuracy and Detection Efficiency of Operational Lightning Surveillance Systems Maier, M. Precursors of Typhoon Development Determined by Microwave Soundings of Atmosphere Lazarev, A.A. Synergistic Use of Remotely Sensed Data for Evaluation of the Boundary Layer in Synoptic Storms and Fronts Dickinson, S. WT01-B02-107IA054-000906-B015-458http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mi3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191321 text/html 2697HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:11:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 3: Atmospheric Correction of Satellite Imaging Data Monday Interactive, August 8 Area 3: Atmospheric Correction of Satellite Imaging Data Characterization of Cirrus Clouds from Multi-Pass AVIRIS Goetz, A.F.H. Atmospheric Corrections of AVIRIS Images With a Procedure Based on the Inversion of 5S Model Zagolski, F., and J.P. Gastellu-Etchegorry Effects of Change in Spectral Resolution and Channel Position on Radiative Transfer Model Based Atmospheric Correction Techniques Applied to Imaging Spectrometers Carrere, V. Sensitivit y Analysis of Shortwave Atmospheric Correction Through Combined Radiative Transfer and Multi-Angular Methods North, P.R., S.A. Briggs, S.E. Plummer, A.K. Wilson, C. Godsalve, J.J. Settle and S.M. Singh A Shortwave Radiation Model for Radiometric Correction of Optical Satellite Data in Rugged Terrain Sandmeier, S., P. Meyer and K.I. Itten Atmospheric and Topographic Correction of Satellite Data Over Mountainous Terrain Kusaka, T., and Y. Kawata Angular Characteristics of Pathfinder AVHRR Land Thermal Imagery and Radiative Transfer Modeling Liang, S., and K.J. Ransom Adaptive Reconstruction of Sequential AVHRR Imagery of Texas Via Dynamic Compositing Using Expoentially Weighted Polynomial Function Lee, S., and M.M. Crawford A Two-Phase Algorithm to Correct for Atmospheric Effects on the 85 GHZ Channels of the SSM/I in the Arctic Region St. Germain, K.M. WT01-B02-108IA054-000906-B015-503http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mi4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191349 text/html 2727HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:12:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 4: Propagation and Scattering in Media Monday Interactive, August 8 Area 4: Propagation and Scattering in Media Coherent Channels Expansion in the Theory of Wave Propagation in Turbulence Charnotskii, M.I. Influence of an Inhomogeneous Ionosphere on Mobile Satellite Communication Blaunshtein, N., and R. Mazar Visualization and Assessment of VOCAR Propagation Conditions Cook, J., G.G. Love, S.D. Burk and W.T. Thompson VOCAR Refractive Variability Using Isentropic Cross-Section Analysis Helvey, R. Ray Paths in Refractive Random Media Golynski, S.M. Ka-Band Propagation Measurements From the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Turk, J., J. Beaver and V.N. Bringi Microwave Radiation Pulse Scattering by a Water Drop in the Atmosphere Shifrin, K.S., and I.G. Zolotov Scattering of Millimeter Radiowaves by Dry Snowflakes Osharin, A.M. Radiative Transfer in Anisotropically Scattering Atmospheres: The Finite Element Method Kisselev, V.B., L. Roberi and G. Perona Theoretical Prediction and Measurement of the Scattering From Thin Wires With One-Dimensional Random Orientation Swart, P.J.F., and P. Snoeij Numerical Analysis of Wave Scattering From a Conducting Cylinder in Turbulent Media Tateiba, M., H. Koga and Z.Q. Meng WT01-B02-109IA054-000906-B015-527http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mi5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191405 text/html 2449HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:12:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 5: Ecosystems and Vegetation Monitoring Monday Interactive, August 8 Area 5: Ecosystems and Vegetation Monitoring A Remote Sensing Monitoring System for a Colonization Area in Tropical Rain Forest Bijker, W., and D. Hoekman A Parametric Study of the Trunk-Ground Corner Effect in Forest Remote Sensing Robin, E., and A. Guissard Characterization of Canopy Physiology at BOREAS With SAR McDonald, K.C., R. Zimmermann, J.Way and E. Rignot Forest Age Discrimination From Texture Measures of SAR Imagery Luckman, A., G. Groom and J. Baker Inventory by Compartments Using Radar-Derived Stand Profiles Hyyppa, J., and J. Pulliainen Estimating Release of Carbon from Forest Fires in Alaska Using Satellite Remote Sensing Data Kasischke, E.S., L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez, N.H.F. French, S.L. Ustin and N.L. Christensen Estimation of Conifer Bi-Directional Reflectance Using a Monte Carlo Method North, P.R., and S.E. Plummer A Study of Linearized Index Generation Using Multi-Spectral Image for Environmental Monitoring Pan, J.J., and S.T. Li Lidar Implementation of Pump-and-Probe Technique for Remote Sensing Estimates of Photosynthesis Efficiency in Plants Gorbunov, M.Yu, and A.M. Chekalyuk WT01-B02-110IA054-000906-B016-14http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mi6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191426 text/html 2497HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:13:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 6: Land Monitoring and Thermal Sensing Monday Interactive, August 8 Area 6: Land Monitoring and Thermal Sensing Using Airborne and Satellite Data for Multitemporal Studies of Land Degradation Ray, T.W., T.G. Farr, R.G. Blom, R.E. Crippen and E.M. De Jong Simultaneous Evaluation of Spectral Featureless Constituents in Soils Using Near Infrared Analysis (NIRA) Technique Ben-Dor, E., and A. Banin A Systems Based Modification of the NDVI to Minimize Soil and Atmospheric Noise Liu, H., and A. Huete Effect of Latent Heat Transfer on Diurnal and Annual Prediction of Temperature and Radiobrightness of Northern Prairie Liou, Y.A., and A.W. England First-Order 4-D Data Assimilation in a Distribution Model of Surface Temperature and Energy Fluxes Washburne, J. An Evaluation of BATS as a Basis for a Radiobrightness Model for Northern Prairie Judge, J., J.F. Galantowicz and A.W. England Laboratory Studies of Salinity Influence on Dielectric Characteristics of Sand Ilyin, V.A., and Yu.M. Sosnovsky Far-Infrared Absorption of CO2 Clathrate Hydrate Landry, J.C., and A.W. England The Outcomes of Employment of New Instrument and Software of Thermal Remote Sensing at Search of Oil and Gas Deposits Kornienko, S.G., and A.V. Savin WT01-B02-111IA054-000906-B016-71http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191501 text/html 2711HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:13:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Sea Ice Remote Sensing and Modeling Monday Afternoon, August 8 Sea Ice Remote Sensing and Modeling Antarctic Passive Microwave Signatures During Summer and Autumn Comiso, J.C., and S.F. Ackley Contribution of Antarctic Coastal Polynya Areas to Total Ice Production: Comparison of Satellite- and Model-Derived Estimates Markus, T., and B.A. Burns Characteristics of Winter Sea Ice Conditions in the Southwestern Weddell Sea in 1992 as Derived From Multi-Sensor Observations Viehoff, T., A. Li, C. Oelke and H. Rebhan Satellite Microwave Radar- And Buoy-Tracked Ice Motion in the Weddell Sea During WWGS'92 Drinkwater, M.R., and C. Kottmeier Enhanced Resolution ERS-1 Scatterometer Imaging of Southern Hemisphere Polar Ice Long, D.G., D.S. Early and M.R. Drinkwater Testing of a Coupled Ice-Ocean Model in a Sea Ice Forecasting System Preller, R.H., and P.G. Posey Early Stages of Sea Ice Growth Observed With Satellite Data Cavalieri, D.J. ERS-1 SAR Backscatter Modelling and Interpretation of Sea Ice Signatures Askne, J., A. Carlstrom, W. Dierking and L. Ulander ERS-1 Investigations of Southern Ocean Sea Ice Geophysics Using Combined Scatterometer and SAR Images Drinkwater, M.R., D.S. Early and D.G. Long Model for Estimating Surface Roughness of Level and Ridged Sea Ice Using ERS-1 SAR Carlstrom, A., L.M.H. Ulander and B.Hakansson WT01-B02-112IA054-000906-B016-100http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191520 text/html 2850HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:14:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature Monday Afternoon, August 8 Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature Representing Fluxes in the Atmospheric Planetary Boundary Layer Above Heterogeneous Surfaces Avissar, R., B. Li, B.H. Lynn, T. Schmidt and F. Zeng Aggregation of Energy Balance Controlling Parameters Over Heterogeneous Landscape Lhomme, J.P., and A. Chehbouni Characterising the Landcover of the Australian Continent for Incorporation into High Spatial Resolution GCMs Graetz, R.D., and M.A. Wilson Estimation of Sensible Heat Flux Using a Two- and Three-Component Model During the Monsoon '90 Experiment Chehbouni, A., J.P. Lhomme, E.G. Njoku, D. Nichols, D. Stannard, S.M. Moran and Y.H. Kerr Mapping Surface Energy Fluxes of a Semiarid Region in Arizona Rahman, A.F., J.C. Washburne, M.S. Moran, A.K. Batchily, M.A. Weltz, A.R. Huete and M. Hodshon Yates Spatial Variation of Evaporation Over the HAPEX-SAHEL Southern Super Site Derive From Satellite Data Stewart, J.B. An Approach to Estimating Surface Parameters and Fluxes Using Modeling and Multispectral Remote Sensing Njoku, E.G., A. Chehbouni, F. Cabot, B. Rague, K. Fleming and Y.H. Kerr Salsa-Mex: Semi-Arid Land-Surface-Atmospheric Mountain Experiment Goodrich, D.C. The BRDF Effect on Determination of Spectral Emissivities of Land-Surface Materials From Spectrometric Measurements Wan, A., and J. Davis Estimating of Surface Temperatures on Forest Stands Using Airborne MSS Emittance Data Kim, C. WT01-B02-113IA054-000906-B016-130http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpcp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191537 text/html 2539HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:14:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Atmospheric Correction of Satellite and Aircraft Based Imaging Data Over Land Monday Afternoon, August 8 Atmospheric Correction of Satellite and Aircraft Based Imaging Data Over Land A Method for Surface Temperature Retrieval With ASTER/TIR Arai, K. Proposed Atmospheric Correction for the Solar-Reflective Bands of the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer Thome, K.J. Simulation of the Emergent Radiation From the Top of Atmosphere, Where the Broken Cirrus Layer is Considered Takashima, T., and K. Masuda Remote Sensing Through Cirrus Clouds: Visual and Sub-Visual Shanks, J.G., and D.K. Lynch Thermal Infrared Calibration of Aerial and Satellite Images Schott, J.R. Using the Mosart Code for Atmospheric Correction Cornette, W.M., D.C. Robertson and G.P. Anderson Atmospheric Corrections of MAS Data El Saleous, N., J.C. Roger and E. Vermote Operational Atmospheric Correction of AVHRR Visible and Near Infrared Data El Saleous, N., E. Vermote and J.C. Roger Spectral Calibration of an Imaging Spectrometer Inflight Using Solar and Atmospheric Absorption Bands Green, R.O., J.E. Conel, J. Margolis and T.G. Chrien In-Flight Wavelength Calibration of Multispectral Thermal Infrared Data Hook, S.J., and K. Okada WT01-B02-114IA054-000906-B016-199http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpe.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191640 text/html 2986HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:15:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Boreal Ecosystems Monday Afternoon, August 8 Boreal Ecosystems Monitoring of Freeze/Thaw Transitions in Taiga Forests Using ERS-1 SAR Rignot, E., K. McDonald, J. Way, R. Zimmermann, C. Williams and L. Viereck Microclima te, Water Potential, Transpiration, and Bole Dielectric Constant of Conifers and Deciduous Tree Species in the Continental Boreal Ecotone in Central Alaska Zimmermann, R., K. McDonald, J. Way and R. Oren Vegetation Mapping of Forested Ecosystems in Interior Central Alaska Ustin, S.L., L.H. Szeto, Q.F. Xiao, Q.J. Hart and E.S. Kasischke Forest Modeling of Jack Pine Trees for BOREAS Moghaddam, M., and S. Saatchi Multi-Stand Radar Modeling From Pre-BOREAS Experiment Chauhan, N., R. Lang, J. Ranson, and O.Killic Seasonal Effects on C- and X-Band Backscattering Properties of FinnishBoreal Forests Pulliainen, J., K. Heiska, J. Koskinen, T. Tares and M. Hallikainen Statistics of Backscattering Source Distribution of Boreal Coniferous Forests at C- and X-Band Hyyppa, J., J. Pulliainen, K. Heiska and M. Hallikainen Using ERS-1 SAR Imagery to Monitor Variations in Burn Severity in an Alaskan Fire-Disturbed Boreal Forest Ecosystem Bourgeau-Chavez, L.L., E.S. Kasischke, N.H.F. French, L.H. Szeto and C.M. Kherkher Relating Soil Water Measurements at Fire Disturbed Sites in Alaska to ERS-1 SAR Image Signature French, N.H.F., E.S. Kasischke, L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez, P.A. Harrell and N.L. Christensen Jr. Remote Sensing of PAR Interception and Net Primary Production in Trembling Aspen and Black Spruce Stands Goetz, S.J., F.G. Hall, K.F. Hummerich and J.E. Nickeson WT01-B02-115IA054-000906-B016-227http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191656 text/html 2775HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:15:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Basic Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering I Monday Afternoon, August 8 Basic Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering I Pulse Broadening of the Enhanced Backscattering From Rough Surfaces Ishimaru, A., L. Ailes-Sengers, P. Phu and D. Winebrenner Comparison of a Polarimetric Scattering and Emission Model With Ocean Backscatter and Brightness Measurements Yueh, S.H., S.V. Nghiem and R. Kwok Numerical Simulation of Omnidirectional Scattering From Three-Dimensional Randomly Rough Dielectric Surfaces Fung, A.K., S. Tjuatja and C. Terre The Small Slope Approximation for Wave Scattering From Randomly Rough Surfaces Using a Pierson-Moskowitz Spectrum Broschat, S.L. Enhanced Backscattering From 1-D Free Standing Dielectric Film Gu, Z., J.Q. Lu, A.A. Maradudin and E.R. Mendez Studies of Large Scale Random Rough Surface Problems With the Sparse-Matrix Flat-Surface Iterative Approach Pak, K., L. Tsang and C.H. Chan Scattering From Open Cavities in a Perfectly Conducting Surface Schiavone, G.A., K. O'Neill and K.D. Paulsen New Features in the Transmission of Light Through Thin Metal Films With Randomly Rough Surfaces Sanchez-Gil, J.A., A.A. Maradudin and J.Q. Lu Application of a Stochastic Variational Principle to Random Rough Surface Scattering Donohue, D.J. Analysis of Scattering From Rough Surfaces at Small Grazing Angles Using a Periodic-Surface Moment Method West, J.C., and R. Chen WT01-B02-116IA054-000906-B016-259http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mph.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191710 text/html 2447HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:15:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html New Developments in SAR: Special Session Honoring Kiyo Tomiyasu on His 75th Birthday Monday Afternoon, August 8 New Developments in SAR: Special Session Honoring Kiyo Tomiyasu on His 75th Birthday Beyond the Obvious: Some Reflections Raney, R.K. The Potential of SAR in Hydrology Engman, E.T. On the Derivation of Coseismic Displacement Fields Using Differential Radar Interferometry: The Landers Earthquake Zebker, H.A., and P. Rosen UHF Wideband SAR Design and Preliminary Results Sheen, D.R., C.M. Strawitch and T.B. Lewis Interferometric Signatures of Temperate Forest From ERS-1 SAR Data Wegmuller, U., C.L. Werner, D.R. Nuesch and A. Sieber Results of 1993 Repeat-Pass SAR Interferometry Experiments Klein, J., S. Hensley, S. Madsen and F. Webb AIRSAR/TOPSAR Studies of Tropical Glaciers in the Cordillera Real, Bolivia Forster, R.R., A.G. Klein, T.A. Blodgett and B.L. Isacks An Approximate Analytical model for the SAR or Interferometric SAR Imaging of a Monochromatic Ocean Wave Shemer, L. Comments on SAR Signal and Noise Equations Raney, R.K., and R. Bamler Calibration of the CARABAS VHF SAR System Ulander, L.M.H., and H. Hellsten WT01-B02-117IA054-000906-B016-288http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mps.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191727 text/html 2591HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:16:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Data Compression Monday Afternoon, August 8 Data Compression The Development of Lossless Data Compression Technology for Remote Sensing Applications Yeh, P.S., and W.H. Miller Crush: A Comparative Lossless Compression Package Tilton, J.C., and E. Seiler Terrain-Adaptive Multispectral Bandwidth Compression Saghri, J.A., A.G. Tescher and J.T. Reagan Adaptive Maximization of Lossless Image Compression of Satellite Images Stewart, R.J., F.Y.M. Lure and J.C. Liou Information Content of Compressed Remotely Sensed Data Brown, R.J., M. Manore, D. Bedard and C. Hepburn Compression of Satellite Multispectral Imagery for Applications Requiring High-Quality Radiometry Hogan, D.B. Lossless Compression and Multiresolution Decompression of the Global AVHRR 1 KM Data Set Lossless Compression and Multiresolution Decompression of the Global AVHRR 1 KM Data Set Kess, B., D. Steinwand and S.E. Reichenbach Accessing Portions of Losslessly Compressed Multiband Data Remus, M., and K. Sayood Scan Predictive Vector Quantization of Multispectral Images Memon, N.D., and K. Sayood Spatial and Spectral Decorrelation of LANDSAT-TM Imagery for Lossless Data Compression Tang, S., J.Wang and K. Zhang WT01-B02-118IA054-000906-B016-323http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpt.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191745 text/html 2423HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:16:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html TOPEX/Poseidon Results and Follow-On Monday Afternoon, August 8 TOPEX/Poseidon Results and Follow-On Engineering Performance Analysis of the TOPEX Radar Altimeter Purdy, C.L., D.W. Hancock III and G.S. Hayne Evaluation of the SSALT Poseidon Altimeter Menard, Y., P. Escudier, E. Jeansou, O. Zanife and P. Vincent Global Verification Results for TOPEX/Poseidon and ERS-1 Altimetry Tapley, B.D., J.C. Ries and C.K. Shum Detection of Oceanic Steric Height Change Using TOPEX/Poseidon Satellite Altimetery Hendricks, J.R., R.R. Leben, G.H. Born and C. Koblinsky Accounting for Regional Factors of the Altimeter Sea State Bias Glazman, R., A. Fabrikant and A. Greysukh Seasonal Changes in Dynamic Heights Based on Altimetric Data Naeije, M.C., E. Wisse, K.F. Wakker and B.A.C. Ambrosius Linear Response of Sea Level to Wind Forcing Determined From TOPEX/POSEIDON Altimeter Data Fu, L.L., and R. Davidson Investigating the Tropical Atlantic Variability From TOPEX/POSEIDON Altimeter Arnault, S., Y. Menard and B. Bourles A Compact Dual-Frequency Altimeter for TOPEX-POSEIDON Follow On Mission Richard, J., C. Mavrocordatos, N. Suinot, P. Raizonville and P. Escudier WT01-B02-119IA054-000906-B016-349http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpv.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191812 text/html 2205HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:16:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Radar Meteorology: Observations of Weather and EM Wave Propagation Monday Afternoon, August 8 Radar Meteorology: Observations of Weather and EM Wave Propagation Advances in Radar Meteorology: An Overview Atlas, D. Rainrate Estimation in the Presence of Hail Using S-Band Specific Differential Phase Aydin, K., V.N. Bringi and L. Liu K-Band Model Computations of Propagation Effects in Precipitation Vivekanandan, J., and J. Turk Retrieval of Propagation Induced Attenuation From Radar Derived Accumulated Differential Phase Measurements Chandra, M., A. Schroth and E. Lueneburg Self-Consistent Measurements of Differential Phase and Differential Reflectivity in Rain Goddard, J.W.F., J.D. Eastment and J. Tan Melting Layer Observation With Radar and Aircraft Hagen, M., J. Hubbert, C. Richter, V.N. Bringi and P.F. Meischner Stereoradar Meteorology: A New Unified Approach to Process Data From Airborne or Ground Based Weather Radars Kabeche, A., and J. Testud Observations of a MCS With a Dual-Polarization Radar Ryzhkov, A.V., and D.S. Zrnic WT01-B02-120IA054-000906-B016-370http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/mpz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191825 text/html 2690HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:17:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Sensing and Predicting Electromagnetic/Electrooptical Propagation Conditions in Coastal Environments Monday Afternoon, August 8 Sensing and Predicting Electromagnetic/Electrooptical Propagation Conditions in Coastal Environments Sensing of Radio Refractivity and Aerosol Extinction Richter, J.H. Variability of Coastal Atmospheric Refractivity Paulus, R.A. Statistical Assessment of the Variability of Atmospheric Propagation Effects i the Southern California Coastal Area Rogers, T. Lidar Measured Refractive Effects in a Coastal Environment Blood, D.W., S. McKinley, C.R. Philbrick, R. Paulus and T. Rodgers Comparisons of Lidar and Microwave Radiometer Measurements of Atmospheric Water Vapor and Temperature Kane, T.J., S. Rajan, C.R. Philbrick, S. Keihm, S. Walter and M.J. Mahoney Remote Measurements and Coastal Atmospheric Refraction Wash, C.H., and K.L. Davidson Mesoscale Modeling of Refractive Conditions During the VOCAR Experiment Burk, S.D., W.T. Thompson, J. Cook and G.G. Love Guidance for an Expert System Approach to Elevated Duct Assessment Over the Northeastern Pacific ocean Rosenthal, J., and R. Helvey Variations in Coastal Atmospheric Refractivity Induced by Mesoscale Processes Thompson, W.T., S.D. Burk, J. Cook and G.G. Love Marine Modification to LOWTRAN Radiance Predictions Zeisse, C.R. WT01-B02-121IA054-000906-B016-404http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ti1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191843 text/html 2522HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:17:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Clouds and Precipitation Tuesday Morning, August 9 Clouds and Precipitation Global Cloud System Histories Obtained From Earth Radiation Budget (ERBE) Scanner Data Barkstrom, B.R., S. Cady and L. Matthias Deriving Cloud Parameters From AVHRR NOAA Data Romanov, P. A 95 GHz Airborne Radar for High Resolution Polarimetric Cloud Measurements Pazmany, A., J. Mead, J. Galloway, R. McIntosh, R. Kelly and G. Vali The NCAR Eldora Airborne Doppler Weather Radar: Goals, Design and First Field Tests Hildebrand, P.H., and C.A.Walther Very Low Side-Lobe Level Pulse Compression for Rain Radar Mavrocordatos, C., J. Richard, N. Suinot and P. Mancini Implementation of a Rain Measurement Mode Into RA-2 Radar Altimeter Provvedi, F., and G. Levrini Maritime Precipitation Distributions Determined From Airborne Radar and Multi-Frequency Radiometric Measurements Weinman, J.A., and J.L. Schols High Resolution Microwave Radiometric Signatures of Mid-Latitude and Tropical Rainfall Vivekanandan, J., and J. Turk The Determination of Atmospheric Water Vapour Content Using Double-Frequency Radiometer Etkin, V.S., M.S. Dzura, Yu.P. Perfiliev and Yu.G. Trokhimovsky New Arrangement for Remote Velocity Measurements of Atmospheric Inhomogeneities by Imaging and Data Processing Mitev, V.A., and G.I. Sokolinov WT01-B02-122IA054-000906-B016-424http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ti2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191911 text/html 2597HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:17:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 2: Sea Surface Temperature/Optical Properties Tuesday Interactive, August 9 Area 2: Sea Surface Temperature/Optical Properties Robust Water Temperature Retrieval Using Multi-Spectral and Multi-Angular IR Measurements Tornow, C., C.C. Borel and B.J. Powers On Remote Sensing of SST From Space Xu, L., J. Zhang and G. Zhang Evaluation of the Multichannel Sea Surface Temperature Algorithm Along the Brazilian Coast Monteiro, A., and C.A.E. Garcia The Relationship Between Skipjack Tuna Fishery and Oceanographic Features Observed by Infrared Imagery in the Southern Brazilian Coast Andrade, H.A., and C.A.E. Garcia Joint Analysis of Satellite Infrared- and SAR-Images in the Vicinity of Main Black Sea Current Jet Grodsky, S.A., and S.V. Stanichny The Restoration of the Satellite Black Sea Temperature Images on Purposes to Investigation Time Parameters Stanichnava, R.R., and V.P. Vastreb Airborne Remote Sensing Experiments of Marine Monitoring Zhifu, S., H. Ming, Z. Kai and S. Yuanfu Airborne and Satellite TM Data Integration for Water Monitoring Along the Ligurian Coast Cipollini, P., G. Corsini, M. Diani and E. Ferretti A New Method for Inherent Hydro-Optical Characterisitcs Evaluation Sud'bin, A.I., and A. Volynsky On Opportunity of Assessment of Underwater Solar Radiation in the Global Ocean on Satellite Data Kopelevich, O.V., and P.P. Shirshov WT01-B02-123IA054-000906-B017-8http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ti3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210191939 text/html 3267HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:18:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 3: Ocean Waves, Currents and Bathymetry Tuesday Interactive, August 9 Area 3: Ocean Waves, Currents and Bathymetry Comprehensive Modeling of the Wind Wave System With Wind-Wave Interaction and Dissipation Schatzman, J.C., and B. Chen New Statistical Formulation for an Inhomogeneous Ocean Surface Yoshimori, K., K. Itoh and Y. Ichioka The Remote Sensing of the Ocean Surface at the Frontal Zone Lavrenov, I., T. Belonenko and Y. Sharikov Hydrodynamic and Radar Modeling of Surface Features Observed in Gulf Stream Boundary Regions Jansen, R.W., T.L. Ainsworth, R.A. Fusina, S.R. Chubb and G.R. Valenzuela Precise Spatial and Temporal Measurement of Gravity-Capillary Waves and Associated Radar Backscatter Onstott, R.G., M. Perlin and H. Lin Comparison of Data and Model Slope Statistics for a Current Convergence Feature Fusina, R.A., R.W. Jansen, S.R. Chubb, F. Askari, J.A.C. Kaiser, A. Cooper and G.R. Valenzuela Calculations of Ocean Environmental Parameters from Ka-Band Scatterometer Using the Loguet-Higgens Approach Evans, C., S. Haimov and R.K. Moore Ocean Surface Imaging With a Focused Phased Array Imaging Radar (FOPAIR) Fraiser, S.J., Y. Liu and R.E. McIntosh The Effect of Internal Waves on Decimeter and Centimeter Surface Waves for Various Orientations of Their Directions of Propagation Bakhanov, V.V., V.I. Titov, D.L. Belyakov, A.G. Ryabinin and E.M. Zuikova The Effect of Wave Blocking on Mapping of Sea Bottom Topography With Imaging Radar Vogelzang, J. Lasers for Lidar Bathimetry and Oceanological Research: Choice Criteria Feigels, V.I., and Yu.I. Kopilevich Lidar Measurements of Wave-Heights Spectra in the Ocean Mikhalevich, V. WT01-B02-124IA054-000906-B017-50http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ti4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192007 text/html 2676HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:18:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 4: Ocean Features/Processing and Operations Tuesday Interactive, August 9 Area 4: Ocean Features/Processing and Operations Multispectral MM-Wave Diagnostics of Two Coupled Oceanic Eddies (Rossby Soliton) Cherny, I.V., and V. P. Shevtzov Multiscale Objects Detecting in the MM-Wave Imaging of Ocean Surface Seryakoff, G. Multiscale Analysis of Shapes Applied to Thermal Infrared Sea Surface Images Lemonnier, B., C. Lopez, E. Duporte and R. Delmas Effect of the Ocean Medium Non-Uniformities on Wave Breaking and Microwave Brightness Sea Temperature Dulov, V., S. Grodsky and V. Kiufryavtsev On the High-Contrast Spectral Variations of Sea Surface Brightness Temperature at MM-Wave Cherny, I.V. Detection, Estimation of Directional Features on Ocean Surface Images Hafemeister, L., and J.P. Cocquerez Algorithms for the Detection of Ships and Ship Wakes in SAR Images Schuler, D.L., J.S. Lee, L.J. Du, S.A. Mango and M.R. Grunes Polarimeteric Radar Signatures of Oil Slicks for Measuring Slick Thickness Kasilingan, D. Interactiv e Integration of Infrared Satellite Imagery, Satellite Altimetery, and In Situ Measurements Into the Production of an Operational Ocean Features Analysis Product Campbell, W.B., and J.M. Nault SAR Wave Application on an Open Image Processing System Biagini, M., B. Aster, S. Severoni, M. Stefanutti and M. Uliana WT01-B02-125IA054-000906-B017-96http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ti5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192052 text/html 2600HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:19:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 5: Sea Ice Tuesday Interactive, August 9 Area 5: Sea Ice The Distribution of Biogenic Material in Arctic Sea Ice Roesler, C.S. A Coupled Ice-Ocean Model for the Labrador Pack Ice Tang, C.L., and Q. Gui Laser Propagation in Salt Water Ice Longacre, J.R., and M.A. Landry Optical and Microwave Response to Thermally Dynamic Saline Ice Sheets Tanis, F.J., and R.G. Onstott Sea Ice Characterization With Millimeter Scatterometer Isham, J., and C.T. Swift Microwave Scattering From Saline Ice Using Plane Wave Illumination Young, J., L. Peters, P. Gogineni, and K. Jezek Feature Matching From SAR Arctic Data Using Neural Networks Silveira, P.E., M. Van Dyne and C. Tsatsoulis An Examination of the Radar Backscatter of Sea Ice i nthe East Siberian and Chukchi Seas Gineris, D.J., and F.M. Fetterer AMI-Wind Measurements Compared to SSM/I Interpretations Over Arctic Sea Ice Cavanie, A. No Significant Trend in Arctic and Antarctic Ice Concentrations From 1973 to 1991 Johannessen, O.M., and E. Bjoergo Automatic Synthetic Aperture Radar Information Extraction Algorithms for Sea Ice Applications Ramsay, B.R., and T. Hirose WT01-B02-126IA054-000906-B017-168http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ti6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192135 text/html 1826HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:19:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 6: Remote Sensing in Education Tuesday Interactive, August 9 Area 6: Remote Sensing in Education The SIR-C Education Program (SIR-CED) Freeman, A., and K. Crandall NASA-Sponsored Educational Outread Initiative Willis, K.J., W.J. Daley, F.R. Brumbaugh, M.J. Wilkinson and J.M. Bremer Remote Sensing Technologies: The Educational Implications and Effectiveness of Student Data Acquisition and Assimilation Milroy, S. Teaching With Satellite Direct Readout Wagner, T.W., and J.H. Gibson Ground Truth Studies: Using Remotely Sensed Data in K-12 Education Boyce, J., and W. Emery Space Shuttle Photography on Laser Disc: A Winning Combination for the Classroom McKay, M.F., and K.J. Willis Space Shuttle Earth Observations Digital Data Base Pitts, D.E., M.R. Helfert, K. Lulla, J.M. Bremer, C.A. Evans, J. Heydom, C. Dardano and K.J. Willis WT01-B02-127IA054-000906-B017-264http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/taa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192254 text/html 3037HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:21:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering II Tuesday Morning, August 9 Studies in Surface and Volume Scattering II Applications of Angular and Frequency Correlation Functions for Detecting the Characteristics of Geophysical Media at Millimeter Wavelengths Kitichotpanit, B., and Y. Kuga Detection of Volume Scattering Effects in Beamwidth Limited Altimetry Data Newkirk, M.H., G.S. Brown and D.C. Vandemark Monte Carlo Simulations of the Extinction Rate of Densely Packed Spheres With Clustered and Non-Clustered Geometries Based on Solution of Maxwell's Equations Zurk, L., K.H. Ding, L. Tsang and D.P. Winebrenner Monte Carlo Simulation of Electromagnetic Scattering From a Heterogeneous Two-Component Medium Polatin, P.F., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Polarimetr ic Backscattering From Thin Saline Ice Related to Ice Physical and Morphological Characteristics Nghiem, S.V., R. Kwok, S.H. Yueh, J.A. Kong, M.A. Tassoudji, C.C. Hsu, A.J. Gow and D.K. Perovich Fully Polarimetric Measurements of Robotically Fabricated Dense Media Targets Porco, R., J. Bredow, S. Tjuatja and A. Fung Microwave Scattering From Forest Canopies Saatchi, S., M. Moghaddam, K. McDonald and S. Durden Collective Scattering Effects in Vegetation Canopies at Microwave Frequencies Based on Monte Carlo Simulations Tsang, L., Z. Chen, K.H. Ding, C. Hsu and G. Zhang Bistatic Scattering Characteristics of Densee Randomly Distributed Cyclinders Clayton, D., and Y. Kuga Numerical Analysis of the Effective Propagation Constant of a Space Where Small Spheres With High Permittivity are Randomly Distributed Tateiba, M., and Y. Nanbu WT01-B02-128IA054-000906-B017-305http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/taaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192322 text/html 2448HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:22:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Atmospheric Forcing and Oceanic Response in the Warm Pool of the Western Pacific Tuesday Morning, August 9 Atmospheric Forcing and Oceanic Response in the Warm Pool of the Western Pacific Satellite Observation of Surface Forcing Over the Warm Pool Liu, W.T., C.S. Hsu and W. Tang Backscatter From the Ocean Surface Under Low Wind Conditions Carswell, J., and R. McIntosh Scanning Radar Altimeter Measurements of Sea Surface Mean Square Slope and Directional Wave Spectra During TOGA COARE Walsh, E.J., D. Vandemark, D.E. Hines, R.N. Swift and J.F. Scott ARMAR Observations During TOGA/COARE Durden, S., E. Im, F. Li, A. Tanner and W. Wilson Estimation of Sea-Surface Winds in TOGA COARE Using Backscatter Cross Section Measurements From Airborne Research Weather Radar Hildebrand, P.H. Correcting Infrared Satellite Estimates of Sea Surface Temperature for Atmospheric Water Vapor Attenuation Emery, W.J., Y. Yu, G.A. Wick, P. Schluessel and R.W. Reynolds Airborne Radiometer for Sea Surface Temperature Measurements During TOGA COARE Hagan, D. Observations and Modeling of Ocean Radiant Heating During TOGA/COARE Siegel, D.A., L. Washburn, and J.C. Ohlmann Shipboard Doppler Radar Observations of Convection Observed During TOGA COARE Rutledge, S.A. WT01-B02-129IA054-000906-B017-362http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/tacp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192353 text/html 2785HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:22:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature II Tuesday Morning, August 9 Land Surface Fluxes and Surface Temperature II A Simple Two-Layer for Computing Turbulent Fluxes with Radiometric Surface Temperature Norman, J.M., and W.P. Kustas Optical-Microwave Data Synergism to Provide Parameters Required as Inputs by Surface Energy Balance Models Moreno, J.F., S.S. Saatchi, R.O. Green and A.M. Jochum Combined Use of Spectral Measurements: A Promise for Surface Parameter Retrieval Cabot, F., A. Chehbouni, E.G. Njoku, Y.H. Kerr and G. Dedieu Simulation of Microwave Brightness Temperatures Using a Coupled Land-Surface-Canopy-Atmosphere Model Lakshmi, V., E.F. Wood and B.J. Choudhury Assessing the Land Surface Temperature and Moisture With Infrared and Microwave Data Givri, J.R. Soil Moisture Profile Retrieval by Assimilation of Multispectral Remote Sensing and Surface Observations Nakamura, H., D. Entekhabi and E. Njoku Radiobrightness Signatures of Energy Balance Processes: Melt/Freeze Cycles in Snow and Prairie Grass Covered Ground Galantowicz, J.F., and A.W. England An Efficient Water Concept for Monitoring Vegetation in West Africa Amram, O., and G. Flouzat Improvement of Rainfall Estimates in Arid Areas Using Meteosat and TOVS Data Carn, M., C. Jean and A. Pesin Relationships Between Western Africa ITCZ and St. Helena Anticyclone Suggested by a Watch of Meteosat-WV Channel Jean, C., and P. Agna WT01-B02-130IA054-000906-B017-410http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/tae.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192418 text/html 2814HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:22:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Laboratory Observations and Modelling of Sea Ice< Tuesday Morning, August 9 Laboratory Observations and Modelling of Sea Ice< Measurement of Microwave Emission From New and Young Saline Ice During the 1983 CRREL Pond Experiment Grenfell, T.C., M.R. Wensnahan and D.K. Perovich An Experimental Study of Relative Contributions From Surface and Volume Scattering Mechanisms in Saline Ice Bredow, J., A.K. Fung and S. Tjuatja Polarimetric Backscattering Signatures From Thin Saline Ice Under Controlled Laboratory Conditions Nghiem, S.V., R. Kwok, S.H. Yueh, J.A. Kong, M.A. Tassoudji, C.C. Hsu, A.J. Gow and D.K. Perovich Microwave Study of the Formation of Brine Layers on Homogeneous Saline Ice Sheets Onstott, R.G., and M.P. Madden Radiative Transfer in Sea Ice and the Measurement of In-Ice Optical Profiles Maffione, R.A., C.D. Mobley, W.S. Pegau and J.R.V. Zaneveld Does Snow Cover Mask the Microwave Signature of Sea Ice? Lohanick, A.W. Modeling Interpretation of Scattering From Snow-Covered Sea Ice Fung, A.K., S. Tjuatja, S. Beaven, S.P. Gogineni, K. Jezek, A.J. Gow and D.K. Perovich Forward and Inverse Signature Modeling for Congelation Ice Winebrenner, D.P., T.C. Grenfell, J. Sylvester and L. Tsang Radiative Transfer Theory for Remote Sensing of Sea Ice Ewe, H.T., M.E. Veysoglu, C.C. Hsu, R.T. Shin and J.A. Kong Inversion Algorithms for Remote Sensing of Sea Ice Veysoglu, M.E., H.T. Ewe, A.K. Jordan, R.T. Shin and J.A. Kong WT01-B02-131IA054-000906-B017-453http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/taes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192455 text/html 3008HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:23:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Fluorescence Techniques in Remote Sensing Assessment of Vegetation Changes Tuesday Morning, August 9 Fluorescence Techniques in Remote Sensing Assessment of Vegetation Changes Fluorescence Signatures Applied to Climate Change Effects: Case Studies With Mediterranean Oak Ecosystems Rambal, S., M. Methy and C. Damesin Steady-State Chlorophyll Fluorescence Red/Far-Red Emission Ratio Increases Detected From Pinus Strobus After Short-Term Ozone Exposure Theisen, A.F., B.N. Rock and R.T. Eckert Fluorescence Lidar in Vegetation Remote Sensing: System Features and Multiplatform Operation Cecchi, G. Interpretation and Physiological Significance of Blue-Green and Red Vegetation Fluorescence Mazzinghi, P. Analysis of Active Chlorophyll Fluorescence From Douglas Fir Effects of Air Pollutants on Fluorescence Yield and Fluorescence Band Ratio Snel, J.F.H., H. Schroote, M.E. Bossen, B.w.A. van Hove, G.W. Lucassen and A. Rosema 3D-Reconstruction of Laser-Induced Chlorophyll-Fluorescence of Beech (Fagus Sylvatica L.) Leaves Hoque, E., and G. Remus Blue-Green Fluorescence Excited by UV Laser on Leaves of Different Species Originates From Cutin and is Sensitive to Leaf Temperature Bongi, G., A. Palliotti, P. Rocchi, I. Moya and Y. Goulas The Fluorescence Pulse Method as a Tool to Characterize the Photsynthetic System of Plants and Algae Ruth, B. Analysis of Time-Resolved Chlorophyll Florescence and Backscattered Signal From Vegetation Camenen, L., Y. Goulas, G. Guyot, I. Moya and G. Schmuck Measuring Crop Residue Cover by Fluorescence Imaging Daughtry, C.S.T., J.E. McMurtey III and E.W. Chappelle WT01-B02-132IA054-000906-B018-2http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/tah.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192530 text/html 2531HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:24:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Remote Sensing Clouds with Application to Climate Research Tuesday Morning, August 9 Remote Sensing Clouds with Application to Climate Research On the Remote Sensing of Clouds Stephens, G. Studies of Radiatively-Important Clouds With 8-Millimeter Wavelength Doppler Radar Kropfli, R.A., S.Y. Matrosov, T. Uttal, A.S. Frisch and J.B. Snider A Millimeter-Wave Cloud Profiling Radar System (CPRS) Sekelsky, S.M., A.L. Pazmany and R.E. McIntosh Ground Based Lidar Characterization of Cirrus Clouds Eloranta, E.W. Radiative and Microphysical Properties of Cirrus Observed by Remote Sensors at Fire II Eberhard, W.L., J.M. Intrieri and G. Feingold Airborne Imaging of Tropospheric Emission at Millimeter and Submillimeter Wavelengths Gasiewski, A.J., D.M. Jackson, J.R. Wang, P.E. Racette and D.S. Zacharias Studies on Passive Remote Sensing of Ice and Liquid Water Paths Li, L., J. Vivekanandan, C.H. Chan and L. Tsang Millimeter Wave Scattering From Ice Crystal Distributions Aydin, K., and C. Tang Airborne and Spaceborne Cloud Radar Designs Li, F., S. Durden, E. Im and W. Wilson A Combined IR-Microwave Spaceborne Cloud Profiler Pallikala, S., and R.K. Moore WT01-B02-133IA054-000906-B018-27http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/tas.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192546 text/html 2700HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:24:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Remote Sensing of the Earth's Troposphere Tuesday Morning, August 9 Remote Sensing of the Earth's Troposphere Remote Sensing of Tropospheric Chemistry Beer, R. Retrieval of Tropospheric Ozone From Simulations of Spectral Radiances as Observed From Space Clough, S.A. Measurements of Carbon Monoxide and Methane From Space Drummond, J.R., G.V. Bailak and G. Mand Retrieval of Profiles of Carbon Monoxide and Total Methane Columns From Mopitt Measurements Gille, J.C., L. Pan, M.D. Smith and P.L. Bailey Band Pass Optimization for Total Column Measurements of Atmospheric CO and CH4 Using a Length Modulated Gas Filter Correlation Radiometer Smith, M.A. Mechanisms for the Photodissociation of Tropospheric and Stratospheric Nitrates Mazely, T.L., R.R. Fridl, S.L. Nickolaisen and S.P. Sander Export of Ozone and Its Precursors From North America to the Global Troposphere Jacob, D.J. Sensitivity Studies on Retrievals of Temperature and Gas Concentrating Carried Out on Simulated AES Spectra of Upwelling Radiation Atmospheric Radiation Margolis, J.S., S. Nandi and L.C. Sparks Simultaneous Detection of Multiple Greenhouse Gases Using Long-Path Spectrometers Gibbs, D.P., M. Dolaty, C.L. Betty, J. Skelton and Z. Zepeda A 75-110 GHz Millimeter-Wave Spectrometer for Pollution Studies Bredow, J., A.K. Fung, D. Gibbs and S. Tjuatja WT01-B02-134IA054-000906-B018-71http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/tat.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192605 text/html 2807HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:24:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Crustal Motion Tuesday Morning, August 9 Crustal Motion New Perspectives on Active Tectonics: Observing Fault Motion, Mapping Earthquake Strain Fields, and Visualizing Seismic Events in Multiple Dimensions Using Satellite Imagery and Geophysical Data Bases Crippen, R.E., and R.G. Blom Using Polarimetric SAR Data in Morphological Analyses the Island of Ischia (Southern Italy) Ferri, M., L. Castellano, A. Siciliano, R. Vigliotti and P. Murino Measurements of Land Subsidence With SAR Interferometry van Halsema, D., and M.W.A. van der Kooij Interferometric Signatures of Freezing and Thawing Permafrost in Alaska With ERS-1 Werner, C.L., P.A. Rosen and A.K. Gabriel Generation of High Resolution Topographic Maps of the Galapagos Islands Using TOPSAR Data Hensley, S., P. Rosen and H. Zebker Integrated Imaging of JERS-1 and ERS-1 SAR Data for Earthquake Tectonic Investigation of the Nahanni Earthquake Area in Northwest Territories, Canada Moon, W.M., M. Lamontagn, Y. Yamaguchi, V. Snghroy and R. Kuoda Using Repeat Track Interferometry to Estimate Small Scale Surface Changes on Venus Hensley, S., S. Shaffer and R. Goldstein Remote Sensing New Tectonics Data of the Arabian Plate Bilal, A. Integrated Geophysical Imaging of the Sudbury Structure Using ERS-1 SAR and Other Airborne Geophysical Data Moon, W.M., X.G. Miao, V. Singhroy and P.D. Lowman Jr. Simulation of the Radar Probing of the Martian Subsurface Structure Rossi, E., and M. Hallikainen WT01-B02-135IA054-000906-B018-110http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/tav.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192625 text/html 2661HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:25:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html SAR Interferometry I Tuesday Morning, August 9 SAR Interferometry I Effects of a Refractive Atmosphere on Interferometric Processing Tarayre, H., and D. Massonnet Estimation and Improvement of Coherence in SAR Interferograms Cattabeni, M., A. Monti-Guarnieri and F. Rocca The Effect of SAR Bandwidth Ratio and Current Variation on Ocean Current Measurements by Along-Track SAR Interferometer Ouchi, K. Simulation of Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar Imaging of Two-Dimensional Ocean Wave Surface Wave Fields Bao, M., C. Bruning and W. Alpers Doppler Spectra of the Radar Backscatter From the Sea Surface Obtained From a Three-Scale Composite Surface Model Romeiser, R. Phase-Unwrapping of SAR Interferogram With Multi-Requency or Multi-Baseline Xu, W., E.C. Chang, L.K. Kwoh, H. Lim, W. Cheng and A. Heng Two-Dimensional Phase Unwrapping of SAR Interograms by Charge Connection Through Neutral Trees Rosen, P.A., A. Hiramatsu and C.L. Werner Combination of Interferograms From Ascending and Descending Orbits Pasquali, P., R. Pellegrini and C. Prati Comparison of Long Valley TOPSAR Data With Kinematic GPS Survey Measurements Hensley, S., and F. Webb Validating SAR Interferometry Applications by Using EMSL Fortuny, J., E. Ohlmer, A.J. Sieber, P. Pasquali, C. Prati and F. Rocca WT01-B02-136IA054-000906-B018-162http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/taz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192702 text/html 3341HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:25:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Joint US/Russian Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Tuesday Morning, August 9 Joint US/Russian Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment An Overview of the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Gasparovic, R.F., and V.S. Etkin Comparison Analysis of Ku-Band SLAR Sea Surface Image at VV and HH Polarizations Obtained During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Etkin, V.S., Yu.G. Trokhimovski, V.V. Yakovlov and R.F. Gasparovic Multi-Frequency, Polarimetric and Interferometric SAR Observations of Ocean Features During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Carande, R., W. Brown and M. Kubrick ERS-1 SAR Observations of Internal Waves During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Monaldo, F.M., R.F. Gasparovic and R.E. Sterner II Investigation of Sea Surface Temperature and Wind Fields in the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Etkin, V.S., A.V. Kuzmin, M.N. Pospelov, A.I. Smirnov and Yu.G. Trokhimovski Comparisons of Internal Waves as Observed by a Towed CTD and Radar Porter, D.L., R.D. Chapman, D.R. Thompson, R.F. Gasparovic and V. Paka Shipborne Microwave Radiometer and Scattometer Measurements of Sea Surface Patterns During the Joint US/Russia Internal Wave Remote Sensing Experiment Bulatov, M.G., G.A. Bolotnikova, V.S. Etkin, E.I. Skvortsov and Yu.G. Trokhimovski Observations of Internal Waves at X and Ka Bands, and Comparison With Model Calculations Gotwols, B.L., M.J. Jose, R.E. Sterner II, D.R. Thompson, E.M. Zuikova, V.I. Titov and V.V. Bakhanov Nonlocal Effects of Internal Waves on the Ocean Surface Bakhanov, V.V., D.L. Belyakov, A.G. Ryabinin, V.I. Titov and E.M. Zuikova Investigation of Variations of Long Surface Wave Parameters by Optical Techniques During JUSREX 1992 Titov, V.I., V.V. Bakhanov, G.N. Balandina, D.L. Belyakov, O.N. Kemarskaya and E.M. Zuikova WT01-B02-137IA054-000906-B018-209http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wi1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192738 text/html 2733HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:26:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 1: Environmental Degradation and Pollution Wednesday Interactive, August 10 Area 1: Environmental Degradation and Pollution Environmental Monitoring of Soil Contaminated With Heavy Metals Using Laser-Induced-Breakdown Spectroscopy Alexander, D.R., R.D. Kubik, D.E. Poulaine, M.D. Ahmad and E.R. Cespedes Detection of Heavy Metal Contaminated Sediments Using Imaging Spectrometer Data Farrand, W.H., and J.C. Harsany Environmental Impact Evaluation of the Iron Ore Mining Activities in Minas Gerais State, Brazil, Using Orbital Remote Sensing and GIS Filho, B.S.S. Radar Sensing of Hydrocarbon Gas Seepage Waite, W.P.,V.H. Kaupp, H.C. MacDonald, L. Gournay, J. Sandy and G. Hawkins Extract of Polluted Area in Industrial Complex by MOS-1 (MESSR) Image Data Osaki, K. A Model to Simulate and Predict Soil Salinity and Water Logging (Elaborated for the Nile Delta Fringes, Egypt) Goossens, R., M. De Dapper, B. de Vliegher Elaboration of a Wild Fire Hazard Model for the Eparchy of Pylias (SW-Messinia, Greece) Based Upon Remote Sensing and GIS De Vliegher, B.M., and P.S. Basigos AVHRR Observations of Persian Gulf Oil Spills Tseng, W.Y., and L.S. Chiu Fluorescent Spectroscopy of Oil Pollutions and Dissolved Organic Substance in Natural Water Patsayeva, S.V., and V.I. Yuzhakov Oil Leakage Expansion and Simulation Model Based on Fractl Techniques Cerdan, R. WT01-B02-138IA054-000906-B018-243http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wi2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192751 text/html 4179HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:26:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 2: Ocean Winds/Surface Scattering Wednesday Interactive, August 10 Area 2: Ocean Winds/Surface Scattering Some Features of the Backscattered From the Sea Surface Radar Signal Frequency Doppler-Shift Distribution Statistical Characteristics Arakelian, A.K. The VIERS Radar Backscatter Model Development for Wind Field Retrieval Snoeij, P., P.A.E.M. Janssen, H.A.M. Janssen, E. van Halsema, W.A. Oost, C.J. Calkoen and J. Vogelzang The Modulation and Coherence Functions Between Atmospheric Turbulence at the Sea Surface and the Microwave Radar Cross Section Fluctuations Weissman, D.E., W.J. Plant and S. Stolte Microwave Scattering Distributions From a Rain-Roughened Water Surface: Measurements and Modeling Elfouhaily, T., B. Chapron, K. Katsaros and L. Bliven Presenting the NASA/GSFC Rain-Sea Interactive Facility Bliven, L., and T. Elfouhaily The Scatterometer's Processing at the French ERS Processing and Archiving Facility Quilfen, Y., P. Farcy and J.P. Marlarde Initial Results From the Deployment of an Ultra-Wideband Scatterometer Reed, R., D.G. Long, D.V. Arnold and R.S. Collyer The Coherence of Wind and Radar Data Obtained During the Joint US-Russia Internal Wave Experiment Trokhimovsky, Y., V. Yakovlev, R.D. Chapman and D.R. Thompson Polarimetric Radar Imagery of the Ocean at Low Grazing Angles Under Unstable Atmospheric Conditions Smirnov, A., and R. Kropfli Radar Observations of Breaking Waves at Low Grazing Angles Donato, T.F., F. Askari, O.M. Griffin and R. Peltzer Numerical Prediction of Shadowing in EM Scattering From a Rough Ocean Wave at Grazing Incidence West, J.C. Sea Spikes: The Empirical Dependence of K-Distribution Parameters on System and Environmental Parameters Davis, J., M. Rankin, A. Ochadlick, W. Everett, J. Krauss, A. Siegel, T. Webster, C. Rino and J. Lyden Ocean Microwave Backscatter From the LOGAN Experiment Rino, C., E. Eckert, A. Siegel, T. Webster, A. Ochadlick, M. Renkin, W. Everett, J. Kraus and J. Davis Peculiarities of the X-Band Radar Signal Scattered by the Sea Surface at Small Grazing Angles Malinovsky, V.V. Spatial and Temporal Correlation of LOGAN-1 High-Resolution Radar Sea Clutter Data Webster, T., A. Siegel, A. Ochadlick Jr., J. Davis, W. Everett, J. Kraus, M. Rankin, J. Morrison and J. Lyden WT01-B02-139IA054-000906-B018-269http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wi3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192806 text/html 2157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:26:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 3: Agriculture/Crop Monitoring Wednesday Morning, August 10 Area 3: Agriculture/Crop Monitoring An Evaluation of ERS-1 PRI Data in the Context of the Rapid Estimation of Crop Acreages in Europe Kohl, H.G. Estimation of Leaf Area Index Over Agricultural Areas From Polarimetric SAR Images Saatchi, S.S., R. Treuhaft and M.C. Dobson Synergisti c Use of Optical and Microwave Remote Sensing Data Using Models and Specific Features with Respect to the Sugar Beet Crop Monitoring van Leeuwen, H.J.C., J.G.P.W. Clevers and G.J. Rijckenberg Yield Estimation of Corn With Multitemporal and Multisensoral Remotely Sensed Data Demircan, A., and W. Mauser An Integrated Data Base Approach in Support of Remote Sensing Studies of Agricultural Areas Lemoine, G.G., J.G.M. Bakker and E.J. Huising Using of Geographic Information System for Optimization of Cropping Dates: Case of Brazilian Savanna and Pantanal Region Assad, E.D., E.E. Sano, B. Soriano, S.C. Silva and E.J.V. Lobato The Use of Differential GPS in Field Data Extraction and Spatially Variable Fertilizer Application Eatock, R., and M.R. Inggs WT01-B02-140IA054-000906-B018-297http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wi4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192822 text/html 2308HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:27:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 4: Data Integration and Analysis Wednesday Interactive, August 10 Area 4: Data Integration and Analysis The EARSEC Information and Data Fusion Environment Sieber, A.J., C. Lavalle, G. De Grandi and D. Sloggett Application of the Hough Transform for Automated Interpretation of Linear Features in Imageries Saether, B., H. Rueslatten and A. Gronlie Geometric Correction of Airborne Imaging Spectrometer Data Karna, J.P., and K. Makisara A Computer-Aided Geological Interpretation System for Subsurface Imaging Young, J.A., P.G. Rogers, P.P. Jordan and L.A. Brandt A GIS-Driven Interactive Radar Image Simulation Using EMSARS Model Yang, Y.E., H.T. Ewe, C.C. Hsu, L. Wang, J.A. Kong, R.T. Shin, H. Nguyen, T. Nguyen, J.Y. Ho and K. O'Neill Urban Terrain Zone Based Spatial Data Management Liu, J., R. Ellefsen and D. Costanzo Development of a Tactical Terrain Analysis System With GIS Technique Kim, K.O., Y.K. Yang, J.H. Lee, H.O. Nam, D.J. Seo and T.H. Kang An Experimental Mosaic Interface to Scientific Information Systems Hinds, N., and A.W. England Image Processing on PC-Class Workstation Rusakov, M. WT01-B02-141IA054-000906-B018-335http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wi5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192838 text/html 2777HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:27:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 5: Image Classification: Algorithms Wednesday Interactive, August 10 Area 5: Image Classification: Algorithms A New Approach for Feature Transformation to Euclidian Space Useful in the Analysis of Multispectral Data Linganagouda, K., P. Nagabhushan, K.C. Gowda The Problem of Unclassified Pixels for Nonparametric-Type Classification Algorithms Rasson, J.P., F. Orban-Ferauge and V. Granville An Approach to Geographic Pattern Recognition Using a Mathematical Morphology Kawamura, M., and Y. Tsujiko Desampling Fir Filters in Real-Time Imaging Techniques Li, Z. An Automated Change Detection System Sloggett, D., C. Gurney, R. Gooding , I. Dowman and W. Newton Effects of Resolution and Spatial Properties on Textural Classification Dikshit, O. Comparison of Two Spectral-Texture Classification Algorithms Philpot, W. Fuzzy Segmentation and Sample-Based Object Recognition in Remote Sensing Images Wendling, L., J. Desachy and M. Zehana Satellite Image Classification Based on Multi-Source Information-Fusion With Possibility Theory Roux, L., J. Desachy and L. Mascarilla Fuzzy Set Technique for Spatial Problem Solving Zehana, M., D. Saint-Joan and J. Desachy Improving Performance of Supervised Classifiers Using a Simple Iterative Estimation Procedure and Its Convergence Issues Safavian, S.R. WT01-B02-142IA054-000906-B018-372http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wi6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192851 text/html 2449HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:27:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 6: SAR Processing Wednesday Interactive, August 10 Area 6: SAR Processing X-SAR Precision Data Products From the Shuttle Radar Lab Runge, H., P. Secchi, A. Roth, U. Steinbrecher, H. Breit, M. Eineder, D.Just and R. Bamler A SAR Processor Implemented on a Transputer Ring Knight, A.R., and M.R. Inggs Development of a Generic SAR Processor in the Netherlands Otten, M.P.G., J.S. Groot and H.C. Wouters ASF Design Considerations for Radarsat/ERS-2 Cuddy, D., T. Bicknell and M. Tankenson Correction for Quadrature Errors Netterstrom, A., and E.L. Christensen Conceptual Design, Performance Analysis and Results of the High Resolution Real-Time Processor of the DLR Airborne SAR System Moreira, A., R. Spielbauer and W. Potzsch A SAR Processor Based on Two Dimensional Exact Transfer Function Eldhuset, K. LOCOSAR: A SAR Image Simulator Planes, J.G., M. Deschaux-Beaume and M. Busson A Subband Algorithm for Real-Time Autofocusing of SAR Images Bierens, L. Confocal Techniques Applied to Microwave Holographic Synthetic Aperature Radar (HSAR) Byrd, M.J., and A.J. Blanchard WT01-B02-143IA054-000906-B018-392http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/waa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192913 text/html 2568HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:27:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html LIDAR Techniques for Remote Sensing Wednesday Morning, August 10 LIDAR Techniques for Remote Sensing Development of Coherent Laser Radar Post, M.J. Two-Wavelength Lidar Monitoring of Stratospheric Particles After Pinatubo Volcano Eruption Rau, Y.C., and C.R. Philbrick A Decade of Atmospheric Studies Using a Pulsed CO2 Doppler Lidar Hardesty, R.M., R.M. Banta, M.J. Post and W.L. Eberhard CO2 Lidar: A Somewhat Different View of Clouds Eberhard, W.L. 2.0 Micron Solid State Source Technology McCarthy, J.C., P.B. Budni, L, Pomeranz, M.G. Knights and E.P. Chicklis Incoherent Doppler Lidar for Continuous Measurement of Wind and Aerosol Profiles McGill, M.J., W.R. Skinner, and T.D. Irgang Iron Boltzmann Factor Lidar: Proposed New Remote Sensing Technique for Mesospheric Temperature Gelbwachs, J.A. The Development of a Lidar Instrument for Precise Topgraphic Mapping Stetina, F., J. Hill and T. Kunz Optimization of an Airborne Laser Altimeter for Measurement of Vegatation and Tree Canopies Blair, D.B., D.B. Coyle, J.L. Bufton and D.J. Harding Lidar Sounding of the Atmosphere With Tunable Acousto-Optical Filter as Spectral Element in Receiver Kolarov, G.V., A.D. Deleva and Ts.A. Mitsev WT01-B02-144IA054-000906-B018-441http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/waaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192939 text/html 2536HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:28:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Ocean Winds and Scatterometry Wednesday Morning, August 10 Ocean Winds and Scatterometry Calibration/Validation of ERS-1 Wind Scatterometer Precision Products Quilfen, Y., and A. Bentamy Wind Measurement Resolution for a Scanning Pencil Beam Scatterometer Long, D.G. Models the Near-Surface Oceanic Vorticity and Divergence Gunther, J.H., and D.G. Long High Wind Study: A Validation Wind Data Base for AMI on ERS-1 Sylvester, W.B. Communique on Veering Wind Effects on Scatterometry From the Sea-Surface Bliven, L., V. Billat, P. Sobieski, A. Guissard, H. Branger and J. Giovanangeli Radar Backscatter Related to Ocean Wave Spectrum Chapman, B. Studies of a C-Band Model Function for Friction for Friction Velocity Using Coincident, Simultaneous Ku-Band Scatterometer Measurements Weissman, D.E. Seawinds: A Scanning Scatterometer for ADEOS II -- Science Overview Freilich, M.H., D.G. Long and M.W. Spencer Space and Time Aliasing Structure in Mean Polar-Orbiting Satellite Data Zeng, L., and G. Levy Tropical Cyclone Surface Winds and Waves From the Advanced Microwave Instrument of the ERS-1, Comparison to Special Sensor Microwave/Imager Observations Katsaros, K., Y. Quilfen, B. Chapron and H. Zhao WT01-B02-145IA054-000906-B018-470http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wacp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210192957 text/html 2956HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:28:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Vegetation Fluorescence and Spectroscopy Wednesday Morning, August 10 Vegetation Fluorescence and Spectroscopy Some Aspects of Chlorophyll Fluorescence Application in Remote Sensing Kharuk, V.I., V.N. Morgun, A.F. Theisen, B.N. Rock and D.L. Williams High Spectral Resolution Fluorescence Lidar: Three Years of Experiments on Vegetation Cecchi, G., M. Bazzan, V. Raimondi, L. Pantani and P. Mazzinghi Fluorescence Lidar Remote Sensing of Vegetation: Research Advances in Europe Cecchi, G., and L. Pantani Field Canopy and Leaf Level Fluorescence for Distinguishing Plant Conditions Differences Due to Nitrogen Fertilization McMurtrey, J., III, E. Chappelle, C. Daughterty, J. Kalshovan, L. Corp, and M. Kim A New Fluorescence Band Obtained by the Excitation of Plants at 280 NM and Its Implications to the Remote Assessment of Vegatation Corp, L.A., E.W. Chappelle, J.E. McMurtrey and M.S. Kim Phenological Changes in Needle Fluorescence of Damaged and Undamaged Norway Spruce Trees Banninger, C., and E. Chappelle Measurements of Chlorophyll Fluorescence in Several Plant Species in Different Air Pollution Affected Sites in Varanger, Northern Norway, Compared with Remote Sensing Data Tommervik, H., A.M. Odasz and K. Skevik Investigations on the Biochemical Components NIR Absorption Features in AVIRIS and Laboratory Reflectance Spectra of Vegetation Verdebout, J., S. Jacquemoud, G. Andreoli, B. Hosgood and G. Schmuck Are Leaf Chemistry Signatures Preserved at the Canopy Level? Borel, C.C., and S.A.W. Gerstl Assessment of Forest Canopy Chemistry With ISM Gastellu-Etchegorry, J.P., F. Zagolski, V. Pinel, G. Giordano, J. Romier, G. Marty, and E. Mougin WT01-B02-146IA054-000906-B018-496http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wae.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193006 text/html 2745HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:28:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Remote Sensing of Lead Properties in the Arctic - LEADEX'92 Wednesday Morning, August 10 Remote Sensing of Lead Properties in the Arctic - LEADEX'92 Analysis of Subsurface-Based Passive Microwave Observations During LEADEX '92 Grenfell, T.C., and D.K. Perovich In-Situ Observation of the Microwave Response of Lead Evolution Onstott, R.G. Optical Properties of Multiyear and First Year Sea Ice Tanis, F.J., and R.G. Onstott Lead Retrieval Using Visible and Thermal AVHRR Imagery: Testing Theoretical Atmospheric and Geometric Effects with Leadex Data Key, J., R. Stone and J. Maslanik Analysis of ERS-1 SAR Ice Type Signatures and Products Based on LEADEX Measurements Holt, B. Satellite Remote Sensing of the Beaufort Sea During LEADEX'92 Shuchman, R.A., R.G. Onstott, R.W. Fett and C.C. Wackerman Estimating High-Latitude Radiative Fluxes From Satellite Data: Problems and Successes Key, J., R. Stone and M. Rehder Water Surface Temperature Estimates Using Active and Passive Microwave Remote Sensing: Preliminary Results from an Outdoor Wind-Wave Tank Vesecky, J.F., R.G. Onstott, N.Y. Wang, E. Lettvin, J. Slawski and R.A. Shuchman Use of Time-Series SAR Data to Resolve Ice Type Ambiguities in Newly-Opened Leads Kwok, R., and G.F. Cunningham Extracting Seasonal Parameters of Sea Ice Morphology From SAR Imagery: Size Distributions of First-Year Ice Daida, J., N. French, R. Onstott, F. Tanis and J. Vesecky WT01-B02-147IA054-000906-B018-524http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/waes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193022 text/html 2808HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:29:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Monitoring Arid and Semi-Arid Lands Wednesday Morning, August 10 Monitoring Arid and Semi-Arid Lands Remote Monitoring of Shifting Sands and Vegetation Cover in Arid Regions Ray, T.W., and B.C. Murray Monitoring and Modeling Semi-Arid Landscape Response to Climate Change Yuhas, R.H., and A.F.H. Goetz Comparison of Time Series AVHRR NDVI Values With Ecosystem Parameters for the Assessment of Land Degradation in the Arid United States Mouat, D., J.Lancaster and T. Minor Monitoring Arid Land Surfaces Changes: Optical Remote Sensing of the Non-Vegetated Component Escadafal, R. Use of Vegetation Indices for the Retrieval of Information on Some Characteristics of Semi-Arid Regions Pinty, B., and M.M. Verstraete Temporal Evolution of Physical Parameters Over SALT/HAPEX-SAHEL Site Gond, V., F. Cabot, A. Chehbouni and J.C. Meunier A Soil Color Index to Adjust for Soil and Litter Noise in Vegetation Index Imagery of Arid Regions Huete, A.R., H. Liu, G.R. de Lira, K. Batchily and R. Escadafal Optical and Seasonal Variations Along the U.S. Mexico Border: An Analysis With Landsat TM Imagery de Lira, G.R., K. Batchily, J. Hongtao and A. Huete Estimation Fractional Vegetation Cover at the Subpixel Scale in a Semiarid Region Using a Statistical Mixture Model and Remotely Sensed Data Duncan, J., and J. Franklin Automatic Mapping of the Various Types of Ligneous Vegetation Covers According to Their Density Mering, C., and Y. Poncet WT01-B02-148IA054-000906-B019-24http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wah.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193033 text/html 2634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:29:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Tropical Forests and Wetlands Wednesday Morning, August 10 Tropical Forests and Wetlands Results of the Airsar-93 and Sarex-92 Campaign in Guyana and Colombia Hoekman, D.H., J.J. van der Sanden and W. Bijker Image Quality, Statistical and Textural Properties of SAREX Data From the Tapajos Test Site Grover, K.D., S. Quegan, P. Tissi and A.H. Alves Radar Measurements Over the French Guiana Mangrove Dechambre, M. Canopy Penetration Study for Tropical Rainforests: Modeled Radar Backscatter From Amazon Floodplain Forests at C-, L-, and P-Band Wang, Y., L.L. Hess, S. Filoso and J.M. Melack Radar Signature Studies of Coastal Environments in Indonesia Using ERS-1 SAR Wismann, V.R., J. Aschbacher and A. Poniman Computation of Carbon and Water Cycles in Forest Ecosystems From a Biogeochemical Model With Remotely Sensed Data Soares, J.V., and M. de Avila Chaves Validation and Calibration of SAR Imagery of Manu National Park, Peru Chapman, B., A. Freeman, R. Zimmermann and R. Oren Multi-Scale Texture in SAR Imagery: Landscape Dynamics of the Pantanal, Brazil Kux, H.J.H., and G.M. Henebry Mapping Floodplan Inundation With Multi-Frequency Polarimetric SAR: Use of a Tree-Based Model Hess, L.L., J.M. Melack and F.W. Davis Land Cover Discrimination Using SAREX Data Hernandez, P., L.V. Dutra, K. Grover, S. Amaral and S. Quegan WT01-B02-149IA054-000906-B019-53http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/was.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193048 text/html 2546HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:29:32 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification Wednesday Morning, August 10 Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification First Results From SIR-C Calibration Freeman, A., J. Cruz, B. Chapman, M . Alves, M. Azeem and S. Shaffer Calibration and Performance Analysis of the X-SAR System Zink, M. Frequency and Azimuthal Variations of Radar Cross-Section and Their Influence Upon Low Frequency SAR-Imaging Axelsson, S.R.J. A Plea for Radar Brightness Raney, R.K., A. Freeman, R.W. Hawkins and R. Bamler Adaptive Algorithms for Satellite Passive Microwave Data Processing Petrenko, B.Z., and M.T. Smirnov Radiometric Calibration of Airborne SAR Imagery Holecz, F., E. Meier, J. Piesbergen, U. Wegmuller and D. Nuesch Calibration for RADARSAT Srivastava, S.K., N.W. Shepherd, R.K. Hawkins and T.I. Lukowski Artificial Distributed Targets for the Calibration of Imaging Radar Systems Mametsa, H.J., H. Moreau, P.F. Combes, and J.M. Lopez External Polarimetric Calibration of the Danish Polarimetric C-Band SAR Skriver, H., J. Dall and S.N. Madsen Calibration of the Microwave Limb Sounder on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite Jarnot, R.F., J.W. Waters and G.E. Peckham WT01-B02-150IA054-000906-B019-79http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wat.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193101 text/html 2659HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:29:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Observations of the Upper Atmosphere During the UARS Mission Wednesday Morning, August 10 Observations of the Upper Atmosphere During the UARS Mission A Brief Review of the UARS Mission and Correlative Measurements Campaign Zurek, R.W., M.R. Schoeberl, A.R. Douglass and C.H. Jackman Monitoring the Total Solar Irradiance of the Geosphere Willson, R.C., J.M. Pap and R.S. Helizon A Proxy Method of Solar Soft X-Ray Determinations and Resultant No Production and Transport Winningham, J.D., R.A. Frahm, R. Link, and D.A. Siskind Variations in Total Solar Irradiance Related to Solar Magnetic Fields Pap, J.M., R.C. Willson and A. Ruzmaikin Observations of Stratospheric Composition and Structure by the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer (CLAES) on UARS Roche, A.E., J.B. Kumer and J.L. Mergenthaler Balloon-Borne Measurements of Stratospheric Trace Gases by FTIR Solar Absorption Spectrometry Toon, G.C., J.F. Blavier, B. Sen and J.T. Szeto The Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy Investigation Gunson, M.R. UARS Microwave Limb Sounder Observations of Upper Atmosphere Ozone and Chlorine Monoxide Flower, D.A., L. Froidevaux, W.G. Read and J.W. Waters Lidar Measurements of Stratospheric Ozone and Temperature at Table Mountain, CA, and Mauna Loa, HI, and Comparison With UARS Results McDermid, I.S., E.F. Fishbein, L. Froidevaux, E.W. Sirko and T.D.Walsh WT01-B02-151IA054-000906-B019-113http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wav.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193118 text/html 2495HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:30:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Polarimetric Theory, Signal and Image Processing Wednesday Morning, August 10 Polarimetric Theory, Signal and Image Processing Development of Polarimetric Vector Signal and Tensor Image Processing in POL-RAD/SAR Analysis Boerner, W., J.S. Verdi, H. Mott, E. Luneburg, M. Tanaka, and Y. Yamaguchi A New Extended Target Decomposition Scheme Huynen, J.R. Target Decomposition Theorems Applied to Multiple Scattering of Polarised Waves Cloude, S. A Revisition of Some Basic Formulations in Radar Polarimetry Krogager, E., and W.M. Boerner Polarimetric Modeling and Parameter Estimation with Elecrtomagnetic Vector Sensors Hochwald, B., and A. Nehorai The Theory of Radiopolarimetry of Thermal Radiation of Surfaces Logvin, A.I., and A.I. Kozlov Feature Extraction From POL-SAR Imagery for Radar Target Identification and Classification Krogager, E., and A. Freeman Polarization Effects in Radar Reflection From Surfaces With Periodic Roughness Ray, T.W., J.J. van Zyl and E.M. de Jong An Application Example of Cloude Approach in Radar Polarimetry Guissard, A., E. Robin and J.L. Fernandez Radar Target Decomposition Theorems and Unsupervized Classification of Full Polarimetric SAR Data Pottier, E. WT01-B02-152IA054-000906-B019-147http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/waz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193135 text/html 2499HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:30:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Image Processing and Classification: Algorithms Wednesday Morning, August 10 Image Processing and Classification: Algorithms High Dimensional Feature Reduction via Projection Pursuit Jimenez, L., and D. Landgrebe Small Class Classification for Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Data Jia, X., and J.A. Richards Noise Resistant Estimation Techniques for SAR Image Registration and Stereo Matching Frankot, R.T., S. Hensley and L. Shafer Determination of Proportions of Land Use Blend in Pixels of a Satellite Image Mathieu, S., P. Leymarie and M. Berthod Application of Equivocation Quantification to Fuzzy Data Hori, K., T. Hoshi, G. Tong, and K. Shimokouji New Features for Texture Analysis Borne, F. Use of Fuzzy Logic for Unsupervised Classification of Remotely Sensed Images Mouchot, M.C., B. Solaiman and A. Parra A General In-Scene Parameter Estimation Method for Quantitative Image Analysis Snyder, W. A Contextual Classifier Based on Markov Random Fields and Robust M-Estimates Jhung, Y., and P.H. Swain Discussion of Different Solutions to the Problem of Unclassified Pixels Orban-Ferauge, F., J.P. Rasson and V. Granville WT01-B02-153IA054-000906-B019-178http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193150 text/html 2162HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:30:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html SAR Processing I: Algorithms and Performance Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 SAR Processing I: Algorithms and Performance Performance Analysis Results of the SIR-C Ground Data Processor System Chang, C.Y. X-SAR Data and Image Quality Bamler, R., M. Eineder, H. Breit, U. Steinbrecher and D. Just A 2-D SPECAN SAR Processor Forte, A., and F. Vinelli A Quicklook Processor for an Airborne SAR Horrell, J.M., A.R. Knight and M.R. Inggs SAR Simulation of Natural Landscapes Franceschetti, G., M. Migliaccio and D. Riccio ScanSAR Simulation and Processing Using ERS-1 Data Eldhuest, K., P.A. Valand, Y.L. Desnos and J.L. Marchand ScanSAR Processing Using the Fastscan System Thompson, A.A., N.S. McLagan, T.E. Feather, J.C. Curlander, M. D'Iorio and J. Lam ASF SAR Processing System Overview Leung, K., D. Cuddy and M. Chen The EARSEC SAR Processing System Sieber, A.J., C. Lavalle and D.R. Sloggett WT01-B02-154IA054-000906-B019-204http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193208 text/html 3052HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:30:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Geographic Information Systems and Applications Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Geographic Information Systems and Applications SAT-GIS: A Customized System for Satellite Image Processing, Digital Cartography and Topographic Analyses in a GIS Environment, Based Upon a Worldwide Seamless Database Nannemann, J., M. Wolff and H. Nagel Queries and Their Application to Reasoning With Remote Sensing and GIS Goodenough, D., D. Charlebois, S. Matwin, D. MacDonald and A.J. Thompson An Integrated Geographical Information System's Approach to Land Cover Change Assessment Mattikalli, N.M. Predictive Modeling of Trophic Status of a Tropical Reservoir Using Geographical Information Systems Novo, E.M., F. Lobo, M.C. Calijuri and J.G. Tundisi Estimation of Net Carbon Flux Over the FIFE Site by Combining Satellite and Insitu Observations With Models Using GIS Divakaria, M.G., J.M. Norman and L.M. Murdock Estimating Dry Grass Biomass Residues Using AVIRIS Image Analysis Ustin, S.L., Q. J. Hart, G. Scheer and L. Duan Using a Geographic Information System (ARC/INFO) as a Tool for Integration of Remote Sensed and In-Situ-Data in an Analysis of the Air Pollution Effects on Terrestrial Ecosystems in Varanger (Norway) and Nikel-Pechenga (Russia) Johansen, M.E., H. Tommervik, T. Guneriussen and J.P. Pedersen The Estimation on Watershed Design Peak Flow Rates Based on GIS and Remote Sensing Technologies Leu, C.H., and L.J. Chen Classification of Combined Remote Sensing Imagery and GIS Data Using Markov Chain Simulation Solberg, R., A.H.S. Solberg and G. Storvik Generalization of Classified Images for GIS Zhan, C. WT01-B02-155IA054-000906-B019-242http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpcp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193231 text/html 2722HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:31:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Operational Satellite Oceanography Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Operational Satellite Oceanography Coastwatch Operational Mapped AVHRR Imagery Pichel, W., J. Sapper, C. Duda, E. Maturi, K. Jarva and J. Stroup Global Production of Multi-Channel Sea Surface Temperatures Using the Naval Oceanographic Office's Satellite Processing System Parmeter, M.M. Global and Regional Sea Surface Temperature Analyses at Fleet Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center Cummings, J.A., and R.M. Clancy Altimetrically Derived Front and Eddy Positions for Operational Nowcasts Price, J.A., and Z.H. Allen Estimation of Wind Speed and Wind Direction From ERS-1 Imagery Wackerman, C., R. Shuchman and F. Fetterer Operational Procesing of DMSP Special Sensor Microwave/Imager Data at Fleet Numberical Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC): Algorithm Transitions Colton, M.C. Operational Use of Satellite Data for Sea Ice Analysis at the U.S. and Canadian National Ice Centers Bertoia, C.A., and T. Carrieres Operational Use of SSM/I Ice Concentration in the Initialization of a Coupled Ice-Ocean Model Posey, P.G., and R.H. Preller Towards Operational Use of Synthetic Aperture Radar Images in Sea Ice Monitoring Sandven, S., O.M. Johannessen and K. Kloster Ice Edge Detection and Ice/Water Classification Utilizing the ERS-1 and TOPEX Altimeters Coulter, R.E. WT01-B02-156IA054-000906-B019-274http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpe.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193244 text/html 2662HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:31:32 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring Investigation of Leaf Biochemistry by Statistics and Models Jacquemoud, S., J. Verdebout, G. Schmuck, G. Andreoli, B. Hosgood and S.E. Hornig Imaging Spectrometer Measured Leaf Water and Cellulose in the San Gabriel Mountains Prior to the 1993 Altadena Fire van den Bosch, J., and R.O. Green Considerations in Using Spectral Vegetation Indices to Determine Biophysical Variables in the Boreal Forest Kuemmrich, K.F., and F.G. Hall Linear Mixture Modelling Applied to AVHRR Data for Monitoring Vegetation Cherchali, S., and G. Flouzat Estimation of Forest Stand Structure From Landsat TM Through Inversion of the Li-Strahler Model Woodcock, C.E. Analysis of Main Driving Factors in Successional Changes of Reflectance in Northern Temperate Forests Nilson, T., and U. Peterson An Unmanned Aircraft Vehicle System for Boundary-Layer Flux Measurements Over Forest Canopies Daida, J.M., P.B. Russell, T.L. Crawford and J.F. Vesecky Laser Altimetry Waveform Measurement of Vegetation Canopy Structure Harding, D.J., J.B. Blair, J.B. Garvin and W.T. Lawrence A Continental Instrumented Ground Site Network (CIGSN, Australia): A Prerequisite for the Detection, Interpretation and Quantification of Global Change Graetz, R.D., M.A. Wilson, A.J. Prata, I.J. Barton and R.M. Mitchell WT01-B02-157IA054-000906-B019-300http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193255 text/html 2789HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:31:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Ocean Instruments and Techniques Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Ocean Instruments and Techniques Determination of Wind Speed, Wind Direction and Atmospheric Structure Using ERS-1 SAR Data During NORCSEX'91 Shuchman, R., J. Johannsessen, C. Rufenach, K. Davidson and C. Wackerman Microwave Backscatter, Surface Fluxes, and Infrared Imagery Measured From a Blimp Over the Ocean Plant, W.J., W.C. Keller, A.T. Jessup, K.W. Hoppel and E.Z. Uliana Ka-Band Ocean Wave-Radar Modulation Transfer Function: A Comparative Study Haimov, S., B. Gotwols, W. Plant and R.K. Moore Analysis of Multi-Incidence Angle Satellite Microwave Radiometer Data From the DMSP SSM/I Gasster, S.D., D. Rudy, D.L. Glackin, M. Colton and G. Poe Results From the 1993 LOGAN (Low Grazing Angle) Radar Experiment Ochadlick, A., Jr., J. Davis, W. Everett, J. Kraus, M. Rankin, A. Siegel, T. Webster,J. Morrison,J. Lyden,C. Rino and E. Mebus Measurements of Surface Wind on the Ocean Using an Airborne Radar Looking at Small Incidence Angles Hauser, D. Angle and Polarization Dependent Microwave Backscatter From Ocean Waves Lee, P.H.Y., J.D. Barter, D.L. Hindman, B.M. Lake and H. Rungaldier Using Cross-Image Spectra in a SAR Ocean Wave Inversion Scheme Engen, G., H. Johnsen, and E. Korsbakken Hull Characteristics From SAR Images of Ship Wakes Wang, H.T., O.M. Griffin and G.A. Meadows SST and Wind Velocity Estimation Using the AVHRR Data for the Black Sea Aquatory Stanichny, S.V., I.L. Dergileva and D.M. Solov'ev WT01-B02-158IA054-000906-B019-319http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wph.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193304 text/html 2452HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:31:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Use of Radar and Microwave Radiometry for Mapping Snow and Sea Ice Cover Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Use of Radar and Microwave Radiometry for Mapping Snow and Sea Ice Cover Capability of Radar and Microwave Radiometer to Classify Snow Types in Forested Areas Koskinen, J., L. Kurvonen, V.Jaaskelainen and M. Hallikainen Classification of Baltic Sea Ice with Airborne Radiometer Kurvonen, L., M. Toikka and M. Hallikainen Retrieval of Snow and Sea Ice Parameters From SSM/I Data Grandell, J., and M. Hallikainen Backscattering From Sea Ice With Vertical Structural Variation: A Model Analysis Tjuatja, S., and A.K. Fung Discrimination Between Young Sea Ice Types From Single Look SAR Image Data Collins, M.J., C. Livingstone and R.K. Raney The Influence of Layering and Grain Size on Microwave Emission From Polar Firn West, R., D.P. Winebrenner and L. Tsang Sea-Ice Velocity Fields Estimation on Ross Sea AVHRR Images Moctezuma, M., H. Maitre, and F. Parmiggiani Intercomparison of Observed and Simulated Ice Motion for a One Year Time Series Fowler, C., J. Maslanik and W. Emery Assimilating Remotely Sensed Data Into a Dynamic-Thermodynamic Ice Model Maslanik, J. and H. Maybee WT01-B02-159IA054-000906-B019-357http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wps.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193338 text/html 2505HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:32:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Synthetic Aperture Radiometry for Remote Sensing Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Synthetic Aperture Radiometry for Remote Sensing L-Band Synthetic Aperture Radiometers for Earth Remote Sensing Gaiser, P.W., C.T. Swift and D.M. Le Vine A Spaceborne Synthetic Aperture Radiometer Simulated by the TUD Demonstration Model Laursen, B., and N. Skou Digital Correlator Performance Analysis for a Synthetic Aperture Imaging Radiometer Ruf, C.S., W.J. Wilson, K.M. Chandra and A.B. Tanner Status of ESTAR Validation: Results From Washita-92 Le Vine, D., T.J. Jackson, M. Kao, A. Griffis and C.T. Swift MIRAS, A Two-Dimensional Aperture Synthesis Radiometer Martin-Neira, M., Y. Menard, J.M. Goutoule and U. Kraft Soil Moisture Mission: Conceptual Design of an Active/Passive Synthetic Aperture System Tanner, A.B., W.J. Wilson and S.S. Saatchi Applications of Synthetic Aperture Radiometry van Zyl, J., and W. Wiesbeck A Conceptual Design of an Aircraft-Based Synthetic Aperture Millimeter Wave Radiometer Steele, W.G., C.H. Chen, P.S. Lee, P.J. Moffa and R.A. Wrape Results of a Laboratory Synthetic Aperture Millimeter Wave Radiometer Davidheiser, R.A., K.E. Yokoyama and B.H. Stark Indoor Experiment of Two-Dimensional Supersynthesis Radiometer Komiyama, K., Y. Kato and T. Iwasaki WT01-B02-160IA054-000906-B020-2http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpt.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193352 text/html 3204HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:32:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere I Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere I Microwave Limb Sounding of the Earth's Atmosphere: UARS Results and EOS Plans Flower, D.A., R.F. Jarnot and J.W. Waters Pressure Profiles of the Middle Atmosphere Retrieved From Millimeter Wave Atmospheric Sounder (MAS) Onboard the Space Shuttle Mission Atlas-1 Langen, J., A. Berg, H.D. Dicken, T. Wehr, W. Degenhardt, N. Kaempfer and R. Bevilacqua Zeeman Splitting of the 61 GHz (9+) O2 Line in the Upper Atmosphere Measured by MAS Hartmann, G.K., W. Degenhardt, R. Zwick, H.J. Liebe, G.A. Hufford and M.G. Cotton Middle Atmospheric Water Vapor and Ozone Retrievals From the MM-Wave Atmspheric Sounder (MAS) Shuttle Experiment Bevilacqua, R., T. Pauls, M. Daehler, W.Waltman, J. Olivero, D. Goldizen, D. Kriebel, W. Degenhardt, J. Langen and N. Kaempfer First Results of Zonally Averaged CLO Concentrations as Measured by MAS on ATLAS-1 Kampfer, N., C. Aellig, C. Rudin, W. Degenhardt, G. Hartmann, R. Bevilacqua, Ph. Schwartz, J. Langen, K. Kunzi and J. Olivero Calibration of MAS Antenna Using Radiation of the Lunar Surface Dicken, H.D., A. Berg and J. Langen Detection of Atmospheric Chlorine-Compounds with an Airborne Submillimeter Receiver Wehr, T., S. Crewell, K. Kunzi, J. Urban and H. Nett Stratospheric and Mesospheric Water Vapor Distribution Over Northern Europe Measured With an Airborne MM-Wave Sensor Peter, R., and N. Kampfer Ground-Based Monitoring of Water Vapor in the Middle Atmosphere Nedoluha, G.E., R.M. Bevilacqua, W.B. Waltman, R.M. Gomez and D.L. Thacker Latitude Structure of Middle Atmospheric Water Vapor Revealed by Shipboard Microwave Spectroscopy Schrader, M., C. Croskey, and J. Olivero WT01-B02-161IA054-000906-B020-30http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpv.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193405 text/html 2687HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:32:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Polametric Metrology, Calibration, and Signature Analyses Wednesday Afternoon, August 10 Polametric Metrology, Calibration, and Signature Analyses The Danish Polarimetric SAR for Remote Sensing Applications Christensen, E.L., S.N. Madsen, J. Dall, N. Skou, J.H. Jorgensen, K. Woehlers, A. Netterstrom, J. Granholm and M. Dich C-Band Solid State Dual Polarizatin T/R Modules for Airborne SAR Applications Snoeij, P., P.J. Koomen, P. Hoogeboom and H. Pouwels Application of the Polarimetric Matched Image Filter to the Assessment of SAR Data From the Mississippi Flood Region Teti, J.G., F. Ilseman, J.S. Verdi, W.M. Boerner and S. Krasznay Statistical Models for Polarimetric SAR Data Quegan, S., I. Rhodes and R. Caves Monostatic Polarimetric Calibration Via Target Spinor Fabregas, X., A. Broquetas, J. Romeu and L. Jofre Statistical Behavior of a Multiparameter Polarimetric Radar Dataset Basili, P., P. Ciotti, G. d'Auria, F.S. Marzano and N. Pierdicca Wide Band Polarimetric Scattering Matrix Metrology and Calibration Schmitt, K., and W. Wiesbeck Studies on Polarizatin Synthesis and Differential Backscatter Phase Observations Stjernman, A., J. Vivekanandan and A. Nystrom Spatial and Temporal Sampling Errors in Rainfall Fields Reconstruction Through Meteorological Radar Data Giuli, D., L. Facheris, L. Baldini, P. Mazzetti and E. Palmisano Identification of the Phase of Hydrometeors by Jinear Depolarisation Method Kozlov, A.I., and A.I. Logvin WT01-B02-162IA054-000906-B020-53http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/wpz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193419 text/html 2800HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:33:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Neural Network Applications to Remote Sensing Neural Network Applications to Remote Sensing Neural Network Inversion of Bidirectional Reflectance Smith, J.A., J.A. Pedelty and R.G. Knoz Inversion of Soil Moisture With Radar Backscattering Data Souyris, J.C., L. Wang, C.C. Hsu, J.A. Kong, T. Le Toan, N. Boudier, S.H. Yueh, U. Wegmuller and C. Matzler Solving Remote Sensing Inverse Problems Using Bayesian Modeling to Incorporate Information Sources Davis, D.T., J.N. Hwang and L. Tsang Retrieval of Semi-Arid Region Parameters From Passive Microwave Measurements Using Neural Networks Within a Bayesian Framework Chen, Z., D.T. Davis, L. Tsang, J.N. Hwang and E. Njoku Detection of Ship Tracks in AVHRR Cloud Imagery With Neural Networks Lure, F.Y.M., and Y.C. Rau Comparisons of Neural Networks to Standard Techniques for Image Classification and Correlation Paola, J.D., and R.A. Schowengerdt Application of Neural Networks for Detection of Sea Ice Coverage and Movements From Satellite Imagery Rau, Y.C., J.C. Comiso and F.Y.M. Lure Land Use Classification Using Fast Learning Neural Networks and Topology Selection Algorithms Dawson, M.S., F. Amar, V. Rawat, A.K. Fung and M.T. Manry A Comparative Study of Conventional and Neural Network Classification of Multispectal Data Solaiman, B., and M.C. Mouchot A Fuzzy Neural Network Model (FNN Model) for Classification Usin g LANDSAT-TM Image Data Zhang, L., and T. Hoshi WT01-B02-163IA054-000906-B020-74http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thi1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193428 text/html 2958HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:33:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 1: Soil Moisture/Flooding Thursday Interactive, August 11 Area 1: Soil Moisture/Flooding Evaluation of Microwave Scattering Models for Remote Sensing of Soil Moisture in Tropical Agricultural Soils Kux, H.J.H., and R.G.I. Arakaki Bayesian Estimation of Soil Parameters From Remote Sensing Data Haddad, Z.S., P. Dubois, J. van Zyl Evaluation of an Australian ERS-1 SAR Scene Pertaining to Soil Moisture Measurement Sabburg, J.M. Segmentation of Polarimetric AIRSAR-Data for Soil Moisture Determination in an Agricultural Area Prietzsch, C., and H. Gro SAR Terrain Correctio for Improved Soil Moisture Estimation in a Mountain Watershed O'Neill, P.E., A.Y. Hsu and M.S. Seyfried Analysis of Soil Physical Parameters and their Influence on ERS-1 Backscatter Poncet, F.V., and M. Tapkenhinrichs Deriving Antecedent Moisture Conditions From Airborne SAR for Input Into a Flood Forecasting Model Pietroniro, A., E.D. Soulis and N. Kouwen Delineation of 1993 Midwest Flooding Using ERS-1 SAR, SPOT and Landsat Imagery Sivaprasad, K., and R.L. Bolus Remote Sensing and Synchronous Land Surface Measurements of Soil Moisture and Soil Temperature Kolev, N.V., K. Penev, Y. Kirkova, BKrustanov, T. Nazurski, E. Rumenina, G. Kamenov and C. Levchev Laboratory Investigation of Agreement Between Dielectrical and Radiation Properties of Freezen Sand Ilyin, V.A., S.V. Slobodchikova and V.S. Etkin Characterization of Soil Moisture Using a Microstrip Resonator Sarabandi, K., and R.S. Li WT01-B02-164IA054-000906-B020-102http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thi2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193450 text/html 2757HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:33:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 2: Bidirectional Reflectance/Topography and Tectonics Thursday Interactive, August 11 Area 2: Bidirectional Reflectance/Topography and Tectonics Spectral Scattering Properties of Scots Pine Shoots and Needles Ross, J., O. Meinander and M. Sulev Influence of Sun-View Geometries on the Relationships Among Vegetation Indices LAI, and Absorbed PAR Epiphanio, J.C.N., A.R. Huete and H. Liu Biophysical Interpretation of Spectral Mixture Models Based on Radiative Transfer Models and Observational Data van Leeuwen, W.J.D., A.R. Huete and C.L. Walthall Using Remotely Sensed Data to Estimate Surface Albedo and Absorbed Photosynthetic Active Radiation Toll, D.L., D. Shirey and D. Kimes Optimization Method for B/H Ratio Determination Taking Occlusion Effect and MTF Degradation Due to Atmosphere into Account Arai, K., M. Ozawa and Y. Terayama Improving DEM Generation With Additional Constraint Information McNeill, S. Measurement of Topographic Surface Slopes in Polarimetric SAR Images Schuler, D.L., J.S. Lee and G. de Grandi Automatic DEM Generation Using Magellan Stereo Data Hensley S., and S. Shaffer Tectonics and Geodynamics of the Eastern Mediterranean: An Example of Complex interpretatin of the Geological-Geophysical Data Yutsis, V.V., M.K. Ivanov and A.F. Limonov Earth Crust Tension and Recent Geodynamics Activity of the Strait of Sicily Kuzmina, A.M., and V.V. Yutsis WT01-B02-165IA054-000906-B020-155http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thi3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193514 text/html 1956HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:33:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 3: Environmental Monitoring Using ERS-1 Data Thursday Interactive, August 11 Area 3: Environmental Monitoring Using ERS-1 Data Radar Backscattering Studies of Rice Fields Using ERS-1 SAR Data Aschbacher, J., R.P. Dipak, A. Pongsrihabulchai, S. Karnchanasutham and C. Rodprom Effects of Variation in Soil Moisture on ERS-1 SAR Backscatter Wang, Y., F.W. Davis, and E.S. Kasischke Multitemporal Analysis of ERS-1 and Landsat TM Data for Geologic Studies Loizzo, R., M. Pappalepore, P. Pieri, G. Pasquariello and M. Antoninetti Application of ERS-1 SAR for Coastal Inundation Tanis, F.J., L.L. Bourgeau-Chavez and M.C. Dobson Evaluation of a Multitemporal ERS-1 Dataset for Hydrologic Application Mullins, D.W., T.J. Pultz and T.I. Lukowski Global Land Surface Monitoring Using the ERS-1 Scatterometer Wismann, V.R., K. Boehnke and C. Schmullius The Alaska SAR Facility: An Introduction Wales, C. WT01-B02-166IA054-000906-B020-196http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thi4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193539 text/html 2832HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:34:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 4: Optical/Infrared Sensor Calibration and Validation Thursday Interactive, August 11 Area 4: Optical/Infrared Sensor Calibration and Validation Aerosol Optical Thickness Retrieval From Sun Photometer Measurements Ignatov, A.M., I.L. Dergileva, Yu.B. Ratner, S.M. Sakerin and D.M. Kabanov In-Field Characterization of Saharian Sites Reflectances for the Calibration oof Optical Satellite Sensors Cosnefroy, H., X. Briottet, M. Leroy, P. Lecomte and R. Santer Acquisition of In-Situ Surface and Atmospheric Measurements for AVIRIS Data Validation and Analysis Helmlinger, M., R. Green, J. Conel and J. van den Bosch A System for Geometric and Radiometric Correction of Airborne Imaging Spectrometer Data Makisara, K., J.P. Karna and A. Lohi NDVI Sensitivity to Atmospheric Water Vapor as a Function of Spectral Bandwidth Kerekes, J.P. A Precise Navigation Procedure for Automatic Picture Transmission APT Imagery of Meteorological Satellite NOAA Fujimoto, T., M.Tanaka and I. Takanami Phase Correction Algorithms for the Airborne Emissions Spectrometer (AES) Worden, H., J. Fanselow and R. Beer A Quick Access Data Management System for In-Situ Data for EOS AIRS Product Validation Granger, S.L., R.D.Haskins and A.J. Pursch Predicting Laser Bakcscatter With Passive Multiangle Measurements of a Playa for Lite Calibration Cooley, T.W., J.A. Reagan, J. Bufton and B. Minster NIST Traceabler Calibration System for Surface and Submersible Sensors Austin, R.L. WT01-B02-167IA054-000906-B020-226http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thi5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193555 text/html 2476HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:34:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 5: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development I Thursday Interactive, August 11 Area 5: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development I The ERS-1 Payload After 3 Years in Orbit: A Health and Performance Assessment Dieterle, G. The French Contribution to TRMM Follow-On Mission Mavrocordatos, C., J. Richard, N. Suinot and E. Thouvenot The Seawinds Scatterometer Instrument Wu, C., J. Graf, M. Freilich, D. Long, M. Spencer, W. Tsai D. Lisman and C. Winn VAGSAT: A Proposal for a Small Satellite Mission for the Measurement of Ocean Wave Spectra With a Real-Aperture Radar Hauser, D. The Influence of Altitude and Look Angle on SAR Ocean Wave Imaging: A Practical Compromise Monaldo, F. Simulation of RADARSAT ScanSAR for Sea Ice Applications Manore, M., T. Heacock, K. Porter and T. Bretz Canada's GlobeSAR Program Campbell, F.H.A., R.J. Brown, M. Kirby, D. Benmouffok and D. Lapp A SAR Instrument for Global Monitoring of Land Surfaces and Polar Ice Lin, C.C., and P.L. Mancini High Resolution Multifrequency SAR System for Spaceborne Applications Dionisio, C., and A. Torre On Minimizing Imaging Latency Time for RADARSAT III Saper, R., B. Neville and S. D'apollonia WT01-B02-168IA054-000906-B020-256http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thi6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193606 text/html 2808HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:34:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 6: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development II Thursday Interactive, August 11 Area 6: Spaceborne Instrument and Mission Development II A Study of the Microwave Sounding Unit On the NOAA-12 Satellite Mo, T. Spaceborne Microwave Radiometers Designs and Performance Evaluation for Ocean Wind Remote Sensing Yueh, S.H., W.J. Wilson, F.K. Li and S.V. Nghiem Imaging Radiometer Scan Simulation Results Kemppinen, M., and M. Hallikainen A Simulation of EOS MISR Data and Geometric Processing for the Prototyping of the MISR Ground Data System Lewicki, S.A., V.M. Jovanovic, M.M. Smyth, and E.G. Hansen Simulation of Visible and IR Imagery for GOES Hsu, S.S., and S.Ashton Design and Implementation of the GOME Data Processor Balzer, W. How to Double the Spatial Resolution of a Push-Broom Instrument Hagolle, O., J.M. Martinuzzi and C. Latry Horizon Sensor-Based 14-16 Micron Radiation Measurements From IRS-1B Seshamani, R., M. Shashikala, T.K. Alex, Y.K. Jain and K. Kasturirangan Emissions From Orbiting Tethered Satellite Systems to the Earth's Surface: Data Analysis Minna, L., C. Ottonello, S. Pagnan and G. Tacconi Performance Evaluation of Radio Frequency of Cassini Radar Borgarelli, L., and E. Zampolini Faustini Development Status of Cassini Radar for Remote Sensing of Titan Im, E., W.T.K. Johnson and K. Wheeler WT01-B02-169IA054-000906-B020-285http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193622 text/html 2695HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:35:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Moisture Thursday Morning, August 11 Moisture On the Effect of Soil Surface Roughness on the Radar Backscatter Responses to Soil Moisture Smacchia, P., D.Casarano, G. De Carolis and F. Posa Diurnal Observations of Soil Moisture With Passive Microwave Radiometers Jackson, T.J., J. Aleksa, C.T. Swift, P.E. O'Neill and K. Kostov An Empirical Soil Moisture Estimation Algorithm Using Imaging Radars Dubois, P.C., and J. van Zyl Soil Moisture Profile Remote Sensing: Stability and Observability of the Inverse-Problem Nakamura, H., D. Entekhabi and E. Njoku Model of Complex Dielectric Constant of Wet and Frozen Soil in the 1-40 GHZ Frequency Range Tikhonov, V.V. Microwave Radiometry on Bare Soils: Comparison of Various Emission Models of Layered Media With Measurements Costes, F., S. Raju, A. Chanzy, I. Chenerie and J. Lemorton An Inversion Algorithm for Retrieving Soil Moisture and Surface Roughness From Polarimetric Radar Observations Oh, Y., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Microwave Soil Moisture Prediction Through Corn in Washita '92 O'Neill, P.E., N.S. Chauhan, T.J. Jackson, D.M. Le Vine and R.H. Lang Development and Testing of a Remote Sensing Based Hydrologic Model Lin, D.S., E.F. Wood and B. Yang Estimation of A Real Soil Water Content During HAPEX-Sahel and EFEDA-Spain van Oevelen, P.J., and D.H. Hoekman WT01-B02-170IA054-000906-B020-318http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thaaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193637 text/html 2639HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:35:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Image Processing and Classification: Radar Thursday Morning, August 11 Image Processing and Classification: Radar Classification of the Amazon Rain Forest Using JERS-1 SAR Data Freeman, A., C. Kramer and B. Chapman Monitoring Agricultural Surfaces Using ERS-1 Multitemporal SAR Data Kohl, H.G., E.Nezry, H. de Groof and G. Kattenborn Knowledge-Based Land-Coverr Classification Using ERS-1/JERS-1 Composites Pierce, L.E., F.T. Ulaby and M.C. Dobson Land Cover Classification by SAR Ulaby, F.T., L. Pierce, C. Dobson, S. Chacon and K. Sarabandi Multi-Temporal Comparisons of ERS-1 and JERS-1 SAR Data for Land Applications Borgeaud, M., J. Noll and A. Bellini Contribution of Multi-Temporal Data to Improve the Radiometric Resolution of SAR Images Bruniquel, J., and A. Lopes A Multifractal Approach for Terrain Characterization and Classification on SAR Images Bourissou, A., K. Pham, and J. Levy-Vehel A Knowledge Based Classification of Multitemporal ERS-1 and JERS-1 SAR Data Over the Tropics Paudyal, D.R., A. Eiumnoh, J. Aschbacher and R. Schumann Classification of Remotely Sensed Images Using Mathematical Morphology Wang, D., D.C. He and D. Moran Comparison of Segmentation Methodologies Applied to ERS-1 SAR Images Caves, R.G., S. Quegan, R.G. White and R. Cook WT01-B02-171IA054-000906-B020-349http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thacp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193655 text/html 2640HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:35:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Radiative Transfer and Scattering Thursday Morning, August 11 Radiative Transfer and Scattering Understanding the Radiation Regime of a Crop Canopy: Monte Carlo Ray Tracing Simulations Lewis, P. Multi-Dimensional Radiative Transfer Computations Using a Scalable Parallel Implement of the Discrete-Ordinates Method Haferman, J.L., T.F. Smith and W.F. Krajewski A Stochastic Radiative Transfer Model of a Discontinuous Vegetation Canopy Liang, S., and A.H. Strahler The Reflection for Dense Plant Canopies From the One-Angle Radiative Transfer Equation Ganapol, B.D. A Formulation of Millimeter Wave Scattering Amplitude Matrices for Ice Crystals Tang, C., and K. Aydin Comparison of Measured and Predicted Scattering Coefficients at 94 GHz Axelsson, S.R.J., K.G. Johnsson, B.E. Tullson, A. Carlstrom and J. Kjellgren Radar Scattering by Volcanic Debris Flow Surface Analogues Austin, R.T., and A.W. England Full Wave Scatter Cross Sections for Two-Dimensional Random Rough Surfaces Using Joint Conditional Surface height Characteristic Functions Bahar, E., and B.S. Lee A Fractal-Based Approach to Electromagnetic Modelling Franceschetti, G., M. Migliaccio and D. Riccio Electromagnetic Scattering Model for a Tree Trunk Above a Ground Plane Lin, Y.Ch., and K. Sarabandi WT01-B02-172IA054-000906-B020-376http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thae.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193710 text/html 2563HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:35:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Analyses and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery I Thursday Morning, August 11 Analyses and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery I Impact of Recent Enhancements and Upgrades of the Advanced Solid-State Array Spectroradiometer (ASAS) Dabney, P.W., J.R. Irons, J.W. Travis, M.S. Kasten and S. Bhardwaj Data Processing and Calibration of the Advanced Solid State Array Spectroradiometer Kovalick, W., D. Graham, and M. Bur Precise Geometric Registration of ASAS Airborne Data for Land Surface BRDF Studies Allison, D., M.J. Barnsley, P. Lewis, N. Dyble and J.P. Muller A New Registration Algorithm for of ASAS Multi-Angle Images Chong-Guang, Z., W. Jun and A.H. Strahler Retrieval of Surface Reflectance and Atmospheric Properties Using ASAS Imagery Martonchik, J.V., and J.E. Conel Development of an Aerosol Opacity Retrieval Algorithm for Use With Multi-Angle Land Surface Images Diner, D.J., S.R. Paradise and J.V. Martonchik Radiosity Based Model for Terrain Effects on Multi-Angular Views Borel, C.C., and S.A.W. Gerstl On the Information Content of Multiple View Angle (MVA) ASAS Images for Land Cover Mapping Barnsley, M.J., and D. Allison Classification of Multiangle and Multispectral ASAS Radiance Measurements Abuelgasim, A.A., and S. Gopal WT01-B02-173IA054-000906-B020-405http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thaes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193723 text/html 2890HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:36:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere II Thursday Morning, August 11 Investigation of the Middle Atmosphere II Ground Based Millimeter Wave System for CLO and Other Minor Constituents Observation Developed in CRL Ochiai, S., Y. Irimajiri and H. Masuko mm-Wave Spectroscopy of Stratospheric Trace Gases at the South Pole Over an 11-Month Cycle: O3, N2O, HNO3, CLO and NO2 de Zafra, R.L., C. Trimble, J.M. Reeves, D. Cheng and D Shindell Preliminar y Analysis of Chlorine Monoxide Measurements Made by the Ground-Based Microwave Receiver of the Plateau De Bure, France Ricaud, Ph., J. de La Noe, R. Lauque, A. Parrish, J.W. Barrett and P.M. Solomon Accuracy of Profile Retrievals From MM-Wave Spectra of CLO and N2O Emmons, L.K., and R. de Zafra Millimeterwave Measurements of Stratospheric CIO at the Jungfraujoch Station Gerber, L, and N. Kampfer Remote Sensing of Stratospheric Ozone by Ground-Based Microwave Radiometers de La Noe, J. Millimeter-Wave Measurements at the Arctic NDSC Station NY - Alesund in the Winters 1992/93 and 1993/94 Schwaab, G.W., U. Klein, K. Kunzi and U. Raffalski Stratospheric Ozone Measurements Made by a Ground-Based Microwave Radiometer at the Bordeaux Observatory, France Guillemin, G., P. Ricaud, J. de La Noe and R. Lauque Monitoring the Stratospheric Ozone Profile With Ground-Based Microwave Radiometer Heilimo, J., J. Talvela and M. Hallikainen Retrieval of Mesosphere Ozone From Goundbased Millimeter Wave Observations Jarchow, C., and P. Hartogh WT01-B02-174IA054-000906-B020-443http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thah.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193749 text/html 568HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:36:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Future Spaceborne Missions Thursday Morning, August 11 Future Spaceborne Missions ESA's Future Plans for Earth Observation From Polar Orbit Rast, M. WT01-B02-175IA054-000906-B021-8http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thas.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193824 text/html 2593HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:37:02 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Ocean Wave-Current Interaction Thursday Morning, August 11 Ocean Wave-Current Interaction On the Dependence of Radar Signatures of Surface Current Variations on the Azimuthal Radar Look Direction Romeiser, R. INSAR Imagery of Surface Currents, Wave Fields and Fronts Ainsworth, T.L., M.E. Cannella, S.R. Chubb, R.A. Fusina, R.W. Jansen, G.O. Marmorino and G.R. Valenzuela Ship Borne Remote Sensing of Submesoscale Oceanographic Features Along the Northern Boundary of the Gulf Stream Allan, N., D. McLaughlin, E. Twarog, D. Trizna, L. Martin and M. Sletten Remote Sensing of Current-Wave Interaction With SIR-C/X-SAR (SRL-1) at the Gulf Stream Supersite Valenzuela, G.R., R. Chubb, S.A. Mango, F. Askari, B. Holt, W. Alpers, T. Donato and E.H. H. Shih Backscatter Modelling of Ship-Generated Internal Wave Wakes Observed During the Loch Linnhe Series of Experiments Stapleton, N.R. Sunglitter Radiance Modulation of Submarine Sand Waves and Internal Waves Hennings, I., M. Metzner and J. Matthews Wave-Current Interaction Modeling Incorporating Wave Blocking Greidanus, H. Mapping of Sea Bottom Topography in a Multi-Sensor Approach Vogelzang, J., G.J. Wensink, M.v.d. Kooij, W. Alpers, I. Hennings and J. Matthews Wind Waves in the Gulf Stream Frontal Zone: Observations and Analysis Dulov, V., S. Grodsky and V. Kudryavtsev WT01-B02-176IA054-000906-B021-35http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/that.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193838 text/html 2560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:37:24 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Arctic Sea Ice Studies Thursday Morning, August 11 Arctic Sea Ice Studies The Utilization of Modeled Salinity and Temperature Profiles in the Estimation of SAR Backscatter From First Year Arctic Sea Ice Wade, R.H., and W.F. Weeks Ice Lead Orientation Characteristics in the Winter Beaufort Sea Cunningham, G.F., R. Kwok and J. Banfield Determination of Ice Age: A Proposed Scheme for a RADARSAT Sea Ice Geophysical Processor System Kwok, R., D.A. Rothrock, G.F. Cunningham and H. Stern Utilizing the Dynamic Behavior of Sea Ice for Determining Ice Thickness Distributions in SAR Imagery Haverkamp, D, and C. Tsatsoulis SAR Derived Sea Ice Thickness During ICEX'92 Malinas, N.P., R.A. Shuchman and C.C. Wackerman Using ERS-1 SAR Data to Monitor the State of the Arctic Ocean Sea Ice Surface Between Spring and Autumn, 1992 Schwartz, K.R., M.O. Jeffries and S. Li Observing Seasonal Transitions on Sea Ice in the Arctic Using the ERS-1 SAR Winebrenner, D.P., B. Holt and E.D. Nelson Height and Large-Scale Height Roughness Information From CCRS interferometric SAR Data of Arctic Sea Ice van der Kooij, M.W.A., A.L. Gray, M. Manore, K.E. Mattar, C.E. Livingstone, and P.J. Farris-Manning Wave Evolution in the Marginal Ice Zone Using ERS-1 SAR Liu, A.K., and C.Y. Peng WT01-B02-177IA054-000906-B021-94http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thav.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193906 text/html 2304HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:37:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Precipitation Studies Thursday Morning, August 11 Precipitation Studies Description of a Radar/Radiometer Method and Its Application to Airborne Measurements Over Stratiform Rain Meneghini, R., J. Wang, H. Kumagai and T. Iguchi Origin of Storm Footprints of Storms on the Sea Seen by SAR Atlas, D. Rain Rate Estimation From Attenuation Measurements Using a 35 GHz Dual Polarization Propagation Link Ruf, C.S, K. Aydin and S. Mathur Investigation of the Vertical Profiles of Linear Depolarization Ratio and Reflectivity at S, X and K Band Wavelengths Raghavan, R., J. Turk and J. Vevekanandan Optimal Estimation of Rain Rate Profiles From Single-Frequency Radar Echoes Haddad, Z.S., E. Im and S.L. Durden Retrieval of Rainrate Over Rough Sea Surfaces as Measured by the Advanced Microwave Precipitation Radiometer (AMPR) Wu, S.T.S. Nonlinear Statistical Precipitation Retrievals Using Simulated Passive Microwave Imagery Skofronick-Jackson, G.M., and A.J. Gasiewski Spatial Inhomogeneities of Rain Brightness Temperature and the Effect of Averaging for Observations by Satellite Microwave Radiometers Kutuza, B.G., A. Hornbostel and A. Schroth WT01-B02-178IA054-000906-B021-135http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thaz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193926 text/html 2425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:38:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Exploratory Analysis and Visualization of Data Thursday Morning, August 11 Exploratory Analysis and Visualization of Data Working With Spacecraft Data: Where We Are, And Where We Want to Go Kahn, R., and R. Haskins Algorithms for Exploratory Screening of Data-Density Images Carr, D.B. Change Point Analysis With Adaptive Mixture Models Priebe, C.E., G.W. Rogers D.J. Marchette and J.L. Solka NDS, A Portable Software Tool for Visualization and Analysis of 3D Radar Images Holt, H., and H.D. Maney Automated Multi-Sensor Image Mapping System Curlander, J.C. Linkwinds, A Visual Data Analysis System and Its Application to Remote Sensed Data Jacobson, A.S., and A.L. Berkin Resampling Methods of Statistical Inference Berk, R.A. Imaging Classification and Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis Techniques Phinn, S.R. A New Approach in Remote Sensing Image Analysis for Natural Environment Cartography Borne, F., and S. Guillobez An Automated Method for Making Mosaic Out of NOAA/AVHRR Images for Global Monitoring Hanaizumi, H., R. Takesaki and S. Fujimura WT01-B02-179IA054-000906-B021-165http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210193942 text/html 2629HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:38:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Analysis and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery II Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Analysis and Applications of Multiple View Angle VIS/NIR Digital Imagery II Directional Vegetation Index Interactions in ASAS Imagery Huete, A.R., and H. Liu Biophysical Parameter Retrievals Using Bidirectional Measurements Qi, J., M.S. Moran, G. Dedieu and F. Cabot Estimation of Forest Canopy Leaf Area Index Using Directional ASAS Measurements Johnson, L.F., and D.L. Peterson Estimating the Fraction of Absorbed Photosynthetically Active Radiation (fAPAR) From Off-NADIR Airborne Measurements Brown de Colostoun, E.C., C.L. Walthall, C.A. Russell and J.R. Irons Modeling Sources of Uncertainty in Satellite-Based Estimates of Leaf Area Index Using a Scene Simulation Model Friedl, M.A., F.W. Davis, J. Michaelsen and M. Moritz Influence of Scale Change on Bidirectional Reflectances of a Pecan Orchard Derived From ASAS Image Data Gauthier, R.P., K. Staenz, P.M. Teillet and D.J. Williams A Hybrid Geometric-Optical Radiative-Transfer Model for the Directional Reflectance of Discontinuous Vegetation Canopies Li, X., A.H. Strahler and C.E. Woodcock Validation of Canopy Bidirectional Reflectance Models With ASAS Imagery of a Spruce Forest in Maine Schaaf, C.B., X. Li and A.H. Strahler A Modelling Study of Bidirectional Reflectance From Soil Surfaces Li, Z., A.K. Fung, D. Gibbs, C.L. Betty, S. Tjuatja, and J.R. Irons WT01-B02-180IA054-000906-B021-227http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194024 text/html 2674HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:38:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Vegetation Biomass Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Vegetation Biomass Microwave Scattering Model for Grassland and Short Vegetation Canopies Stiles, J.M., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Sensitivity of Microwave Backscattering to Crop Biomass Luciani,S., S. Paloscia, P. Pampaloni, G. Schiavon, S. Sigismondi and D. Solimini Modelling Canopy Radiative Temperature Surface and Flux Estimation Prevot, L., Y. Brunet and B. Seguin Passive Microwave Remote Sensing of Vegetation Biomass Macelloni, G., S. Paloscia, P. Pampaloni, R. Ruisi and C. Susini Relations Between Optical and Passive Microwave Vegetation Indices to Crop Biomass Characteristics Choudhury, B.J. Comparison Between Predicted Performances of Bistatic and Monostatic Radar in Vegetation Monitoring Ferrazzoli, P., L. Guerriero and D. Solimini P-Band Radar Mapping of Forest Biomass in Boreal Forest of Interior Alaska Rignot, E., J. Way, C. Williams, L. Viereck, and J. Yarie An Ecological Approach to Radar Mapping of Biomass in Interior Alaska Boreal Forests Williams, C., E. Rignot, K. McDonald, L. Viereck A. Balser and J. Way The Potential of Microwave Radiometers in Monitoring Forest Biomass Karam, M.A. Analysis of NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHz Data Over Vegetated Land Surfaces: Theory and Examples Saatchi, S.S., B. Rague and R. Zimmermann WT01-B02-181IA054-000906-B021-308http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpcp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194115 text/html 2689HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:39:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Image Processing, Classification and Neural Networks Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Image Processing, Classification and Neural Networks A Self-Organising Map Model for Remote Sensing Imagery Analysis Wan, W., and D. Fraser Application of Multilayer Feedforward Neural Networks to Precipitation Cell-Top Altitude Estimation Spina, M.S., M.J. Schwartz, D.H. Staelin and A.J. Gasiewski Multispectral Classification by a Modular Neural Network Architecture Blonda, P., V. la Forgia, G. Pasquariello and G. Satalino A Combination of Temporal Thresholding and Neural Network Methods for Classifying Multiscale Remotely Sensed Image Data Moody, A., S. Gopal, A.H. Strahler, J. Borak and P. Fisher Remote Sensing of Forest Structure and Change Using Artificial Neural Networks Gopal, S., and C. Woodcock Comparison and Visulatizatio of Feature Space Behavior of Statistical and Neural Classifiers of Satellite Imagery Fierens, F., I. Kanellopoulos and G.G. Wilkinson Smoothing SAR Images With Neural Networks Ellis, J., M.Warner and R. White Neural Network-Based Inversion Technique for SAR Images of Ocean Surface Waves Kasilingam, D. Detection of Linear Features in ERS-1 SAR Images Using Neural Network Technology Hellwich, O. Neural Network Adaptive Wavelet Classification of Radar Targets Jouny, I., and M. Kanapathipillai WT01-B02-182IA054-000906-B021-331http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpe.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194128 text/html 2543HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:40:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Inverse Problems in Optical Remote Sensing Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Inverse Problems in Optical Remote Sensing Inversion Techniques for Atmospheric Limb Measurements Using the Occultation Approach Chu, W.P. Aerosol Retrieval From Airborne Polder Data by Multiple Scattering Model Kawata, Y., A. Yamazaki, T. Kusaka and S. Ueno Aerosol Retrieval Based on Photopolarimetry Mukai, S., I. Sano, T. Takashima and Y. Yamaguchi Methods for the Retrieval of Atmospheric State Parameters From High Resolution Spectral Radiance Data Clough, S.A. Tikhonov's Method of the Ground-Based Radiometric Retrieval of the Ozone Profile Gaikovich, K.P. An Inverse Technique for Obtaining Cirrus Cloud Microphysical Parameters Using Combined Radar and Lidar Backscatter Measurements Intrieri, J.M., W.L. Eberhard and G. Feingold Stereo Passive Remote Sensing of Aerosol Transport and Diffusion Bleiweiss, M.P., W.M. Farmer, K.C. Payne and T.A. King Transmitted Radiation of Searchlight in Turbid Atmosphere Wang, A.P., S. Ueno and M. Toho Automatic Filter Ozonometer Serbin, A., V. Feigels, A. Shalamyansky and V. Privalov Evaluation of Ozone Concentration in Atmosphere Based on Measurements in Visible Area Volynsky, V.A., A.I. Sud'bin and P.P. Shirshov WT01-B02-183IA054-000906-B021-381http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194154 text/html 2329HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:40:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Remote Sensing of Snow Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Remote Sensing of Snow Measurement and Modeling of the Bidirectional Reflectance of Snow Nolin, A.W., K. Steffen and J. Dozier Active Microwave Measurements of Snowcover: Progress in Polarimetric SAR Shi, J., J. Dozier and H. Rott A Review of Modeling for Millimeter Wave Remote Sensing of Snow O'Neill, K. Effect of Snow Stereology on Millimeter Wave Extinction Koh, G., and R.E. Davis A Detailed Study of the Backscatter Characteristics of Snowcover Measured at 35, 95 and 225 GHz Chang, P., J. Mead, R. McIntosh, R. Davis and H. Boyne Mapping the Diagenetic Zone Transitions of Greenland Using the AAFE Radar Altimeter Ferraro, E.J., and C.T. Swift Snow Cover Classification Using Millimeter-Wave Radar Imagery Narayanan, R.M., and S.R. Jackson A Snow Index for the Landsat Thematic Mapper and Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer Riggs, G.A., D.K. Hall and V.V. Salomonson Monitoring Land Surfaces With Combined DMSP-SSM/I and ERS-1 Scatterometer Data Hiltbrunner, D., C. Matzler and A. Wiesmann WT01-B02-184IA054-000906-B021-409http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thph.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194220 text/html 1906HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:41:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html ERS-1 Achievements and New Results Thursday Afternoon, August 11 ERS-1 Achievements and New Results Overview of Scientific and Pre-Operation Exploitation of ERS-1 After 3 Years in Orbit Duchossois, G. ERS-1 SAR Views the Ocean: An Assessment Alpers, W. Altimetry of Ice, Inland Water and Land With ERS-1 Rapley, C.G. On the Use of the ERS-1 Wind Scatterometers Over Land Surfaces Kerr, Y., and R.D. Magagi Crop Discrimination Using Multi-Temporal ERS-1 SAR Data Wooding, M.G., A.D. Zmuda and A.J. Batts Practical Use of ERS-1 SAR Images in Pollution Monitoring Wahl, T., T. Anderssen and A. Skoelv Progress in Polar Oceans Research Using ERS-1 Data Carsey, F. Global Sea-Surface Temperature, and Properties of the Atmosphere and of the Land Surfaces, Measured by ATSR on the ERS-1 Satellite - A Survey of Scientific Results Llewellyn-Jones, D.T., C.T. Matlow and P.J. Barton Recent Advances in SAR Interferometry Massonnet, D. ERS-1 Bistatic Radar Images Goldstein, R., P. Rosen and C. Werner WT01-B02-185IA054-000906-B021-437http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thps.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194232 text/html 2380HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:41:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html SAR Processing II: Motion Compensation Thursday Afternoon, August 11 SAR Processing II: Motion Compensation A New Method for Wide Field Synthetic Aperture Radar Processing Lanari, R. PRF Ambiguity Determination for Radarsat ScanSAR System Jin, M.Y. High Precision Motion Compensation for Multiple Pass Airborne Interferometry Budenbender, H. Motion Compensation for Airborne Interferometric SAR Stevens, D.R., I.G. Cumming and A.L. Gray Motion Compensation for Airborne SAR Based on Inertial Data, RDM and GPS Buckreuss, S. A New MTI-SAR-Approach Using the Reflectivity Displacement Method Moreira, J.R. Doppler Parameter Estimation Algorithms for SAR Processing With the Chirp Scaling Approach Moreira, A., and R. Scheiber Antenna Distortions in Multiple Phase Centre Interferometric Systems Lightstone, L. A New Approach for Image Rgistration in Interferometric Processing Franceschetti, G., G. Fornaro, and E.S. Marzouk Performance Evaluation of Interferometric SAR Image Registration Techniques Kenyi, L.W. WT01-B02-186IA054-000906-B021-467http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpt.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194246 text/html 2824HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:41:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical I Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical I Laboratory Calibration of Electro-Optical Imagers at CCRS Neville, R.A., J. Schwarz and N. Rowlands SeaWIFS Intercalibration Round Robin Experiments Mueller, J.L. Solar-Radiation-Based Absolute Calibration of Optical Sensors: SeaWiFS and Daedalus 1268 Biggar, S.F., K.J. Thome, P.N. Slater, L.K. Balick and C.J. Golanics ASTER Round-Robin Radiometers for the Preflight Cross-Calibration of EOS AM1 Instruments Sakuma, F., M. Kobayasi and A. Ono Design of New Photodiode Standards for Use in the MISR In-Flight Calibrator Jorquera, C.R., R. Korde, V.G. Ford, V.G. Duval and C.J. Bruegge Contrasting Target, Stray-Light, and Other Performance Metrics for MISR Chrien, N.L., M.L. White, E.C. Hagerott, C.J. Bruegge and E.R. Freniere Geometric Calibration of the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS): Technique and Results Chrien, T.G., C. Chovit, I.H. Novack and R.O. Green Radiometric Calibration of the Landsat-7 Enhanced Thematic Mapper Markham, B.L., S.P. Ahmad, J.R. Irons and D.L. Williams End-to-End Spectral Response Characterization of the Clouds and the Earth's Radiant Energy System Sensors From 0.3 to 200 Microns Jarecke, P., M. Frink, M. Folkman, S. Carmen, S. Baliga, A. Doctor, L. Avis, B. Barkstrom, J. Cooper, L. Kopia, W. Lawrence, R MTF Measurement Using Spotlight Leger, D., J. Duffaut and F. Robinet WT01-B02-187IA054-000906-B022-23http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpv.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194314 text/html 2528HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:41:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html SAR Imaging of Ocean Features Thursday Afternoon, August 11 SAR Imaging of Ocean Features Simulation of SAR Images of Submesoscale Ocean Phenomena Lyzenga, D., and C. Wackerman Detection of Surface Current Features With ERS-1 SAR Imaging Radar Johannessen, J.A., R.A. Shuchman, G. Digranes, C. Wackermann , O.M. Johannessen and D.R. Lyzenga Measurements of Ocean Currents With SAR Interferometry and HF Radar Thompson, D.R., H.C. Graber and R.E. Carande The Generation and Propagation of Internal Wave Forms in the Strait of Gibraltar Studied by ERS-1 SAR Imagery and a Numerical Model Brandt, P., and W. Alpers ERS-1 SAR Images of Atmospheric Gravity Waves Vachon, P.W. Two-Dimensional Simulations of SAR Imagery of Ocean Waves Zurk, L., and W.J. Plant The Impact of the Ocean Wave-Radar Modulation Transfer Function on the Inversion ERS-1 SAR Image Spectra into Ocean Wave Spectra Bruning, C. ERS-1 SAR Imaging of Ocean Features in the Vestfjorden Area Wahl, T., and A. Skoelv Slick Detection in SAR Images Hovland, H.A., J.A. Johannessen and G. Digranes Mapping Coastal Currents With SAR, Using Naturally-Occurring Surface Slick Patterns Gower, J.F.R. WT01-B02-188IA054-000906-B022-50http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/thpz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194332 text/html 2736HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:42:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Atmospheric Water Vapor Thursday Afternoon, August 11 Atmospheric Water Vapor Atmospheric Water Vapor Profiles Using a Raman Lidar Melfi, S.H., D. Whiteman, R. Ferrare and K. Evans Lidar Measurements of Water Vapor Concentrations in the Troposphere Philbrick, C.R. Raman Lidar Profiling of Atmospheric Water Vapor Goldsmith, J.E., and S.E. Bisson Differential Absorption Lidar Measurements of Water Vapor Browell, E.V., S. Ismail, N.S. Higdon, T.H. Chyba, W.B. Grant and P. Ponsardin Comparison of Water Vapor Measurements by Ground-Based Microwave Radiometers and Raman Lidar Han, Y., J.B. Snider, E.R. Westwater, S.H. Melfi and R.A. Ferrare Profiling the Thermodynamic Properties of the Atmosphere With High Spectral Resolution Infrared Radiance Measurements Smith, W.L., H.E. Revercomb, H.L. Huang, X.L. Ma, H.B. Howell, R.O. Knuteson, R. Dedecker and W.F. Feltz Retrieval of Water Vapor Profiles Using Measurements From a Millimeter-Wave Imaging Radiometer Wang, J.R., P. Racette and L.A. Chang Passive Microwave Humidity Profile Retrievals Using Neural Networks Cabrera-Mercader, C.R., and D.H. Staelin Remote Sensing of Humidity Profiles With Passive IR Sounders: HIRS and AIRS Chahine, M., J. Susskind and J. Joiner Variability of Global Upper-Tropospheric Water Vapor Derived for Satellite Infrared Observations Bates, J.J. WT01-B02-189IA055-000915-B041-197http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fi1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194351 text/html 2263HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:42:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 1: Ice Sheets and Snow Friday Interactive, August 12 Area 1: Ice Sheets and Snow Microwave Effective Permittivity Model of Media of Dielectric Particles and Applications to Dry and Wet Snow Boyarskii, D.A., and V.V. Tikhonov Two Flow Model of Wet Snow Microwave Emissivity Boyarskii, D.A., and V.S. Etkin Close Range 37 GHz Passive Microwave Observations of Snow on North and South Facing Slopes Pilant, D. Radar Satellite Snowmelt Detection in the Canadian Rocky Mountains Wankiewicz Maxfield, A. Estimating Snow Particle Size Using TM Band-4 Shi, J., and J. Dozier Snowcover Mapping With the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer Nolin, A.W. An Automatic System for Operational Snow-Cover Monitoring in the Norwegian Mountain Regions Solberg, R., and T. Andersen Monitoring Alpine Snow Cover Variations Using NOAA-AVHRR Data Baumgartner, M.F., G. Apfl, and T. Holzer Experiences From Real Time Runoff Forecasts by Snow Cover Remote Sensing Seidel, K., W. Brusch and Ch. Steinmeier WT01-B02-190IA055-000915-B041-228http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fi2.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194412 text/html 2334HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:42:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 2: Optical/IR Image Classification and Analysis Friday Interactive, August 12 Area 2: Optical/IR Image Classification and Analysis A Multi-Band Road Extraction Scheme for LANDSAT-TM Imagery Wang, J., and W. Liu Physics Based Analysis/Synthesis of Infrared Imagery Gambotto, J.P. Analyzing Spatio-Temporal Characteristics of Surface Parameters From NOAA/AVHRR Data Vogt, J.V., and M.M. Verstraete Analysis of Real IR Scenes Acquired for SWOE JT&E Bleiweiss, M.P., M. Rollins, C. Chapel and R. Borger Interpretation of Parametric Maps Obtained by Means of "Blue to Green Ratio" Over Coastal Waters Cipollini, P., and G. Corsini Multispectral Landsat Images Segmentation Using Neural Networks and Multi-Experts Approaches Solaiman, B., M.C. Mouchot and R.Koffi Performance Evaluation of Multispectral Analysis for Surface Material Classification Ford, S.J., and D.M. McKeown, Jr. Wavelets and Neural Nets for Stratigraphic Analysis Rehmeyer, D.L., and J.L. Aravena Artificial Neural Network Model for Recognition About Land Cover Type of Remote Sensing Cai, Y. WT01-B02-191IA055-000915-B041-258http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fi3.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194433 text/html 2904HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:43:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html  Area 3: SAR Image Classification Friday Interactive, August 12 Area 3: SAR Image Classification Frequency Selection and Multipolarimetry for Hard Target Detection Dionisio, C., and E. Zampolini Robustness of a Mathematical Symbiotic System on Segmenting SAR Imagery Daida, J.M. A Comparison of Digital Speckle Filters Shi, Z., and K.B. Fung Coast Line Detection From SAR Images Zhang, D.B., L. Van Gool and A. Ooserlinck Segmentation of Combined High Resolution Optical and Radar Imagery for the Determination of Field Inhomogenities Schoenmakers, R.P.M.H., G.G. Lemoine, H.J.C. van Leeuwen and E. Nezry Efficient Speckle Filtering of SAR Images Hagg, W., and M. Sties The LMMSE Polarimetric Wishart and the LMMSE Textural Vector Speckle Filters for SAR Images Lopes, A., and F. Sery K-Statistics of Terrain Clutter in High Resolution SAR Images Muller, H.J. Segmentation Based Change Detection in ERS-1 SAR Images Caves, R.G., and S. Quegan Principal Component Analysis for Change Detection on Polarimetric Multitemporal SAR Data Baronti, S., R. Carla, S. Sigismondi and L. Alparone Classification of Multipolarisation Radar Images in Agricultural Areas Anys, H., D.C. He, L. Wang and Q.H.J. Gwyn Discrimination Between Young Sea Ice Types from Single Look SAR Image Texture Collins, M.J., R.K. Raney and C. Livingstone WT01-B02-192IA055-000915-B041-306http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fi4.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194455 text/html 3034HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:43:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 4: SAR Image Classification/Data Compression Friday Interactive, August 12 Area 4: SAR Image Classification/Data Compression Restoration of Textural Properties in SAR Images Using Second Order Statistics Nezry, E., H.G. Kohl and H. de Groof A Modified Version of the SAR Speckle Filter Based on Detection of Structures Baraldi, A., and F. Parmigiani On the Use of the Multilook Amplitude K Distribution for SAR Image Analysis Yanasse, C.C.F., A.C. Frery, S.J.S. Sant'Anna and L.V. Dutra Estimators and Distributions in Single and Multi-Look Polarimetric and Interferometric Data Tough, R., D. Blacknell and S. Quegan K-Distribution for Multi-Look Processed Polarimetric SAR Imagery Lee, J.S., D.L. Schuler, R.H. Lang and K.J. Ranson Comparison of Simulation Techniques for Correlated Gamma and K Distributed Images for SAR Application Lombardo, P., A. Blake, D. Blacknell and C.J. Oliver SAR Image Filtering With the ICM Algorithm Mascarenhas, N.D.A., and A.C. Frery Cross-Section Estimation by Simulated Annealing White, R.G. Radar Image Classification and Multiresolution Analysis Boucher, J.M., and S. Pleihers Data Compression Device for SAR Application Bertoni, R., L. Di Paolo, R. Di Julio, F. Impagnatiello and F. Quaranta A Comparison of Several Algorithms for On-Board SAR Raw Data Reduction Strodl, K., U. Benz, F. Blaser, T. Eiting and A. Moreira A Technique for Lossless Compression of GMS VISSR Images Yamashita, K., and A. Yasuda WT01-B02-193IA055-000915-B041-334http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fi5.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194509 text/html 2661HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:43:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 5: Microwave Sensor Calibration and Resolution Enhancement Friday Interactive, August 12 Area 5: Microwave Sensor Calibration and Resolution Enhancement Radiometric Calibration of Fast-Delivery SAR Images Ulander, L.M.H., and P.W. Vachon Pulse-Based Internal Calibration of Polarimetric SAR Dall, J., N. Skou and E.L. Christensen Calibration Experiments of ERS-1 SAR With Active Radar Calibrator in Japan Satake, M., M. Fujita, H. Hanado, H. Horie, K. Sato and S. Ochiai Effect of Doppler Centroid MIS-Tracking on the Parameter Estimation of Point Target Complex Signals Touzi, R., and R.K. Raney TRMM Precipitation Radar: Calibration and Data Collection Strategies Kozu, T., T. Kawanishi, K. Oshimura, M. Satake and H. Kamagai Spaceborne SAR Calibration Studies: ERS-1 T.I. Lukowski, I.A. Neeson, T.C. Khandelwal, and R.Z. Moucha Prediction of Image Performance and Real-Time Quality Improvement for the SIR-C/X-SAR SRL-1 Mission Wagner, A., and B. Aster Field-of-View Calibration of the Microwave Limb Sounder of the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite Cofield, R.E. Image Reconstruction Methods for Remote Sensing by Aperature Synthesis Lannes, A., and E. Anterrieu Reconstructing Enhanced Resolution Imaging From Spaceborne Microwave Sensors Daum, D.R., W.B. Davis and D.G. Long WT01-B02-194IA055-000915-B041-359http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fi6.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194520 text/html 1870HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:44:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Area 6: Airborne Instruments/Data System Development Friday Interactive, August 12 Area 6: Airborne Instruments/Data System Development iSAR: A Multispectral, Polarimetric Airborne SAR System Inggs, M.R., J. Horrell, A. Knight and P. Koeppen INGARA: The Australian Airborne Imaging Radar System Stacy, N.J.S., and M.P. Burgess 93 GHz Imaging Radiometer Kemppinen, M., J. Pallonen and M. Hallikainen Airborne Lidar Payload for Primary Productivity and Related Parameter Sensing in Coastal Waters Seshamani, R., T.K. Alex, Y.K. Jain and K. Kasturirangan A Geographical Information System Finalised to the Gome Instruments (ERS-2 Mission) Girardi, A., M. Gabella and G. Perona The German Processing and Archiving Center for ENVISAT Schreier, G., and W. Markwitz An Early EOS Progress Report Khazenie, N., and R. Price WT01-B02-195IA055-000915-B042-28http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/faa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194538 text/html 2469HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:44:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html SAR Interferometry II Friday Morning, August 12 SAR Interferometry II Interferometric SAR Phase Difference Calibration: Methods and Results Bickel, D.L., and W.H. Hensley Cross-Track and Proposed Multi-Frequency SAR Interferometry: Comparisons With Optical Holographic Interferometry Ouchi, K., and D.A. Burridge Performance of the 3D-SAR Imagery Piau, P. Maximum Likelihood Estimation for SAR Interferometry Seymour, M.S., and I.G. Cumming Effective Number of Looks for a Multilook Interferometric phase Distribution Joughin, I.R., and D.P. Winebrenner A Novel Method for Two-Dimensional Phase Estimation Guarino, C.R. Phase Unwrapping for SAR Interferometry Loffeld, O. Progress in the Development of the CCRS Along-Track Interferometer Gray, A.L., M.W.A. van der Kooij, K.E. Mattar and P.J. Farris-Manning First Results of One Pass Airborne Interferometry With the Dornier SAR System Budenbender, H. DTM Generation From 35-Day Repeat Pass ERS-1 Interferometry Kwoh, L.K., E.C. Chang, W. Cheng, A. Heng and H. Lim WT01-B02-196IA055-000915-B042-65http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/faaa.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194559 text/html 3076HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:44:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical II Friday Morning, August 12 Sensor Calibration and Performance Verification: Optical II SPOT 3: First in Flight Radiometric Calibration Results Meygret, A., O. Hagolle, P. Henry, M. Dinguirard, R. Santer and J.L. Deuze Improvemen ts to the Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS) Calibration System Chrien, T.G., G. Kopp, R.O. Green, C. Chovit, M.L. Eastwood, J. Holbrook, H. Johnson, P. Hajek, J. Raney and C. Sarture Absolute-R adiometric Calibration of Landsat-5 Thematic Mapper and the Proposed Calibration of the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer Thome, K.J., S.F. Biggar, D.I. Gellman and P.N. Slater Electrically Based Absolute Spectral Radiance Calibrations for Remote Sensing Zalewski, E., and P. Petrone Cross Calibration of a Blackbody Standard With an Active Cavity Radiometer Folkman, M., P. Jarecke, T.Hedman, S. Carmen, L. Avis, B. Barkstrom, J. Cooper, L. Kopia, W. Lawrence, R. Lee and L. Smith Performance Verification of Spectral and Panchromatic Modules of the MOMS-02 Sensor Flown Aboard STS55/D2-Mission Berger, M., and H. Kaufmann Component of the MODIS Spectral Bands Pellicori, S.F., M. Pavlov and J.W. Figoski Improvement in 1985-1993 NDVI Time-Series for World Desert Targets Using Post-Launch Calibration Kogan, F., J. Sullivan and B. Pu A Comparison of Measured and Calculated FTIR Spectral Radiance Han, Y., J.H. Churnside, J.A. Shaw and E.R. Westwater High Precision Calibration of a Sun Photometer Using Langley-Plots Performed at Jungfraujoh (3580 M) and Standard Irradiance Lamps Schmid, B., and C. Wehrli WT01-B02-197IA055-000915-B042-90http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/facp.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194609 text/html 2308HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:44:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Propagation and Scattering Friday Morning, August 12 Propagation and Scattering A Radar Land Clutter Model and Its Verification Reilly, J.P., and C.C. Lin Modeling Surface Effects With the Prabolic Equation Method Hitney, H.V. Surface Characterization Using Regularity Models and Frequency Diverse Measurements Cramblitt, R.M., and M.R. Bell Regionalized Soil Roughness Indexes Guillobez, S., and M. Arnaud Multiple Scattering From Random Rough Surfaces Based on a Deterministic Full Wave Model El-Shenawee, M., and E. Bahar Induced Electromagnetic Field Associated With Wakes -- Signal Processing Aspects Madurasinghe, D., and G.R. Haack Statistical Distributions of Partially Developed Speckle Based on a Small Number of Constant Scatterers With Random Phase Daba, J.S., and M.R. Bell Optimum Frequency of Microwave Radiometry for Measurements of Attenuation, Path Delay and Columnar Content of Water Vapor Ojima, T. Comparisons of Radiative Transfer Models of Vegetation Canopies With Laboratory Measurements Strahler, A.H., and S. Liang WT01-B02-198IA055-000915-B042-125http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fae.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194625 text/html 3066HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:45:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Imaging Spectroscopy Applications in Earth Sciences Friday Morning, August 12 Imaging Spectroscopy Applications in Earth Sciences Determination of Particulate Resuspension and Mixing Near an Ocean Outfall Using Hyperspectral Ocean Color Imagery Hamilton, M., and C.O. Davis Classification of AVIRIS Data From Iceland -- Geological Applications Benediktsson, J.A., K. Arnason, J.R. Sveinsson and A. Eiriksson Modelling and Model Verification of the Spectral Reflectance of Soils Under Varying Moisture Conditions Bach, H., and W. Mauser Relationships Between Leaf Chemistry and Reflectance for Plant Species From Jasper Ridge, California Grossman, Y.L., E.W. Sanderson, and S.L. Ustin Seasonal Changes Observed in AVIRIS Images of Jasper Ridge, California Ustin, S.L., L. Duan, Q.J. Hart and R. Haxo Comparison of Spectral Feature Algorithms for Remote Sensing of Chlorophyll in Eutrophic Lakes Melack, J.M., and M. Gastil Temporal and Spatial Relationships Between Topography, Atmspheric Water Vapor, Liquid Water and Endmember Abundances of Vegetation Determined Using AVIRIS Roberts, D.A., R.O. Green, J.B. Adams, J.S. Cothern, D.E. Sabol and M.O. Smith Geometric Mixture Analysis of Imaging Spectrometry Data Boardman, J.W. A New Approach to Determining Spectral Abundances of Mixtures in Multispectral Images Smith, M., D. Roberts, J. Hill, W. Mehl, B. Hosgood, J. Verdebout, G. Schmuck, C. Koechler and J. Adams The European Optical Goniometric Facility: Technical Description and First Experiment on Spectral Mixing Koechler, C., B. Hosgood, G. Andreoli, G. Schmuck, J. Verdebout, A. Pegoraro, J. Hill, W. Mehl, D. Roberts and M. Smith WT01-B02-199IA055-000915-B042-204http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/faes.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194709 text/html 2728HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:45:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Ice Sheets and Glaciers Friday Morning, August 12 Ice Sheets and Glaciers Estimating Firn Temperatures in Greenland and Antarctica From Dual Polarization C-Band Microwave Emission Observations Winebrenner, D.P., R.D. West and L. Tsang Comparison of Enhanced Resolution Images of Greenland From the ERS-1 and SeaSAT Scatterometers Early, D.S., D.G. Long and M.R. Drinkwater Greenland Ice Sheet Topographic Mapping Using Combined Airborne Laser and GPS Technology Krabill, W.B., R.H. Thomas, R.N. Swift and S. Manizade Spatial Texture in AirSAR Images of the Greenland Ice Sheet Lin, I-I, and W.G. Rees Airborne Interferometric SAR Results From Mountainous and Glacial Terrain Mattar, K.E., A.L. Gray, M.W.A. van der Kooij an dP.J. Farris-Manning A Study on Glacier Movement Using Satellite SAR and Visible/Near-IR Imagery Takahashi, A., K. Cho, H. Shimoda, T. Sakata, F. Nishio and K. Watanabe Comparison of Landsat TM and SAR Mapping of Alpine Snow and Glaciers: Results of Recent Crysys Research at Wapta Icefield, Alberta Brugman, M.M., A. Pietroniro and X. Shi Surface Elevation Changes of the Greenland Ice Sheet From an Analysis of Seasat & Geosat Altimeter Data Davis, C.H. Determination of Surface Features on Glaciers in Alaska From ERS-1 SAR Observations Josberger, E.G., M.A. True and R.A. Shuchman Development of a High Resolution Ice Echo Sounder for Arctic Ice Sheet Suitz, T., K. Okamoto, H. Maeno and S. Uratsuka WT01-B02-200IA055-000915-B042-317http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fah.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194814 text/html 2689HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:46:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Polarimetric Observations and Scattering Characteristics of the Ocean Surface Friday Morning, August 12 Polarimetric Observations and Scattering Characteristics of the Ocean Surface Wind Vector Satellite Radiometer Wentz, F.J. The San Clemente Ocean Probing Experiment: A Study of Air/Sea Interactions With Remote and In-Situ Sensors Kropfli, R.A., and S.F. Clifford Airborne Dual-Channel Radiometric Ocean Surface Observations During SCOPE 93 Fedor, F.S., and V. Irisov Airborne Passive Polarimetric Measurements of Sea Surface Anisotropy at 92 GHz Kunkee, D.B., and A.J. Gasiewski Polarimetric Passive Remote Sensing of Ocean Wind Vectors Yueh, S.H., W.J. Wilson, S.V. Nghiem, F.K. Li and W.B. Ricketts Design of a KA Band Polarimetric Radiometer Swift, C.T., and L. Hevisi Small Slope Approximation for Microwave Polarimetric Observation of the Sea Surface Irisov, V.G. Comparison of Microwave Backscatter With Optically-Derived Cross Sections From Wind-Generated Waves in a Wavetank Keller, M.R., B.L. Gotwols, W.J. Plant and W.C. Keller Tests of Some Radar Backscatter Models With Multifrequency, Polarimetric SAR Data From the 1989 Noordwijk Experiment Macklin, J.T. Radar Cross Section of the Ocean Surface When Surface Films are Present: A Model Calculation Using Marangoni Wave Damping Theory Vesecky, J.F. WT01-B02-201IA055-000915-B043-3http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fas.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194835 text/html 2803HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:47:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Atmospheric Sounding and Profiling Friday Morning, August 12 Atmospheric Sounding and Profiling Passive Microwave Imagery of Hurricanes Near 118 GHz: Thermal and Precipitation Structure Schwartz, M.J., J.W. Barrett, P.W. Fieguth, P.W. Rosenkranz, M.S. Spina and D.H. Staelin Simulation Study of a Microwave Radiometric Temperature Profiler for the Antarctic Atmosphere Basili, P., P. Ciotti, G. d'Auria, F.S. Marzano and N. Pierdicca A Rapid Transmittance Algorithm for Microwave Sounding Frequencies Rosenkranz, P.W. Spectral Band and Detector Optimization for Atmospheric Sounding Interferometers Kerekes, J.P., and H.J. Jimenez-Gonzalez Determining Winds Aloft With a Radar Wind Sensor: Accounting for Rain-Drop Fall Speed Pallikala, S., and R.K. Moore Atmospheric Boundary Layer Investigations With a UHF Doppler/Interferometric Wind Profiler Van Baelen, J., and C.L. Holloway Improvements in Atmospheric Wind Profiling Using Imaging Doppler Interferometry Palmer, R.D., Y. Lei, P. Solanki, S. Fukao, M. Yamamoto and T. Nakamura A Bistatic Dual-Doppler Radar to Measure Vector Winds Using One Transmitter and a Low-Gain Passive Receiver Wurman, J. High-Resolution Measurements of Atmospheric Turbulent Layers Using Frequency Domain Interferometry Palmer, R.D., A. Bhattacharyya, S. Fukao, M. Yamamoto and T. Nakamura Observations of Upper Stratospheric Short Period Gravity Waves Using the Jicamarca VHF Radar Maekawa, Y., S. Fukao, M. Yamamoto, M.D. Yamanaka, T. Tsuda, S. Kato and R.F. Woodman WT01-B02-202IA055-000915-B043-51http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fat.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194859 text/html 2497HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:47:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Vegetation Scattering and Remote Sensing Friday Morning, August 12 Vegetation Scattering and Remote Sensing A Volume Emission Model for the Radiobrightness of Prairie Grass England, A.W., and J.F. Galantowicz Analysis of Polarimetric Radar Data From Vegetated Areas Rijckenberg, G.J., H.J.C. van Leeuwen and M.A.M. Vissers Semi-Empirical Method for Estimation of Forest Biophysical Properties From Multifrequency Polarimetric SAR Dobson, M.C., L.L. Pierce and F.T. Ulaby Inference of Forest Biomass Using P-Band Circular-Polarized Radar Signals Rignot, E., and J. van Zyl Diurnal Variations of Backscattering Properties of Pine Trees at C- and X-Bands Heiska, K., and M. Hallikainen Application of ERS-1 SAR Data in Large Area Forest Inventory Tomppo, E., P. Mikkela, H. Henttonen, M. Katila, M. Hallikainen, J. Hyyppa, J. Pulliainen, K. Heiska, T. Tares and G. Vass Theoretical Sensitivity of ERS-1 SAR Backscatter Over Forest Wegmuller, U., F.Holecz, Y. Wang and G. Kattenborn Contribution of ERS-1 Wind Scatterometer Data to the Study of Terrestrial Vegetation Frison, P.L., E. Mougin and A. Lopes Temporal Variations in Radar Backscatter Coefficients of Vegetation and Soil Media Nystrom, A., A. Stjernman and J. Vivekanandan WT01-B02-203IA055-000915-B043-109http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fav.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194929 text/html 2695HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:48:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Subsurface Sensing and Inversion Friday Morning, August 12 Subsurface Sensing and Inversion The Use of Polarimetry in Subsurface Radar Langman, A., and M.R. Inggs Estimation of Penetration Depth in a Random Media Using Frequency Decorrelation of Backscattered Field Nashashibi, A., K. Sarabandi and F.T. Ulaby Simulation of a Polarimetric Random Noise/Spread Spectrum Radar for Subsurface Probing Applications Narayanan, R.M., Y. Xu and D.W. Rhoades Interpretation of Time-Domain Induced Polarization and Resistivity Data for Earth Modeling Attia, M.F. Detection of Shallowly Buried Dielectric Objects With Microwave Radiometers Shmalenyuk, A.S., Yu.G. Tishchenko, N.A. Armand and V.M. Poyakov Hardware Cancellation of the Direct Coupling in a Stepped CW Ground Penetrating Radar Kabutz, M., A. Langman and M.R. Inggs Imaging Targets Embedded in a Lossy Half-Space With Synthetic Aperture Radar Doerry, A., B. Brock, B. Boverie and D. Cress Scattering From Buried Dielectric Objects in the Presence of an Air-Earth Interface: A Method of Moments Technique Ellis, G.A., and I.C. Peden Set Theoretic Estimation Techniques for Incorporating Diffusion Effects in Geotomography Rogers, P.G., L.A. Brandt and J.A. Young On-Line Complex Permittivity Measurements for Ground Penetrating Radar Ballard, N.R., A. Langman and M.R. Inggs WT01-B02-204IA055-000915-B043-141http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/faz.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210194946 text/html 2731HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:48:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Image Processing and Classification: Optical/IR Friday Morning, August 12 Image Processing and Classification: Optical/IR Orbit Refinement With Applications to Remote Sensing McNeill, S., S. Belliss and T. Barnes NOAA AVHRR Data Processing: Requirements and Limitations in Operational Algorithms Moreno, J.F., and J. Melia An Iterative Frequency-Domain Technique to Reduce Image Degradation Due to Lens Defocus and Motion Blur Bhaskar, R., J. Hite and D. Pitts Segmentation and Interpretation of NOAA-AVHRR Multi-Temporal NDVI Based Data Sets in Temperature Regions Genovese, G., M. Millot, and R.P.H.M. Schoenmakers Multitemporal Classification of Texas AVHRR Imagery Using Harmonic Components Lee, S., and M.M. Crawford Model-Based Feature Classification and Change Detection Ngai, F.M., J.C. Curlander and A.D. Stocker Spectral Error Characterization and Database Development Silberstein, R.P., R. Haberstroh, D. DiMarzio, J.R. Baker Effect of Radiance-to-Reflectance Transformation and Atmosphere Removal on Maximum Likelihood Classification Accuracy of High-Dimensional Remote Sensing Data Hoffbeck, J.P., and D.A. Landgrebe Identifying and Mapping Wetlands Using Combined SAR and Landsat Thematic Mapper Data Rundquist, D., C. Keithley and B. Leavitt A Study on Whole Three Years Data Analysis of NOAA AVHRR Images Kudoh, J., H. Kawamura and Y. Nemoto WT01-B02-205IA055-000915-B043-230http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940001.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195045 text/html 9628HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:49:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940002 Paper 940004 Paper 940005 Paper 940006 Paper 940007 Paper 940008 Paper 940010 Paper 940011 Paper 940012 Paper 940013 Paper 940014 Paper 940016 Paper 940017 Paper 940018 Paper 940019 Paper 940020 Paper 940021 Paper 940022 Paper 940023 Paper 940027 Paper 940028 Paper 940029 Paper 940031 Paper 940032 Paper 940034 Paper 940035 Paper 940036 Paper 940037 Paper 940038 Paper 940039 Paper 940041 Paper 940042 Paper 940043 Paper 940045 Paper 940046 Paper 940047 Paper 940049 Paper 940050 Paper 940051 Paper 940052 Paper 940053 Paper 940054 Paper 940055 Paper 940056 Paper 940057 Paper 940058 Paper 940059 Paper 940060 Paper 940061 Paper 940062 Paper 940063 Paper 940064 Paper 940065 Paper 940067 Paper 940068 Paper 940069 Paper 940070 Paper 940071 Paper 940073 Paper 940075 Paper 940076 Paper 940077 Paper 940078 Paper 940079 Paper 940080 Paper 940081 Paper 940083 Paper 940084 Paper 940085 Paper 940087 Paper 940088 Paper 940089 Paper 940090 Paper 940091 Paper 940092 Paper 940093 Paper 940094 Paper 940095 Paper 940096 Paper 940097 Paper 940098 Paper 940099 WT01-B02-206IA055-000915-B044-66http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940101.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195126 text/html 10200HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:49:44 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940100 Paper 940101 Paper 940102 Paper 940103 Paper 940104 Paper 940105 Paper 940106 Paper 940107 Paper 940108 Paper 940109 Paper 940110 Paper 940111 Paper 940112 Paper 940113 Paper 940114 Paper 940115 Paper 940116 Paper 940117 Paper 940118 Paper 940119 Paper 940120 Paper 940121 Paper 940122 Paper 940123 Paper 940124 Paper 940125 Paper 940126 Paper 940127 Paper 940128 Paper 940129 Paper 940130 Paper 940132 Paper 940133 Paper 940134 Paper 940135 Paper 940136 Paper 940137 Paper 940138 Paper 940139 Paper 940140 Paper 940141 Paper 940142 Paper 940143 Paper 940145 Paper 940146 Paper 940147 Paper 940148 Paper 940149 Paper 940150 Paper 940151 Paper 940152 Paper 940153 Paper 940154 Paper 940155 Paper 940156 Paper 940157 Paper 940158 Paper 940159 Paper 940162 Paper 940166 Paper 940167 Paper 940168 Paper 940169 Paper 940170 Paper 940171 Paper 940173 Paper 940176 Paper 940178 Paper 940179 Paper 940180 Paper 940181 Paper 940182 Paper 940183 Paper 940184 Paper 940186 Paper 940187 Paper 940188 Paper 940189 Paper 940190 Paper 940191 Paper 940192 Paper 940193 Paper 940194 Paper 940195 Paper 940197 Paper 940198 Paper 940199 WT01-B02-207IA055-000915-B044-148http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940201.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195209 text/html 10312HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:50:32 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940201 Paper 940202 Paper 940203 Paper 940204 Paper 940205 Paper 940206 Paper 940207 Paper 940208 Paper 940209 Paper 940210 Paper 940211 Paper 940212 Paper 940213 Paper 940214 Paper 940216 Paper 940217 Paper 940218 Paper 940219 Paper 940221 Paper 940222 Paper 940223 Paper 940224 Paper 940225 Paper 940226 Paper 940227 Paper 940228 Paper 940229 Paper 940230 Paper 940231 Paper 940232 Paper 940233 Paper 940234 Paper 940235 Paper 940236 Paper 940237 Paper 940238 Paper 940239 Paper 940240 Paper 940241 Paper 940242 Paper 940243 Paper 940244 Paper 940245 Paper 940246 Paper 940247 Paper 940248 Paper 940251 Paper 940252 Paper 940253 Paper 940254 Paper 940255 Paper 940256 Paper 940257 Paper 940258 Paper 940259 Paper 940260 Paper 940261 Paper 940263 Paper 940264 Paper 940266 Paper 940267 Paper 940268 Paper 940270 Paper 940271 Paper 940272 Paper 940273 Paper 940274 Paper 940275 Paper 940276 Paper 940277 Paper 940278 Paper 940279 Paper 940280 Paper 940282 Paper 940283 Paper 940285 Paper 940286 Paper 940287 Paper 940288 Paper 940289 Paper 940289 Paper 940291 Paper 940292 Paper 940293 Paper 940294 Paper 940295 Paper 940296 Paper 940299 WT01-B02-208IA055-000915-B044-200http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940301.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195245 text/html 10768HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:51:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940300 Paper 940302 Paper 940303 Paper 940304 Paper 940305 Paper 940306 Paper 940307 Paper 940308 Paper 940309 Paper 940310 Paper 940311 Paper 940312 Paper 940313 Paper 940314 Paper 940315 Paper 940316 Paper 940317 Paper 940318 Paper 940319 Paper 940320 Paper 940321 Paper 940322 Paper 940323 Paper 940324 Paper 940325 Paper 940326 Paper 940327 Paper 940328 Paper 940329 Paper 940330 Paper 940331 Paper 940333 Paper 940335 Paper 940336 Paper 940337 Paper 940339 Paper 940341 Paper 940342 Paper 940343 Paper 940344 Paper 940345 Paper 940346 Paper 940347 Paper 940348 Paper 940349 Paper 940350 Paper 940351 Paper 940353 Paper 940354 Paper 940355 Paper 940356 Paper 940357 Paper 940358 Paper 940359 Paper 940360 Paper 940361 Paper 940362 Paper 940363 Paper 940364 Paper 940365 Paper 940367 Paper 940368 Paper 940369 Paper 940370 Paper 940371 Paper 940373 Paper 940374 Paper 940375 Paper 940376 Paper 940377 Paper 940378 Paper 940379 Paper 940380 Paper 940381 Paper 940382 Paper 940383 Paper 940384 Paper 940385 Paper 940386 Paper 940387 Paper 940388 Paper 940389 Paper 940390 Paper 940391 Paper 940392 Paper 940393 Paper 940394 Paper 940395 Paper 940396 Paper 940397 Paper 940398 Paper 940399 WT01-B02-209IA055-000915-B044-228http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940401.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195300 text/html 10878HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:51:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940400 Paper 940401 Paper 940402 Paper 940403 Paper 940404 Paper 940406 Paper 940407 Paper 940408 Paper 940409 Paper 940410 Paper 940411 Paper 940412 Paper 940413 Paper 940414 Paper 940415 Paper 940416 Paper 940417 Paper 940418 Paper 940419 Paper 940420 Paper 940422 Paper 940423 Paper 940425 Paper 940426 Paper 940427 Paper 940428 Paper 940429 Paper 940430 Paper 940431 Paper 940432 Paper 940433 Paper 940434 Paper 940435 Paper 940436 Paper 940437 Paper 940438 Paper 940439 Paper 940440 Paper 940441 Paper 940442 Paper 940444 Paper 940445 Paper 940446 Paper 940447 Paper 940448 Paper 940450 Paper 940451 Paper 940452 Paper 940453 Paper 940455 Paper 940456 Paper 940457 Paper 940458 Paper 940459 Paper 940460 Paper 940461 Paper 940462 Paper 940463 Paper 940464 Paper 940465 Paper 940466 Paper 940467 Paper 940468 Paper 940469 Paper 940470 Paper 940471 Paper 940472 Paper 940474 Paper 940475 Paper 940476 Paper 940477 Paper 940478 Paper 940479 Paper 940480 Paper 940481 Paper 940482 Paper 940483 Paper 940484 Paper 940485 Paper 940486 Paper 940487 Paper 940488 Paper 940489 Paper 940490 Paper 940491 Paper 940492 Paper 940493 Paper 940494 Paper 940495 Paper 940496 Paper 940497 Paper 940498 Paper 940499 WT01-B02-210IA055-000915-B044-269http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940501.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195322 text/html 10764HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:51:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940500 Paper 940501 Paper 940502 Paper 940503 Paper 940504 Paper 940505 Paper 940506 Paper 940508 Paper 940509 Paper 940510 Paper 940512 Paper 940513 Paper 940514 Paper 940515 Paper 940516 Paper 940518 Paper 940519 Paper 940520 Paper 940521 Paper 940522 Paper 940523 Paper 940524 Paper 940525 Paper 940526 Paper 940527 Paper 940528 Paper 940529 Paper 940530 Paper 940531 Paper 940532 Paper 940533 Paper 940534 Paper 940535 Paper 940536 Paper 940538 Paper 940539 Paper 940540 Paper 940541 Paper 940542 Paper 940543 Paper 940544 Paper 940545 Paper 940546 Paper 940547 Paper 940548 Paper 940549 Paper 940550 Paper 940551 Paper 940552 Paper 940553 Paper 940554 Paper 940555 Paper 940556 Paper 940557 Paper 940558 Paper 940559 Paper 940560 Paper 940561 Paper 940562 Paper 940563 Paper 940564 Paper 940565 Paper 940566 Paper 940567 Paper 940568 Paper 940569 Paper 940570 Paper 940571 Paper 940572 Paper 940573 Paper 940574 Paper 940575 Paper 940576 Paper 940577 Paper 940578 Paper 940579 Paper 940580 Paper 940581 Paper 940582 Paper 940583 Paper 940585 Paper 940587 Paper 940588 Paper 940589 Paper 940590 Paper 940591 Paper 940592 Paper 940593 Paper 940596 Paper 940597 Paper 940598 Paper 940599 WT01-B02-211IA055-000915-B044-299http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940601.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195343 text/html 11106HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:52:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940600 Paper 940601 Paper 940602 Paper 940603 Paper 940604 Paper 940606 Paper 940607 Paper 940608 Paper 940609 Paper 940610 Paper 940611 Paper 940612 Paper 940613 Paper 940614 Paper 940615 Paper 940616 Paper 940617 Paper 940618 Paper 940620 Paper 940621 Paper 940622 Paper 940623 Paper 940624 Paper 940625 Paper 940626 Paper 940627 Paper 940628 Paper 940629 Paper 940630 Paper 940631 Paper 940632 Paper 940633 Paper 940635 Paper 940636 Paper 940637 Paper 940638 Paper 940639 Paper 940640 Paper 940641 Paper 940642 Paper 940643 Paper 940644 Paper 940645 Paper 940646 Paper 940647 Paper 940648 Paper 940649 Paper 940650 Paper 940651 Paper 940652 Paper 940653 Paper 940654 Paper 940655 Paper 940656 Paper 940657 Paper 940658 Paper 940659 Paper 940660 Paper 940661 Paper 940662 Paper 940663 Paper 940665 Paper 940666 Paper 940667 Paper 940668 Paper 940669 Paper 940670 Paper 940671 Paper 940672 Paper 940673 Paper 940674 Paper 940675 Paper 940676 Paper 940677 Paper 940678 Paper 940679 Paper 940680 Paper 940681 Paper 940682 Paper 940683 Paper 940684 Paper 940685 Paper 940686 Paper 940687 Paper 940688 Paper 940689 Paper 940690 Paper 940692 Paper 940693 Paper 940694 Paper 940695 Paper 940696 Paper 940697 Paper 940698 Paper 940699 WT01-B02-212IA055-000915-B045-7http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940701.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195356 text/html 10422HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:52:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940700 Paper 940701 Paper 940703 Paper 940704 Paper 940705 Paper 940706 Paper 940707 Paper 940708 Paper 940709 Paper 940710 Paper 940711 Paper 940712 Paper 940713 Paper 940714 Paper 940715 Paper 940717 Paper 940718 Paper 940719 Paper 940720 Paper 940721 Paper 940722 Paper 940723 Paper 940724 Paper 940726 Paper 940727 Paper 940728 Paper 940729 Paper 940730 Paper 940731 Paper 940732 Paper 940734 Paper 940735 Paper 940736 Paper 940737 Paper 940738 Paper 940739 Paper 940740 Paper 940741 Paper 940742 Paper 940743 Paper 940744 Paper 940746 Paper 940747 Paper 940748 Paper 940749 Paper 940750 Paper 940751 Paper 940752 Paper 940753 Paper 940754 Paper 940755 Paper 940756 Paper 940757 Paper 940758 Paper 940759 Paper 940760 Paper 940761 Paper 940762 Paper 940763 Paper 940764 Paper 940765 Paper 940768 Paper 940770 Paper 940771 Paper 940772 Paper 940773 Paper 940774 Paper 940775 Paper 940776 Paper 940777 Paper 940778 Paper 940779 Paper 940780 Paper 940781 Paper 940782 Paper 940783 Paper 940784 Paper 940785 Paper 940787 Paper 940788 Paper 940791 Paper 940792 Paper 940793 Paper 940794 Paper 940795 Paper 940796 Paper 940797 Paper 940798 Paper 940799 WT01-B02-213IA055-000915-B045-40http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940801.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195412 text/html 10080HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:52:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940800 Paper 940801 Paper 940802 Paper 940803 Paper 940804 Paper 940806 Paper 940807 Paper 940808 Paper 940809 Paper 940810 Paper 940811 Paper 940812 Paper 940816 Paper 940817 Paper 940818 Paper 940819 Paper 940820 Paper 940821 Paper 940822 Paper 940823 Paper 940824 Paper 940825 Paper 940826 Paper 940827 Paper 940829 Paper 940830 Paper 940831 Paper 940832 Paper 940833 Paper 940834 Paper 940835 Paper 940836 Paper 940837 Paper 940838 Paper 940839 Paper 940841 Paper 940843 Paper 940845 Paper 940847 Paper 940848 Paper 940849 Paper 940850 Paper 940851 Paper 940852 Paper 940853 Paper 940854 Paper 940855 Paper 940856 Paper 940857 Paper 940859 Paper 940860 Paper 940861 Paper 940862 Paper 940863 Paper 940865 Paper 940866 Paper 940867 Paper 940868 Paper 940869 Paper 940870 Paper 940871 Paper 940872 Paper 940873 Paper 940874 Paper 940875 Paper 940877 Paper 940879 Paper 940881 Paper 940882 Paper 940883 Paper 940884 Paper 940885 Paper 940886 Paper 940887 Paper 940888 Paper 940889 Paper 940890 Paper 940891 Paper 940892 Paper 940893 Paper 940894 Paper 940895 Paper 940896 Paper 940897 Paper 940898 Paper 940899 WT01-B02-214IA055-000915-B045-62http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p940901.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195424 text/html 10536HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:53:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 940900 Paper 940901 Paper 940902 Paper 940903 Paper 940904 Paper 940905 Paper 940907 Paper 940908 Paper 940909 Paper 940910 Paper 940911 Paper 940912 Paper 940914 Paper 940915 Paper 940916 Paper 940917 Paper 940918 Paper 940919 Paper 940920 Paper 940921 Paper 940922 Paper 940923 Paper 940924 Paper 940925 Paper 940926 Paper 940927 Paper 940928 Paper 940929 Paper 940930 Paper 940931 Paper 940932 Paper 940933 Paper 940934 Paper 940935 Paper 940936 Paper 940937 Paper 940938 Paper 940939 Paper 940940 Paper 940941 Paper 940942 Paper 940943 Paper 940945 Paper 940946 Paper 940947 Paper 940948 Paper 940949 Paper 940950 Paper 940952 Paper 940953 Paper 940954 Paper 940955 Paper 940957 Paper 940958 Paper 940959 Paper 940960 Paper 940961 Paper 940962 Paper 940963 Paper 940964 Paper 940967 Paper 940968 Paper 940969 Paper 940972 Paper 940973 Paper 940974 Paper 940975 Paper 940976 Paper 940977 Paper 940978 Paper 940979 Paper 940980 Paper 940981 Paper 940982 Paper 940983 Paper 940984 Paper 940985 Paper 940986 Paper 940987 Paper 940988 Paper 940989 Paper 940990 Paper 940991 Paper 940992 Paper 940993 Paper 940994 Paper 940995 Paper 940997 Paper 940998 Paper 940999 WT01-B02-215IA055-000915-B045-91http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p941001.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195448 text/html 4608HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:53:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 941000 Paper 941001 Paper 941002 Paper 941004 Paper 941006 Paper 941007 Paper 941008 Paper 941009 Paper 941012 Paper 941020 Paper 941026 Paper 941027 Paper 941032 Paper 941033 Paper 941037 Paper 941043 Paper 941055 Paper 941056 Paper 941057 Paper 941058 Paper 941060 Paper 941063 Paper 941066 Paper 941067 Paper 941071 Paper 941072 Paper 941073 Paper 941074 Paper 941081 Paper 941082 Paper 941084 Paper 941085 Paper 941086 Paper 941087 Paper 941090 Paper 941090 Paper 941094 Paper 941096 WT01-B02-216IA055-000915-B045-121http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/p941101.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195501 text/html 4954HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:53:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Find Papers by Paper Numbers Find Papers by Paper Numbers Paper 941100 Paper 941101 Paper 941102 Paper 941108 Paper 941109 Paper 941111 Paper 941112 Paper 941116 Paper 941117 Paper 941118 Paper 941119 Paper 941120 Paper 941121 Paper 941122 Paper 941123 Paper 941125 Paper 941130 Paper 941132 Paper 941133 Paper 941134 Paper 941135 Paper 941136 Paper 941137 Paper 941138 Paper 941139 Paper 941140 Paper 941141 Paper 941142 Paper 941143 Paper 941144 Paper 941145 Paper 941146 Paper 941147 Paper 941148 Paper 941149 Paper 941150 Paper 941151 Paper 941152 Paper 941153 Paper 941154 Paper 941155 WT01-B02-217IA055-000915-B045-174http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/convhist.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195532 text/html 1543HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:54:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Conversion History Conversion History Abstracts and papers for this electronic digest were prepared in thefollowing manner: Hardcopy abstracts were scanned via Optical Character Recognition(OCR) technology and reviewed by IGARSS Committee Members. Papers that were submitted electronically in Postscript format wereconverted to Adobe Acrobat(TM) Portable Document Format (PDF). Papers that were submitted electronically in text format wereconverted to HyperText Markup Language (HTML), as time permitted. Additional files, such as images, supporting text, etc., wereplaced on the CD in the same directory with their respective paper. Hardcopy papers were scanned as TIFF images and then converted to Adobe Acrobat(TM) Portable Document Format (PDF). (There are a fewoversized papers that could not be scanned.) These papers willsometimes appear with black borders around the edges. Problem Submissions Several papers were submitted electronically that could not beprocessed. These included those submissions requiring BinHEX 4.0. Otherpapers were submitted in TeX and LaTeX formats which were not processedfurther, but are included on the CD in those original formats. WT01-B02-218IA055-000915-B045-205http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/airborne.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195547 text/html 27664HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:54:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " airborne" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " airborne" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940197: USING AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE DATA FOR MULTITEMPORAL STUDIES OF LAND DEGRADATION 940670: AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE TM DATA INTEGRATION FOR WATER MONITORING ALONG THE LIGURIAN COAST 940361: INTEGRATED GEOPHYSICAL IMAGING OF THE SUDBURY STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR AND OTHER AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL DATA 940577: PRECISE GEOMETRIC REGISTRATION OF ASAS AIRBORNE DATA: IMPACTS AND RESULTS 940705: ESTIMATING OF SURFACE TEMPERATURES ON FOREST STANDS USING AIRBORNE MSS EMITTANCE DATA 940726: STEREO RADAR METEOROLOGY: A NEW APPROACH TO PROCESS DATA FROM AIRBORNE OR GROUND BASED WEATHER RADARS 940321: CLASSIFICATION OF MULTIPOLARISATION AIRBORNE RADAR IMAGES IN AGRICULTURAL AREAS 940324: RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF AIRBORNE SAR IMAGERY 940643: CONCEPTUAL DESIGN, PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND RESULTS OF THE HIGH RESOLUTION REAL-TIME PROCESSOR OF THE DLR AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM 940859: A 95 GHz AIRBORNE RADAR FOR HIGH RESOLUTION POLARIMETRIC CLOUD MEASUREMENTS 940942: STRATOSPHERIC AND MESOSPlHERIC WATER VAPOR DISTRIBU'IION OVER NORTHERN EUROPE MEASURED WITH AN AIRBORNE A-WAVE SENSOR 940005: MARITIME PRECIPITATION DISTRIBUTIONS DETERMINED FROM AIRBORNE RADAR AND MULTI-FREQUENCY RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS 940009: INTERNAL CALIBRATION SCHEMES FOR A POLARIMETRIC PHASED ARRAY AIRBORNE SAR 940053: AIRBORNE LIDAR PAYLOAD FOR PRIMARY PRODUCTIVITY AND RELATED PARAMETER SENSING IN COASTAL WATERS 940209: DETECTION OF TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL VARIATlONS OF CHLOROPHYLL IN LAKES WITH AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETRY 940280: AIRBORNE AND SPACEBORNE CLOUD RADAR DESIGNS 940305: SNOWCOVER MAPPING WITH THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER 940307: A MODIFIED AIRBORNE LASER ALTIMETER FOR MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION STRUCTURE 940336: MOTION COMPENSATION FOR AIRBORNE SAR BASED ON INERTIAL DATA, RDM AND GPS 940347: iSAR: A MULTISPECTRAL, POLARIMETRIC AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM 940349: A QUICKLOOK PROCESSOR FOR AN AIRBORNE SAR 940363: MOTION COMPENSATION FOR AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRIC SAR 940466: AIRBORNE DUAL-CHANEL RADIOMETRIC OCEAN SURFACE OBSERVATIONS DURING SCOPE `93 940472: CONSTRUCTION OF AN AIRBORNE 93 GHz IMAGING RADIOMETER 940495: AIRBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF BALTIC SEA ICE 940542: AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM AIRBORNE POLDER DATA BY MULTIPLE SCATTERING MODEL 940600: A SYSTEM FOR GEOMETRIC AND RADIOMETRIC CORRECTION OF AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA 940635: INGARA: THE AUSTRALIAN AIRBORNE IMAGING RADAR SYSTEM 940646: HIGH PRECISION MOTION COMPENSATION FOR MULTIPLE PASS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRY 940677: MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940780: ESTIMATING THE FRACTION OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (fAPAR) FROM OFF-NADIR AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS 940791: AIRBORNE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENTS OF MARINE MONITORING 940813: 1993 LABORATORY AND FLIGHT TEST RESULTS FOR AN AIRBORNE ASTER SIMULATOR 940814: GEOLOGICAL MAPPING OF DEATII VALLEY USING AN AIRBORNE ASTER SIMULATOR 940010: C-BAND SOLID STATE DUAL POLARIZATION T/R MODULES FOR AIRBORNE SAR APPLICATIONS 940049: DETECTION OF ATMOSPHERIC CHLORINE-COMPOUNDS WITH AN AIRBORNE SUBMILLIMETER RECEIVER 940114: PHASE CORRECTION ALGORITHMS FOR THE AIRBORNE EMISSIONS SPECTROMETER (AES) 940285: AIRBORNE RADIOMETER FOR SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS DURING TOGA COARE 940317: AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRIC SAR RESULTS FROM MOUNTAINOUS AND GLACIAL TERRAIN 940337: FIRST RESULTS OF ONE PASS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRY WITH THE DORNIER SAR SYSTEM 940601: GEOMETRIC CORRECTION OF AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA 940829: DESCRIPTION OF A RADAR/RADIOMETER METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION TO AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS OVER- STRATIFORM RAIN IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC 940925: AIRBORNE PASSIVE POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE ANISOTROPY AT 92 GHZ 940926: AIRBORNE IMAGING OF TROPOSPHERIC EMISSION AT MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS 940933: IMPROVEMENTS TO THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER (AVIRIS) CALIBRATION SYSTEM 940988: DERIVING ANTECEDENT MOISTURE CONDITIONS FROM AIRBORNE SAR FOR INPUT INTO A FLOOD FORECASTING MODEL 941050: USE OF AIRBORNE X/C-BAND SAR DATA FOR THE MONITORING OF TROPICAL FOREST AND SHIFTING CULTIVATION 941111: GEOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER (AVlRlS): TECHNIQUE AND RESULTS 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940204: APPLICATIONS OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETRY 940555: DIFFERENTIAL ABSORTION LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WATER VAPOR 940168: MAPPING THE DIAGENETIC ZONE TRANSITIONS OF GREENLAND USING THE AAFE RADAR ALTIMETER 940413: DEVELOPMENT OF A GENERIC SAR PROCESSOR IN THE NETHERLANDS 940668: EFFECTS OF CHANGE IN SPECTRAL RESOLUTION AND CHANNEL POSITION ON RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODEL-BASED ATMOSPlIERIC CORRECTION TECItNIQUES APPLIED TO IMAGING SPECTROMETERS 940722: LAND COVER DISCRIMINATION USING SAREX DATA 940755: MONITORING AND MODELING SEMI-ARID LANDSCAPE RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE 941057: FLUORESCENCE LIDAR IN VEGETATION REMOTE SENSING: SYSTEM FEATURES AND MULTIPLATFORM OPEREATION 940014: REMOTE SENSING OF TROPOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY 940002: THE AIRSAR-93 AND SAREX-92 CAMPAIGNS IN GUYANA AND COLUMBIA 940248: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF MULTISPECTRAL ANALYSIS FOR SURFACE MATERIAL CLASSIFICATION 940251: INVESTIGATION OF THE VERTICAL PROFILES OF LINEAR DEPOLARIZATION RATIO AND REFLECTIVITY AT S, X AND K BAND WAVELENGTHS 940455: CANADA'S GLOBESAR PROGRAM 940471: OPTIMIZATION OF THE SCAN GEOMETRY OF IMAGING MICROWAVE RADIOMETER 940474: PROFILING THE THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF THE ATMOSPHERE WITH HIGH SPECTRUM RESOLUTION INFRARED RADIANCE MEASUREMENTS 940497: LASERS FOR LIDAR BATHIMETRY AND OCEANOLOGICAL RESEARCH: CHOICE CRITERIA 940536: THE DANISH POLARIMETRIC SAR FOR REMOTE SENSING APPLICATIONS 940655: ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS OF INTERNAL WAVES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940784: MODELLING AND MODEL VERIFICATION OF THE SPECTRAL REFLECTANCE OF SOIL UNDER VARYING MOISTURE CONDITIONS 940848: RETRIEVAL OF WATER VAPOR PROFILES USING MEASUREMENTS FROM A MILLIMETER-WAVE IMAGING RADIOMETER 940924: POLARIMETRIC RADAR IMAGERY OF THE OCEAN AT LOW GRAZING ANGLES UNDER UNSTABLE ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS. 940008: DESAMPLING FIR FILTERS IN REAL-TIME IMAGING TECHNIQUES 940016: SIMULTANEOUS EVALUATION OF SPECTRAL FEATURELESS CONSTITUENTS IN SOILS USING NEAR INFRARED ANALYSIS (NIRA) TECHNIQUE 940043: THE DEVELOPMENT OF A LIDAR INSTRUMENT FOR PRECISE TOPOGRAPHIC MAPPING 940045: INDUCED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD ASSOCIATED WITH WAKES - SIGNAL PROCESSING ASPECTS 940047: VAGSAT: A PROPOSAL FOR A SMALL SATELLITE MISSION FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA WITH A REAL-APERTURE RADAR 940063: ERS-1 SAR IMAGES OF ATMOSPHERIC GRAVITY WAVES 940098: TOWARDS OPERATIONAL USE OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RAOAR CAGES IN SEA ICE MONITORING 940132: ADVANCES IN RADAR METEOROLOGY: AN OVERVIEW 940149: SYNERGY BETWEEN OPOTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING 940170: IMAGING TARGETS EMBEDDED IN A LOSSY HALF-SPACE WITH SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR 940178: MEASUREMENTS OF OCEAN CURRENTS WITH SAR INTERFEROMETRY AND HF RADAR 940194: POLARIZATION EFFECTS IN RADAR REFLECTION FROM SURFACES WITH PERIODIC ROUGHNESS 940195: REMOTE MONITORING OF SHIFTING SANDS AND VEGETATION COVER IN ARID REGIONS 940199: MULTISPECTRAL MM-WAVE DIAGNOSTICS OF TWO COUPLED OCEANIC EDDIES (ROSSBY SOLITON) 940211: SOLAR-RADIATION-BASED ABSOLUTE CALIBRATION OF OPTICAL SENSORS: SeaWiFS AND A DAEDALUS 1268 940222: COMPARISON BETWEEN PREDICTED PERFORMANCES OF BISTATIC AND MONOSTATIC RADAR IN VEGETATION MONITORING 940278: EFFECT OF RADIANCE-TO-REFLECTANCE TRANSFORMATION AND ATMOSPHERE REMOVAL ON MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF HIGH-DIMENSIONAL REMOTE SENSING DATA 940300: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS 940306: LASER ALTIMETRY WAVEFORM MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION CANOPY STRUCTURE 940318: PROGRESS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CCRS ALONG-TRACK INTERFEROMETER 940348: A SAR PROCESSOR IMPLEMENTED ON A TRANSPUTER RING 940365: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED INVERSION TECHNIQUE FOR SAR IMAGES OF OCEAN SURFACE WAVES 940371: SENSITIVITY STUDIES ON RETRIEVALS OF TEMPERATURE AND GAS CONCENTRATIONS CARRIED OUT ON SIMULATED AES SPECTRA OF UPWELLING RADIATION ATMOSPHERIC RADIATION 940378: IMAGES OF CONVECTIVE CELL-TOP ALTITUDES USING 118-GHZ SPECTRAL DATA 940379: ATMOSPHERIC TRANSMITTANCE MEASUREMENTS NEAR 54 AND 118 GHZ 940394: A SUBBAND ALGORITHM FOR REAL-TIME AUTOFOCUSING OF SAR IMAGES 940396: THE EFFECT OF SAR BANDWIDTH RATIO AND CURRENT VARIATION ON OCEAN CURRENT MEASUREMENTS BY ALONG-TRACK SAR INTERFEROMETER 940403: SPECTRAL CALIBRATION OF AN IMAGING SPECTROMETER INFLIGHT USING SOLAR AND ATMOSPHERIC ABSORPTION BANDS 940404: IMAGING SPECTROMETER MEASURED LEAF WATER AND CELLULOSE IN THE SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS PRIOR TO THE 1993 ALTADENA FIRE 940424: GEORADIOMETRIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS DATA IN RUGGED TERRIN AS A BASIS FOR QUANTITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940437: MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGRAPHY IN A MULTI-SENSOR APPROACH 940438: THE EFFECT OF WAVE BLOCKING ON MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGPAPHY WITH IMAGING RADAR 940444: EFFECTS OF RESOLUTION AND SPATIAL PROPERTIES ON TEXTURAL CLASSIFICATION 940454: THE CHINA GLOBESAR PROGRAMME 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940470: DETECTION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES USING NEURAL NETWORK TECHNOLOGY 940498: ON THE EFFECT OF SOIL SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON THE RADAR BACKSCATTER RESPONSES TO SOIL MOISTURE 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 940525: ESTIMATING FRACTIONAL VEGETATION COVER AT THE SUB PIXEL SCALE IN A SEMIARID REGION USING A STATISTICAL MIXTURE MODEL AND REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940530: SEASONAL CHANGES OBSERVED IN AVIR1S IMAGES OF JASPER RIDGE, CALIFORNIA 940549: DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN YOUNG SEA ICE TYPES FROM SINGLE LOOK SAR IMAGE DATA. 940561: CLASSIFICATION OF AVRIS DATA FROM ICELAND-GEOLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940572: INTERPRETATION AND PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BLUE-GREEN AND RED VEGETATION FLUORESCENCE 940579: IN-FIELD CHARACTERIZATION OF SAHARAN SITES FOR SATELLITE CALIBRATION 940607: ARMAR OBSERVATIONS DURING TOGA/COARE 940623: AN APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF CLOUDE APPROACH IN RADAR POLARIMETRY 940653: A COMPARISON ANALYSIS OF Ku-BAND SLAR SEA SURFACE IMAGES, AT VV AND HH POLARIZATIONS OBTAINED DURING, THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940703: RADAR MEASUREMENTS OVER THE FRENCH GUIANA MANGROVE 940706: ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS IMAGES WITH A PROCEDURE BASED ON THE INVERSION OF 5S MODEL 940707: ASSESSMENT OF FOREST CANOPY CHEMISTRY WITH ISM 940710: CALIBRATION OF THE CARABAS VHF SAR SYSTEM 940723: K-STATISTICS OF TERRAIN CLUTTER IN HIGH RESOLUTION SAR IMAGES 940731: COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940746: REMOTE SENSING OF CURRENT-WAVE INTERACTION WITH SIR-C/X-SAR (SRL-I) AT THE GULF STREAM SUPERSITE 940762: OPTIMAL ESTIMATION OF RAIN RATE PROFILES FROM SINGLE-FREQUENCY RADAR ECHOES 940786: YIELD ESTIMATION OF CORN WITH MULTITEMPORAL AND MULTISENSORAL REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940801: TWO-DIMENSIONAL APERTURE SYNTHESIS RADIOMETERS IN A LOW EARTH ORBIT MISSION AND INSTRUMENT ANALYSIS 940812: A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE UARS MISSION AND CORELLATIVE MEASUREMENTS CAMPAIGN 940823: VALIDATING SAR INTERFEROMETRY APPLICATIONS BY USING EMSL 940830: PASSIVE MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION BIOMASS 940831: SENSITIVITY OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTERING TO CROP BIOMASS 940850: SHIP BORNE REMOTE SENSING OF SUB-MESOSCALE OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES ALONG THE NORTH BOUNDARY OF THE GULF STREAM. 940876: MODEL VALIDATION FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY OF CROPS AT FELTWELL, UK 940877: TESTS OF SOME RADAR BACKSCATTER MODELS WITH MULTIFREQUENCY, POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA FROM THE 1989 NCORDWUK EXPERIMENT 940919: MODELLING CANOPY RADIATIVE TEMPERATURE SURFACE AND FLUX ESTIMATION 940922: THE SAN CLEMENTE OCEAN PROBING EXPERIMENT: A STUDY OF AIR/SEA INTERACTIONS WITH REMOTE AND IN-SITU SENSORS 940947: GENERATION OF HIGH RESOLUTION TOPOGRAPHlC MAPS OF THE GALAPAGOS ISLANDS USING TOPSAR DATA 940948: COMPARISON OF LONG VALLEY TOPSAR DATA WITH KINEMATIC GPS SURVEY MEASUREMENTS 940955: RETRIEVAL OF SURFACE REFLECTANCE AND ATMOSPHERIC PROPERTIES USING ASAS IMAGERY 940957: AUTOMATED MULTI-SENSOR IMAGE MAPPING SYSTEM(1) 940962: DETECTION OF HEAVY METAL CONTAMINATED SEDIMENTS USING IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA 941056: FLUORESCENCE LIDAR REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION: RESEARCH ADVANCES IN EUROPE 941090: NIST TRACEABLE CALIBRATION SYSTEM FOR SURFACE AND SUBMERSIBLE SENSORS 941105: SENSOR REQUIREMENTS FOR TREATY VERIFICATION AND CRISIS MONITORING WT01-B02-219IA055-000915-B046-26http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/airsar.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195559 text/html 6933HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:54:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " AirSAR" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " AirSAR" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940002: THE AIRSAR-93 AND SAREX-92 CAMPAIGNS IN GUYANA AND COLUMBIA 940127: SPATIAL TEXTURE IN AIRSAR IMAGE OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET 940478: SEGMENTATION OF POLARIMETRIC AIRSAR-DATA FOR SOIL MOISTURE DETERMINATION IN AN AGRICULATURAL AREA 940752: AIRSAR/TOPSAR STUDIES OF TROPICAL GLACIERS IN THE CORDILLERA REAL, BOLIVIA 940182: SAR TERRAIN CORRECTION FOR IMPROVED SOIL MOISTURE ESTIMATION IN A MOUNTAIN WATERSHED 940437: MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGRAPHY IN A MULTI-SENSOR APPROACH 940917: SEMI-EMPIRICAL METHOD FOR ESTIMATION OF FOREST BIOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES FROM MULTIFREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR 940217: SEGMENTATION OF COMBINED HIGH RESOLUTION OPTICAL AND RADAR IMAGERY FOR THE DETERMINATION OF FIELD INHOMOGENITIES 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940654: MULTI-FREQUENCY, POLARlMETRIC AND INTERFEROMETRIC SAR OBSERVATIONS OF OCEAN FEATURES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940771: CLASSIFICATION OF ERS-1/JERS-1 COMPOSITE SAR IMAGES 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940928: ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940021: ESTIMATION OF AREAL SOIL-WATER CONTENT DURING HAPEX-SAHEL AND EFEDA-SPAIN 940194: POLARIZATION EFFECTS IN RADAR REFLECTION FROM SURFACES WITH PERIODIC ROUGHNESS 940261: FOREST MODELING OF JACK PINE TREES FOR BOREAS 940347: iSAR: A MULTISPECTRAL, POLARIMETRIC AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM 940420: STATISTICAL BEHAVIOR OF A MULTIPARAMETER POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATASET 940438: THE EFFECT OF WAVE BLOCKING ON MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGPAPHY WITH IMAGING RADAR 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940498: ON THE EFFECT OF SOIL SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON THE RADAR BACKSCATTER RESPONSES TO SOIL MOISTURE 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 940552: CHARACTERIZATION OF CANOPY PHYSIOLOGY AT BOREAS WITH SAR 940635: INGARA: THE AUSTRALIAN AIRBORNE IMAGING RADAR SYSTEM 940652: AN OVERVIEW OF THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940738: MEASUREMENT OF TOPOGRAPHIC SURFACE SLOPES IN POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940743: K-DISTRIBUTION FOR MULTI-LOOK PROCESSED POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY 940772: LAND COVER CLASSIFICATION BY SAR 940827: AN EMPIRICAL SOIL MOISTURE ESTIMATION ALGORITHM USING IMAGING RADARS 940831: SENSITIVITY OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTERING TO CROP BIOMASS 940865: MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL 940875: BACKSCATTER MODELLING OF SKIP-GENERATED INTERNAL WAVE WAKES OBSERVED DURING THE LOCK LINNHE SERIES OF EXPERIMENTS 940876: MODEL VALIDATION FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY OF CROPS AT FELTWELL, UK 941066: RADAR TARGET DECOMPOSITION THEOREMS AND UNSUPERVIZED CLASSIFICATION OF FULL POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA WT01-B02-220IA055-000915-B046-57http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/asf.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195614 text/html 2965HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:55:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " alaska and sar" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " alaska and sar" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940408: DETERMINATION OF SURFACE FEATURES ON GLACIERS IN ALASKA FROM ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS 940528: THE ALASKA SAR FACILITY: AN INTRODUCTION 940869: RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE 940282: ASF SAR PROCESSING SYSTEM OVERVIEW 940037: USE OF TIME-SERIES SAR DATA TO RESOLVE ICE TYPE AMBIGUITIES IN NEWLY-OPENED LEADS 940233: OBSERVING SEASONAL TRANSITIONS ON SEA ICE IN THE ARCTIC USING THE ERS-1 SAR 940868: USING ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY TO MONITOR VARIATIONS IN BURN SEVERITY IN AN ALASKAN FIRE-DISTURBED BOREAL FOREST ECOSYSTEM 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940151: THE UTILIZATION OF MODELED SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN THE ESTIMATION OF SAR BACKSCATTER FROM FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE 940300: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 941067: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF FREEZING AND THAWING PERMAFROST IN ALASKA WITH ERS-1 940283: ASF DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR RADARSAT/ERS-2 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 WT01-B02-221IA055-000915-B046-100http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/avhrr.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195631 text/html 11697HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:55:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " AVHRR" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " AVHRR" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940426: AN AUTOMATED METHOD FOR MAKING MOSAIC OUT OF NOAA/AVHRR IMAGES FOR GLOBAL MONITORING 940486: LINEAR MIXTURE MODELLING APPLIED TO AVHRR DATA FOR MONITORING VEGETATION 940296: AVHRR OBSERVATIONS OF PERSIAN GULF OIL SPILLS 940218: COASTWATCH OPERATIONAL MAPPED AVHRR IMAGERY 940295: LOSSLESS COMPRESSION AND MULTIRESOLUTION DECOMPRESSION OF THE GLOBAL AVHRR 1 KM DATA SET 940367: DETECTION OF SHIP TRACKS IN AVHRR CLOUD IMAGERY WITH NEURAL NETWORKS 940524: A STUDY ON WHOLE THREE YEARS DATA ANALYSIS OF NOAA AVHRR IMAGES 940546: SEGMENTATION AND INTERPRETATION OF NOAA-AVHRR MULTI-TEMPORAL NDVI BASED DATA SETS IN TEMPERATE REGIONS 940575: ADAPTIVE RECONSTRUCTION OF SEQUENTIAL AVHRR IMAGERY OF TEXAS VIA DYNAMIC COMPOSITING USING EXPONENTIALLY WEIGHTED POLYNOMIAL FUNCTION 940602: ANALYZING SPATIO-TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE PARAMETERS FROM NOAA AVHRR DATA 940807: NOAA AVHRR DATA PROCESSING: REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS IN OPERATIONAL ALGORITHMS 940226: ANGULAR CHRACTERISTICS OF PATHFINDER AVHRR LAND THERMAL IMAGERY AND 0RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODELING 940238: RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA 940247: COMPARISON OF TIME SERIES AVHRR NDVI VALUES WITH ECOSYSTEM PARAMETERS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF LAND DEGRADATION IN THE ARID UNITED STATES 940456: MULTITEMPORAL CLASSIFICATION OF TEXAS AVHRR IMAGERY USING HARMONIC COMPONENTS 940599: MONITORING ALPINE SNOW COVER VARIATIONS USING NOAA-AVHRR DATA 940186: USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA TO ESTIMATE SURFACE HEMISPHERICAL REFLECTANCE, ALBEDO AND ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETIC ACTIVE RADIATION 940916: CORRECTING INFRARED SATELLITE ESTIMATES OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE FOR ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR ATTENUATION 940073: A CONTINENTAL INSTRUMENTED GROUND SITE NETWORK (CIGSN, AUSTRALIA): A PREREQUISITE FOR THE DETECTION, INTERPRETATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF GLOBAL CHANGE. 940075: CHARACTERISING THE LANDCOVER OF THE AUSTRALIAN CONTINENT FOR INCORPORATION INTO HIGH SPATIAL RESOLUTION GCMs. 940164: COMPARING NUMERICAL AND ANALYTICAL SCHEMES FOR AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM THE ADVANCED VERY HIGH RESOLUTION RADIOMETER 940254: GLOBAL PRODUCTION OF MULTI-CHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURES USING THE NAVAL OCEANOGRAPHIC OFFICE'S SATELLITE PROCESSING SYSTEM 940625: ORBIT REFINEMENT WITH APPLICATIONS TO REMOTE SENSING 940730: NDVI SENSITIVITY TO ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR AS A FUNCTION OF SPECTRAL BANDWIDTH 940115: A PRECISE- NAVIGATION PROCEDURE FOR AUTOMATIC PICTURE TRANSMISSION APT IMAGERY OF METEOROLOGICAL SATELLITE NOAA 940369: APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS FOR DETECTION OF SEA ICE COVERAGE AND MOVEMENTS FROM SATELLITE IMAGERY 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940451: INFORMATION CONTENT OF COMPRESSED REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940482: USE OF VEGETATION INDICES FOR THE RETRIEVAL OF INFORMATION ON SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF SEMI-ARID REGIONS 940493: COMBINED USE OF SPECTRAL MEASUREMENTS: A PROMISE FOR SURFACE PARAMETER RETRIEVAL 940756: COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE MULTISPECTRAL IMAGERY FOR APPLICATIONS REQUIRING HIGH-QUALITY RADIOMETRY 940900: A SOIL COLOR INDEX TO ADJUST FOR SOIL AND LITTER NOISE, IN VEGETATION INDEX IMAGERY OF ARID REGIONS 940915: OBSERVED AND SIMULATED ICE MOTION FOR AN ANNUAL CYCLE IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940004: ASSESSING THE LANG SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE WITH INFRARED AND MICROWAVE DATA 940129: SIMULATION OF VISIBLE AND IR IMAGERY FOR GOES 940135: ON OPPORTUNITY OF ASSESSMENT OF UNDERWATER SOLAR RADIATION IN THE GLOBAL OCEAN ON SATELLITE DATA. 940177: A DESCRIPTION SUSCEPTIBILITY INDEX: USE OF GIS TO ASSESS POTENTIAL DESERTIFICATION 940191: A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL FOR THE LABRADOR PACK ICE 940228: SIMULATION OF MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURES USING A COUPLED LAND-SURFACE-CANOPY-ATMOSPHERE MODEL 940304: MEASUREMENT AND MODELING OF THE BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE OF SNOW 940388: MODELING SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN SATELLITE-BASED ESTIMATES OF LEAF AREA INDEX USING A SCENE SIMULATION MODEL 940389: NEURAL NETWORKS FOR COARSE-SCALE LAND-COVER CHARACTERIZATION USING MULTISOURCE DATA: ASSESSMENT AND COMPARISON TO A BIOPHYSICAL THRESHOLDlNG TECHNIQUE 940422: MAPPING COASTAL CURRENTS WITH SAR, USING NATURALLY- OCCURRING SURFACE SLICK PATTERNS 940440: MONITORING ARID LAND SURFACES CHANGES: OPTICAL REMOTE SENSING OF THE NON-VEGETATED COMPONENT 940460: IMPROVEMENT IN 1985-1993 NDVI TIME-SERIES FOR WORLD DESERT TARGETS USING POST-LAUNCH CALIBRATION 940483: CONTRIBUTION OF ERS-1 WIND SCATTEROMETER DATA TO THE STUDY OF TERRESTRIAL VEGETATION 940492: TEMPORAL EVOLUTIONA OF PHYSICAL PARAMETERS OVER SALT/HAPEX-SAHEL SITE 940579: IN-FIELD CHARACTERIZATION OF SAHARAN SITES FOR SATELLITE CALIBRATION 940606: MONITORING OF CARBON RELEASE IN ALAS- BOREAL FORESTS 940754: THE EFFECTS OF SUB-VISUAL CIRRUS CLOUDS ON IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940809: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SKIPJACK TUNA FISHERY AND OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES OBSERVED BY INFRARED IMAGERY IN THE SOUTHERN BRAZILIAN COAST 940937: AN APPROACH TO ESTIMATING SURFACE PARAMETERS AND FLUXES USING MODELING AND MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 941060: AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 941114: AN ASSESSMENT OF SST ESTIMATION ACCURACY WITH ADEOS/OCTS DATA 941115: AUTOMATIC CLOUD CLASSIFICATION WITH VISIBLE AND THERMAL INFRARED RADIOMETER DATA WT01-B02-222IA055-000915-B046-127http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/aviris.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195646 text/html 6247HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:55:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " AVIRIS" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " AVIRIS" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940933: IMPROVEMENTS TO THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER (AVIRIS) CALIBRATION SYSTEM 940511: A TEST OF AUTOMATIC FEATURE SELECTION IN AVIRIS DATA 940424: GEORADIOMETRIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS DATA IN RUGGED TERRIN AS A BASIS FOR QUANTITATIVE DATA ANALYSIS 940627: ACQUISITION OF IN SITU SURFACE AND ATMOSPHERIC MEASUREMENTS FOR AVIRIS DATA VALIDATION AND ANALYSIS 940667: INVESTIGATIONS ON THE BIOCHEMICAL COMPONENTS NIR ABSORTION FEATURES IN AVIRIS AND LABORATORY REFLECTANCE SPECTRA OF VEGETATION. 940706: ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS IMAGES WITH A PROCEDURE BASED ON THE INVERSION OF 5S MODEL 940532: ESTIMATING DRY GRASS BIOMASS RESIDUES USING AVIRIS IMAGE ANALYSIS 941002: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TOPOGRAPIlY, ATMOSPIIEUC WATER VAPOR, LIQUID WATER AND ENDMEMBER ABUNDANCES OF VEGETATION DETERMINED USING AVIRIS 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940305: SNOWCOVER MAPPING WITH THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER 940403: SPECTRAL CALIBRATION OF AN IMAGING SPECTROMETER INFLIGHT USING SOLAR AND ATMOSPHERIC ABSORPTION BANDS 940962: DETECTION OF HEAVY METAL CONTAMINATED SEDIMENTS USING IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA 940404: IMAGING SPECTROMETER MEASURED LEAF WATER AND CELLULOSE IN THE SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS PRIOR TO THE 1993 ALTADENA FIRE 940561: CLASSIFICATION OF AVRIS DATA FROM ICELAND-GEOLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940197: USING AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE DATA FOR MULTITEMPORAL STUDIES OF LAND DEGRADATION 940530: SEASONAL CHANGES OBSERVED IN AVIR1S IMAGES OF JASPER RIDGE, CALIFORNIA 940668: EFFECTS OF CHANGE IN SPECTRAL RESOLUTION AND CHANNEL POSITION ON RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODEL-BASED ATMOSPlIERIC CORRECTION TECItNIQUES APPLIED TO IMAGING SPECTROMETERS 940712: SMALL CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR HYPERSPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING DATA 940754: THE EFFECTS OF SUB-VISUAL CIRRUS CLOUDS ON IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA 940755: MONITORING AND MODELING SEMI-ARID LANDSCAPE RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE 941111: GEOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER (AVlRlS): TECHNIQUE AND RESULTS 940016: SIMULTANEOUS EVALUATION OF SPECTRAL FEATURELESS CONSTITUENTS IN SOILS USING NEAR INFRARED ANALYSIS (NIRA) TECHNIQUE 940209: DETECTION OF TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL VARIATlONS OF CHLOROPHYLL IN LAKES WITH AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETRY 940277: HIGH DIMENSIONAL FEATURE REDUCTION VIA PROJECTION PURSUIT 940278: EFFECT OF RADIANCE-TO-REFLECTANCE TRANSFORMATION AND ATMOSPHERE REMOVAL ON MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF HIGH-DIMENSIONAL REMOTE SENSING DATA 940410: DETERMINATION OF PARTICULATE RESUSPENSION AND MIXING NEAR AN OCEAN OUTFALL USING HYPERSPECTRAL OCEAN COLOR IMAGERY 940603: ANALYSIS OF POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATA FROM VEGETATED AREAS 940784: MODELLING AND MODEL VERIFICATION OF THE SPECTRAL REFLECTANCE OF SOIL UNDER VARYING MOISTURE CONDITIONS 940814: GEOLOGICAL MAPPING OF DEATII VALLEY USING AN AIRBORNE ASTER SIMULATOR WT01-B02-223IA055-000915-B046-159http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/backscat.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195707 text/html 18747HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:55:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " backscatter" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " backscatter" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940012: THE VIERS RADAR BACKSCATTER MODEL DEVELOPMENT FOR WIND FIELD RETRIEVAL 940331: CANOPY PENETRATION STUDY FOR TROPICAL RAINFORESTS: MODELED RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM AMAZON FLOODPLAIN FORESTS AT C-, L-, AND P-BAND 940332: DETECTING FLOODED OR NONFLOODED GROUND UNDERNEATH FLOODPLAIN FORESTS IN AMAZON BY RADAR BACKSCATTER: MODELING RESULTS 940963: PRECISE SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL MEASUREMENT OF GRAVITY-CAPILLARY WAVES AND ASSOCIATED RADAR BACKSCATTER 940877: TESTS OF SOME RADAR BACKSCATTER MODELS WITH MULTIFREQUENCY, POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA FROM THE 1989 NCORDWUK EXPERIMENT 940221: OCEAN MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM THE LOGAN EXPERIMENT 940086: FULL WAVE BACKSCATTER PREDICTIONS FROM LAYERED STRATIFIED MEDIUM 940366: LOW GRAZING ANGLE BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN - THE EFFECTS OF SHADOWING AND MULTIPLE SCATTERING 940256: AN EXAMINATION OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER OF SEA ICE IN THE EAST SIBERIAN AND CHUKCHI SEAS 940498: ON THE EFFECT OF SOIL SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON THE RADAR BACKSCATTER RESPONSES TO SOIL MOISTURE 940875: BACKSCATTER MODELLING OF SKIP-GENERATED INTERNAL WAVE WAKES OBSERVED DURING THE LOCK LINNHE SERIES OF EXPERIMENTS 940214: COMPARISON OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER WITH OPTICALLY-DERIVED CROSS SECTIONS FROM WIND-GENERATED WAVES IN A WAVETANK 940266: COMPARISON OF A POLARIMETRIC SCATTERING AND EMISSION MODEL WITH OCEAN BACKSCATTER AND BRIGHTNESS MEASUREMENTS 940503: RETRIEVING CIRRUS CLOUD MICROPHYSICAL PARAMETERS FROM LIDAR AND RADAR BACKSCATTER 941004: PREDICTING LASFR BACKSCATTER WITH PASSIVE MULTIANGLE MEASUREMENTS OF A PLAYA FOR LITE CALIBRATION 940105: STUDIES ON POLARIZATION SYNTHESIS AND DIFFERENTIAL BACKSCATTER PHASE OBSERVATIONS 940106: TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN RADAR BACKSCATTER COEFFICIENTS OF VEGETATION AND SOIL MEDIA 940151: THE UTILIZATION OF MODELED SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN THE ESTIMATION OF SAR BACKSCATTER FROM FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE 940158: ANGLE AND POLARIZATION DEPENDENT MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM OCEAN WAVES 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940354: MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER, SURFACE FLUXES, AND INFRARED IMAGERY MEASURED FROM A BLIMP OVER THE OCEAN 940491: ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER MODELLING AND INTERPRETATION OF SEA ICE SIGNATURES 940774: DOPPLER SPECTRA OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM THE SEA SURFACE OBTAINED FROM A THREE-SCALE COMPOSITE SURFACE MODEL 940857: A DETAILED STUDY OF THE BACKSCATTER CHARACTERISTICS OF SNOWCOVER MEASURED AT 35, 95 AND 225 GHZ 940860: BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN SURFACE UNDER LOW WIND CONDITIONS 940980: WIND MEASUREMENT RESOLUTION FOR SPACEBORNE SCATTEROMETERS 940453: EVALUATION OF A MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 DATASET FOR HYDROLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940965: STUDY OF THE TEMPORAL NATURE OF THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES OF LEADS DURING SPRING 940037: USE OF TIME-SERIES SAR DATA TO RESOLVE ICE TYPE AMBIGUITIES IN NEWLY-OPENED LEADS 940261: FOREST MODELING OF JACK PINE TREES FOR BOREAS 940617: ESTIMATION OF PENETRATION DEPTH IN A RANDOM MEDIA USING FREQUENCY DECORRELATION OF BACKSCATTERED FIELD 940959: THE COHERENCE OFWlNDANDRADAR DATA OBTAINED DURING THE JOINT US-RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE EXPERIMENT 940967: IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION 940991: RADAR SCATTERING BY VOLCANIC DEBRIS FLOW SURFACE ANALOGUES 940079: RESULTS FROM THE 1993 LOGAN (LOW GRAZING ANGLE) RADAR EXPERIMENT 940159: A RADAR LAND CLUTTER MODEL AND ITS VERIFICATION 940312: SCATTERING FROM OPEN CAVATIES IN A PERFECTLY CONDUCTING SURFACE 940850: SHIP BORNE REMOTE SENSING OF SUB-MESOSCALE OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES ALONG THE NORTH BOUNDARY OF THE GULF STREAM. 940920: SEAWINDS: A SCANNING SCATTEROMETER FOR ADEOS II-- SCIENCE OVERVIEW 940928: ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940982: ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE 941087: GROUND BASED LIDAR CHARACTERIZATION OF CIRRUS CLOUDS Edwin W. Eloranta University of Wisconsin 1225 W. Dayton St. Madison, WI 53706 Tel 608-262-7327 FAX 262-5974 940087: MULTIPLE SCATTERING FROM RANDOM ROUGH SURFACES BASED ON A DETERMINISTIC FULL WAVE MODEL 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren 940408: DETERMINATION OF SURFACE FEATURES ON GLACIERS IN ALASKA FROM ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940504: RADIATIVE AND MICROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CIRRUS OBSERVED BY REMOTE SENSORS AT FIRE II 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940610: ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. 940752: AIRSAR/TOPSAR STUDIES OF TROPICAL GLACIERS IN THE CORDILLERA REAL, BOLIVIA 940804: STATISTICS OF BACKSCATTERING SOURCE DISTRIBUTION OF BOREAL CONIFEROUS FORESTS AT C- AND X-BAND 940819: RADAR SATELLITE SNOWMELT DETECTION IN THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ANTHONY WANKIEWICZ MAXFIELD 940833: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOME DATA PROCESSOR 940845: SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CORRELATION OF LOGAN-1 HIGH-RESOLUTION RADAR SEA CLUTTER DATA 940890: NUMERICAL PREDICTION OF SHADOWING IN EM SCATTERING FROM A ROUGH OCEAN WAVE AT GRAZING INCIDENCE 940978: INITIAL RESULTS FROM THE DEPLOYMENT OF AN ULTRA-WIDEBAND SCATTEROMETER 941050: USE OF AIRBORNE X/C-BAND SAR DATA FOR THE MONITORING OF TROPICAL FOREST AND SHIFTING CULTIVATION 941067: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF FREEZING AND THAWING PERMAFROST IN ALASKA WITH ERS-1 941085: LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WATER VAPOR CONCENTRATIONS IN THE TROPOSPHERE 940009: INTERNAL CALIBRATION SCHEMES FOR A POLARIMETRIC PHASED ARRAY AIRBORNE SAR 940021: ESTIMATION OF AREAL SOIL-WATER CONTENT DURING HAPEX-SAHEL AND EFEDA-SPAIN 940137: CO2 LIDAR: A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT VIEW OF CLOUDS 940174: SIMULATION OF SAR RAW DATA USING SISAR 940182: SAR TERRAIN CORRECTION FOR IMPROVED SOIL MOISTURE ESTIMATION IN A MOUNTAIN WATERSHED 940184: MULTI-STAND RADAR MODELING FROM PRE-BOREAS EXPERIMENT 940309: OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MULTIYEAR AND FIRST YEAR SEA ICE 940329: MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODEL FOR GRASSLAND AND SHORT VEGETATION CANOPIES 940395: CROSS-TRACK AND PROPOSED MULTI-FREQUENCY SAR INTERFEROMETRY: COMPARISONS WITH OPTICAL HOLOGRAPHIC INTERFEROMETRY 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940557: MELTING LAYER OBSERVATIONS WITH RADAR AND AIRCRAFT 940603: ANALYSIS OF POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATA FROM VEGETATED AREAS 940618: AN INVERSION ALGORITHM FOR RETRIEVING SOIL MOISTURE AND SURFACE ROUGHNESS FROM POLARIMETRIC RADAR OBSERVATIONS 940621: ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING MODEL FOR A TREE TRUNK ABOVE A GROUND PLANE 940655: ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS OF INTERNAL WAVES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940657: COMPARISONS OF INTERNAL WAVES AS OBSERVED BY A TOWED CTD AND RADAR 940659: OBSERVATIONS OF INTERNAL WAVES AT X AND KA BANDS, AND COMPARISON WITH MODEL CALCULATIONS 940695: OPTIMUM POLARIZATIONS FOR RADAR METEOROLOGY 940721: THE SEAWINDS SCATTEROMETER INSTRUMENT 940731: COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940745: SHIPWAKE DETECTION AND CHARACTERIZATION IN SAR IMAGES USING WAVELET TRANSFORM 940758: RADAR CROSS SECTION OF THE OCEAN SURFACE WHEN SURFACE FILMS ARE PRESENT: A MODEL CALCULATION USING MARANGONI WAVE DAMPING THEORY 940841: RADAR OBSERVATIONS OF BREAKING WAVES AT LOW GRAZING ANGLES 940859: A 95 GHz AIRBORNE RADAR FOR HIGH RESOLUTION POLARIMETRIC CLOUD MEASUREMENTS 940869: RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE 940876: MODEL VALIDATION FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY OF CROPS AT FELTWELL, UK 940889: ANALYSIS OF SCATTERING FROM ROUGH SURFACES AT SMALL GRAZING ANGLES USING A PERIODIC-SURFACE MOMENT METHOD 940929: MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM FOREST CANOPIES 940949: POLARIMETRIC RADAR SIGNATURES OF OIL SLICKS FOR MEASURING SLICK THICKNESS 940952: HIGH WIND STUDY: A VALIDATION WIND DATA BASE FOR AMI ON ERS-1 940964: MICROWAVE STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF BRINE LAYERS ON HOMOGENEOUS SALINE ICE SHEETS 940979: MODELING THE NEAR-SURFACE OCEANIC WIND VORTICITY 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 941046: GEOMETRIC PROCESSING OF DISSIMILAR MAGELLAN RADAR IMAGES WT01-B02-224IA055-000915-B046-185http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/biomass.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195719 text/html 5619HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:56:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " biomass" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " biomass" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940300: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 940050: RELATIONS BETWEEN OPTICAL AND PASSIVE MICROWAVE VEGETATION INDICES TO CROP BIOMASS CHARACTERISTICS 940736: THE POTENTIAL OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS IN MONITORING FOREST BIOMASS 940514: CIRCULAR POLARIZATION FOR MAPPING FOREST BIOMASS AT P-BAND? 940532: ESTIMATING DRY GRASS BIOMASS RESIDUES USING AVIRIS IMAGE ANALYSIS 940830: PASSIVE MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION BIOMASS 940831: SENSITIVITY OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTERING TO CROP BIOMASS 940149: SYNERGY BETWEEN OPOTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING 940222: COMPARISON BETWEEN PREDICTED PERFORMANCES OF BISTATIC AND MONOSTATIC RADAR IN VEGETATION MONITORING 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940785: APPLICATION OF AN AGROMETEOROLOGICAL MODEL AND LANDSAT- TM DATA TO ESTIMATE ACTUAL TRANSPIRATION OF CORN 940786: YIELD ESTIMATION OF CORN WITH MULTITEMPORAL AND MULTISENSORAL REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940106: TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN RADAR BACKSCATTER COEFFICIENTS OF VEGETATION AND SOIL MEDIA 940904: OPTICAL AND SEASONAL VARIATIONS ALONG THE US MEXICO BORDER: AN ANALYSIS WITH LANDSAT TM IMAGERY 940123: EVALUATION OF AN AUSTRALIAN ERS-1 SAR SCENE PERTAINING TO SOIL MOISTURE MEASUREMENT 940323: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA 940678: SEASONAL EFFECTS ON C- AND X-BAND BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF FINNISH BOREAL FORESTS 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940927: ANALYSIS OF NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHZ DATA OVER VEGETATED LAND SURFACES: THEORY AND EXAMPLES 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940603: ANALYSIS OF POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATA FROM VEGETATED AREAS 940917: SEMI-EMPIRICAL METHOD FOR ESTIMATION OF FOREST BIOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES FROM MULTIFREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR 940928: ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940992: A SCATTERING MODEL FOR THE RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF PRAIRIE GRASS 941030: ASSESSMENT OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (A_par_) USING HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTlON REFLECTANCE BANDS WT01-B02-225IA055-000915-B046-217http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/boreal.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195733 text/html 3386HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:56:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " boreal" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " boreal" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940140: CONSIDERATIONS IN USING SPECTRAL VEGETATION INDICES TO DETERMINE BIOPHYSICAL VARIABLES IN THE BOREAL FOREST 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940606: MONITORING OF CARBON RELEASE IN ALAS- BOREAL FORESTS 940804: STATISTICS OF BACKSCATTERING SOURCE DISTRIBUTION OF BOREAL CONIFEROUS FORESTS AT C- AND X-BAND 940300: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS 940678: SEASONAL EFFECTS ON C- AND X-BAND BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF FINNISH BOREAL FORESTS 940868: USING ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY TO MONITOR VARIATIONS IN BURN SEVERITY IN AN ALASKAN FIRE-DISTURBED BOREAL FOREST ECOSYSTEM 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 940552: CHARACTERIZATION OF CANOPY PHYSIOLOGY AT BOREAS WITH SAR 940439: REMOTE SENSING OF PAR INTERCEPTION AND NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION IN TREMBLING ASPEN AND BLACK SPRUCE STANDS 940531: VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA 940184: MULTI-STAND RADAR MODELING FROM PRE-BOREAS EXPERIMENT 940261: FOREST MODELING OF JACK PINE TREES FOR BOREAS 940269: MAPPING VEGETATION TYPES USING POLARIMETRIC RADAR 940514: CIRCULAR POLARIZATION FOR MAPPING FOREST BIOMASS AT P-BAND? 940971: THE ADVANCED SOLID-STATE ARRAY SPECTRORADIOMETER DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM WT01-B02-226IA055-000915-B047-8http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/canopy.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195820 text/html 11179HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:56:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " canopy" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " canopy" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940576: UNDERSTANDING THE RADIATION REGIME OF A CROP CANOPY: MONTE CARLO RAY TRACING SIMULATIONS 940331: CANOPY PENETRATION STUDY FOR TROPICAL RAINFORESTS: MODELED RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM AMAZON FLOODPLAIN FORESTS AT C-, L-, AND P-BAND 940306: LASER ALTIMETRY WAVEFORM MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION CANOPY STRUCTURE 940225: A STOCHASTIC RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODEL OF A DISCONTINUOUS VEGETATION CANOPY 940919: MODELLING CANOPY RADIATIVE TEMPERATURE SURFACE AND FLUX ESTIMATION 940286: ESTIMATION OF FOREST CANOPY LEAF AREA INDEX USING DIRECTIONAL ASAS MEASUREMENTS 940552: CHARACTERIZATION OF CANOPY PHYSIOLOGY AT BOREAS WITH SAR 940205: VALIDATION OF CANOPY BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE MODELS WITH ASAS IMAGERY OF A SPRUCE FOREST IN MAINE 940228: SIMULATION OF MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURES USING A COUPLED LAND-SURFACE-CANOPY-ATMOSPHERE MODEL 941112: FIELD AND LEAF LEVEL FLUORESCENCE FOR DISTINGUISHING PLANT GROWTH DIFFERENCES DUE NITROGEN FERTIlIZATION IN A CORN CANOPY 940707: ASSESSMENT OF FOREST CANOPY CHEMISTRY WITH ISM 940140: CONSIDERATIONS IN USING SPECTRAL VEGETATION INDICES TO DETERMINE BIOPHYSICAL VARIABLES IN THE BOREAL FOREST 940439: REMOTE SENSING OF PAR INTERCEPTION AND NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION IN TREMBLING ASPEN AND BLACK SPRUCE STANDS 940927: ANALYSIS OF NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHZ DATA OVER VEGETATED LAND SURFACES: THEORY AND EXAMPLES 940307: A MODIFIED AIRBORNE LASER ALTIMETER FOR MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION STRUCTURE 940329: MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODEL FOR GRASSLAND AND SHORT VEGETATION CANOPIES 940384: COMPARISONS OF RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODELS OF VEGETATION CANOPIES WH LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS 940724: ANALYSIS OF TIME-RESOLVED CHLOROPHYLL FLORESCENCE AND BACKSCATTERED SIGNAL FROM VEGETATION 940783: THE REFLECTION FOR DENSE PLANT CANOPIES FROM THE ONE-ANGLE RADIATIVE TRANSFER EQUATION 940332: DETECTING FLOODED OR NONFLOODED GROUND UNDERNEATH FLOODPLAIN FORESTS IN AMAZON BY RADAR BACKSCATTER: MODELING RESULTS 940780: ESTIMATING THE FRACTION OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (fAPAR) FROM OFF-NADIR AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS 940974: AN UNMANNED AIRCRAFT VEHICLE SYSTEM FOR BOUNDARY-LAYER FLUX MEASUREMENTS OVER FOREST CANOPIES 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940463: ESTIMATION OF CONIFER BI-DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE USING A MONTE CARLO METHOD 940678: SEASONAL EFFECTS ON C- AND X-BAND BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF FINNISH BOREAL FORESTS 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940929: MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM FOREST CANOPIES 940992: A SCATTERING MODEL FOR THE RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF PRAIRIE GRASS 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940106: TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN RADAR BACKSCATTER COEFFICIENTS OF VEGETATION AND SOIL MEDIA 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940667: INVESTIGATIONS ON THE BIOCHEMICAL COMPONENTS NIR ABSORTION FEATURES IN AVIRIS AND LABORATORY REFLECTANCE SPECTRA OF VEGETATION. 940669: INVESTIGATION OF LEAF BIOCHEMISTRY BY STATISTICS AND MODELS 940736: THE POTENTIAL OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS IN MONITORING FOREST BIOMASS 940898: A SIMPLE MODEL RELATING DIRECTIONAL RADlATIVE TEMPERATURE TO AERODYNAMIC TEMPERATURE AND SURFACE ENERGY FLUXES 940918: INFLUENCE OF SCALE CHANGE ON BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCES OF A PECAN ORCHARD DERIVED FROM ASAS IMAGE DATA 940984: COLLECTIVE SCATTERING EFFECTS IN VEGETATION CANOPIES AT MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES BASED ON MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS 941030: ASSESSMENT OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (A_par_) USING HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTlON REFLECTANCE BANDS 941076: ANALYSIS OF RADAR SCATTERED SIGNAL FROM TERRAIN BASED ON FRA CTAL CHARACTERISTICS 940181: MICROWAVE SOIL MOISTURE PREDICTION THROUGH CORN IN WASHITA '92 940196: REMOTE MONITORING OF ARID AND SEMI-ARID LANDS 940226: ANGULAR CHRACTERISTICS OF PATHFINDER AVHRR LAND THERMAL IMAGERY AND 0RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODELING 940269: MAPPING VEGETATION TYPES USING POLARIMETRIC RADAR 940287: PHENOLOGICAL CHANGES IN NEEDLE FLUORESCENCE OF DAMAGED AND UNDAMAGED NORWAY SPRUCE TREES 940390: ESTIMATION OF FOREST STAND STRUCTURE FROM LANDSAT TM THROUGH INVERSION OF THE LI-STRAHLER MODEL 940509: FLUORESCENCE SIGNATURES APPLIED TO CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS: CASE STUDIES WITH MEDITERRANEAN OAK ECOSYSTEMS. 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940525: ESTIMATING FRACTIONAL VEGETATION COVER AT THE SUB PIXEL SCALE IN A SEMIARID REGION USING A STATISTICAL MIXTURE MODEL AND REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940603: ANALYSIS OF POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATA FROM VEGETATED AREAS 940604: BIOPHYSICAL PARAMETER RETRIEVALS USING ASAS BIDIRECTIONAL MEASUREMENTS 940703: RADAR MEASUREMENTS OVER THE FRENCH GUIANA MANGROVE 940728: COMPUTATION OF CARBON AND WATER CYCLES IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS FROM A BIOGEOCHEMICAL MODEL WITH REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940903: INFLUENCE OF SUN-VIEW GEOMETRIES ON THE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG VEGETATION INDICES, LAI, AND ABSORBED PAR 940928: ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 941021: DISCRETE FEATURE ANALYSIS OF SIDESCAN-SONAR UNDER-ICE IMAGERY WT01-B02-227IA055-000915-B047-45http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/climate.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195838 text/html 8799HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:57:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " climate" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " climate" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940755: MONITORING AND MODELING SEMI-ARID LANDSCAPE RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940509: FLUORESCENCE SIGNATURES APPLIED TO CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS: CASE STUDIES WITH MEDITERRANEAN OAK ECOSYSTEMS. 940885: MONITORING THE TOTAL SOLAR IRAADIANCE OF THE GEOSPHERE 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940021: ESTIMATION OF AREAL SOIL-WATER CONTENT DURING HAPEX-SAHEL AND EFEDA-SPAIN 940252: GROUND TRUTH STUDIES: USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA IN K-12 EDUCATION 940100: SOIL MOISTURE PROFILE RETRIEVAL BY ASSIMILATION OF MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING AND SURFACE OBSERVATIONS 940128: A GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FINALISED TO THE GOME INSTRUMENTS (ERS-2 MISSION) 940132: ADVANCES IN RADAR METEOROLOGY: AN OVERVIEW 940169: NO SIGNIFICANT TREND IN ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC ICE CONCENTRATIONS FROM 1973 TO 1991 940177: A DESCRIPTION SUSCEPTIBILITY INDEX: USE OF GIS TO ASSESS POTENTIAL DESERTIFICATION 940196: REMOTE MONITORING OF ARID AND SEMI-ARID LANDS 940239: ASSIMILATING REMOTELY-SENSED DATA INTO A DYNAMIC-THERMODYNAMIC ICE MODEL 940246: COMPARISON OF WATER VAPOR MEASUREMENTS BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS AND RAMAN LIDAR 940247: COMPARISON OF TIME SERIES AVHRR NDVI VALUES WITH ECOSYSTEM PARAMETERS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF LAND DEGRADATION IN THE ARID UNITED STATES 940250: STATISTICS OF OCEANIC RAINFALL TO HELP INTERPRET TRMM DATA 940323: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA 940346: SURFACE ELEVATION CHANGES OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET FROM AN ANALYSIS OF SEASAT & GEOSAT ALTIMETER DATA 940399: MICROWAVE LJMB SOUNDING OF THE EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE: UARS RESULTS AND EOS PLANS 940415: VARIABILITY OF GLOBAL UPPER-TROPOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR DERIVED FOR SATELLITE INFRARED OBSERVATIONS 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940460: IMPROVEMENT IN 1985-1993 NDVI TIME-SERIES FOR WORLD DESERT TARGETS USING POST-LAUNCH CALIBRATION 940469: TRMM PRECIPITATION RADAR: CALIBRATION AND DATA COLLECTION STRATEGIES 940504: RADIATIVE AND MICROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CIRRUS OBSERVED BY REMOTE SENSORS AT FIRE II 940574: DEVELOPMENT OF A HIGH RESOLUTION ICE ECHO SOUNDER FOR ARCTIC ICE SHEET 940599: MONITORING ALPINE SNOW COVER VARIATIONS USING NOAA-AVHRR DATA 940602: ANALYZING SPATIO-TEMPORAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACE PARAMETERS FROM NOAA AVHRR DATA 940608: Ralph Kahn and Robert Haskins Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of Technology MS 169-237, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA Telephone: 818-354-9024 FAX: 818-3" 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940728: COMPUTATION OF CARBON AND WATER CYCLES IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS FROM A BIOGEOCHEMICAL MODEL WITH REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940810: A SAR INSTRUMENT FOR GLOBAL MONITORING OF LAND SURFACES AND POLAR ICE 940820: INVESTIGATING THE TROPICAL ATLANTIC VARIABILITY FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER 940847: RAMAN LIDAR PROFILING OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR 940923: STUDIES OF RADIATIVELY-IMPORTANT CLOUDS WITH 8-MILLIMETER WA~ENGTH DOPPLER RADAR 940934: ESTIMATION OF SENSIBLE HEAT FLUX USING A TWO- AND THREE-COMPONENT MODEL DURING THE MONSOON `90 EXPERIMENT 940936: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST. HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL 940937: AN APPROACH TO ESTIMATING SURFACE PARAMETERS AND FLUXES USING MODELING AND MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 940995: AN EVALUATION OF BATS AS A BASIS FOR A RADIOBRIGHTNESS MODEL FOR NORTHERN PRAIRIE 941048: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST-HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL 941053: EVALUATION OF REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES FOR MEASURING CLOUD WATER AND DRIZZLE IN MARINE STRATOCUMULUS CLOUDS 941087: GROUND BASED LIDAR CHARACTERIZATION OF CIRRUS CLOUDS Edwin W. Eloranta University of Wisconsin 1225 W. Dayton St. Madison, WI 53706 Tel 608-262-7327 FAX 262-5974 WT01-B02-228IA055-000915-B047-91http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/cloud.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195908 text/html 11526HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:57:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " cloud" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " cloud" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 941115: AUTOMATIC CLOUD CLASSIFICATION WITH VISIBLE AND THERMAL INFRARED RADIOMETER DATA 940280: AIRBORNE AND SPACEBORNE CLOUD RADAR DESIGNS 940367: DETECTION OF SHIP TRACKS IN AVHRR CLOUD IMAGERY WITH NEURAL NETWORKS 940503: RETRIEVING CIRRUS CLOUD MICROPHYSICAL PARAMETERS FROM LIDAR AND RADAR BACKSCATTER 940526: A MILLIMETER-WAVE CLOUD PROFILING RADAR SYSTEM (CPRS) 940859: A 95 GHz AIRBORNE RADAR FOR HIGH RESOLUTION POLARIMETRIC CLOUD MEASUREMENTS 941053: EVALUATION OF REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES FOR MEASURING CLOUD WATER AND DRIZZLE IN MARINE STRATOCUMULUS CLOUDS 940923: STUDIES OF RADIATIVELY-IMPORTANT CLOUDS WITH 8-MILLIMETER WA~ENGTH DOPPLER RADAR 941026: SIMULATION OF THE EMERGENT RADIATION FROM THE TOP OF ATMOSPHERE, WERE THE BROKEN CIRRUS LAYER IS CONSIDERED 940364: ON THE REMOTE SENSING OF CLOUDS 940754: THE EFFECTS OF SUB-VISUAL CIRRUS CLOUDS ON IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA 941114: AN ASSESSMENT OF SST ESTIMATION ACCURACY WITH ADEOS/OCTS DATA 940926: AIRBORNE IMAGING OF TROPOSPHERIC EMISSION AT MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS 941007: USING THE MOSART CODE FOR ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION 940083: A TWO-PHASE ALGORITHM TO CORRECT FOR ATMOSPHERIC EFFECTS ON THE 85 GHZ CHANNELS OF THE SSM/I IN THE ARCTIC REGION 940504: RADIATIVE AND MICROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CIRRUS OBSERVED BY REMOTE SENSORS AT FIRE II 940797: HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF ICE PARTICLES IN WINTERTIME THUNDERCLOUDS OBSERVED BY A DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 940829: DESCRIPTION OF A RADAR/RADIOMETER METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION TO AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS OVER- STRATIFORM RAIN IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC 940847: RAMAN LIDAR PROFILING OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR 941087: GROUND BASED LIDAR CHARACTERIZATION OF CIRRUS CLOUDS Edwin W. Eloranta University of Wisconsin 1225 W. Dayton St. Madison, WI 53706 Tel 608-262-7327 FAX 262-5974 940005: MARITIME PRECIPITATION DISTRIBUTIONS DETERMINED FROM AIRBORNE RADAR AND MULTI-FREQUENCY RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS 940069: OPTIMUM FREQUENCY OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENTS OF ATTENUATION, PATH DELAY AND COLUMNAR CONTENT OF WATER VAPOR 940103: SHIPBOARD DOPPLER RADAR OBSERVATIONS OF CONVECTION OBSERVED DURING TOGA COARE 940608: Ralph Kahn and Robert Haskins Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of Technology MS 169-237, 4800 Oak Grove Drive, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA Telephone: 818-354-9024 FAX: 818-3" 940004: ASSESSING THE LANG SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE WITH INFRARED AND MICROWAVE DATA 940017: A RAPID TRANSMITTANCE ALGORITHM FOR MICROWAVE SOUNDING FREQUENCIES 940020: CONTRASTING TARGET, STRAY-LIGHT, AND OTHER PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR MISR 940065: A KNOWLEDGE BASED CLASSIFICATION OF MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA OVER THE TROPICS 940117: THE DETERMINATION OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOUR CONTENT USING DOUBLE-FREQUENCY RADIOMETER 940128: A GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FINALISED TO THE GOME INSTRUMENTS (ERS-2 MISSION) 940132: ADVANCES IN RADAR METEOROLOGY: AN OVERVIEW 940137: CO2 LIDAR: A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT VIEW OF CLOUDS 940149: SYNERGY BETWEEN OPOTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING 940150: RETRIEVAL OF RAINRATE OVER ROUGH SEA SURFACES AS MEASURED BY THE ADVANCED MICROWAVE PRECIPITATION RADIOMETER (AMPR) 940179: INCOHERENT DOPPLER LIDAR FOR CONTINUOUS MEASUREMENT OF WIND AND AEROSOL PROFILES 940218: COASTWATCH OPERATIONAL MAPPED AVHRR IMAGERY 940239: ASSIMILATING REMOTELY-SENSED DATA INTO A DYNAMIC-THERMODYNAMIC ICE MODEL 940249: MAPPING MONTANE SNOW COVER AT SUBPlXEL RESOLUTION FROM THE THEMATIC MAPPER USING A NEURAL NETWORK SIMULATOR 940251: INVESTIGATION OF THE VERTICAL PROFILES OF LINEAR DEPOLARIZATION RATIO AND REFLECTIVITY AT S, X AND K BAND WAVELENGTHS 940268: SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS DESIGNS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR OCEAN WIND REMOTE SENSING 940285: AIRBORNE RADIOMETER FOR SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS DURING TOGA COARE 940326: OBSERVATIONS OF A MCS WITH A DUAL-POLARIZATION RADAR 940335: COMPARISON OF MEASURED AND PREDICTED SCATTERING COEFFICIENTS AT 94 GHZ. 940378: IMAGES OF CONVECTIVE CELL-TOP ALTITUDES USING 118-GHZ SPECTRAL DATA 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940466: AIRBORNE DUAL-CHANEL RADIOMETRIC OCEAN SURFACE OBSERVATIONS DURING SCOPE `93 940557: MELTING LAYER OBSERVATIONS WITH RADAR AND AIRCRAFT 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940575: ADAPTIVE RECONSTRUCTION OF SEQUENTIAL AVHRR IMAGERY OF TEXAS VIA DYNAMIC COMPOSITING USING EXPONENTIALLY WEIGHTED POLYNOMIAL FUNCTION 940628: RADAR BACKSCATTERING STUDIES OF RICE FIELDS USING ERS-1 SAR DATA 940703: RADAR MEASUREMENTS OVER THE FRENCH GUIANA MANGROVE 940752: AIRSAR/TOPSAR STUDIES OF TROPICAL GLACIERS IN THE CORDILLERA REAL, BOLIVIA 940795: STEREO PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF AEROSOL TRANSPORT AND DIFFUSION 940882: mm-WAVE SPECTROSCOPY OF STRATOSPHERIC TRACE GASES AT THE SOUTH POLE OVER AN 11-MONTH CYCLE O3, N20, HNO3, ClO and NO2. 940902: DIRECTIONAL VEGETATION INDEX INTERACTIONS IN ASAS IMAGERY 940935: IMPROVEMENT OF RAINFALL ESTIMATES IN ARID AREAS USING METEOSAT AND TOVS DATA 941020: REMOTE SENSING THROUGH CIRRUS CLOUDS: VISUAL AND SUB-VISUAL 941081: REMOTE MEASUREMENTS AND COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION WT01-B02-229IA055-000915-B047-121http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/earth.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195924 text/html 22829HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:58:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " earth" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " earth" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940911: SPACE SHUTTLE EARTH OBSERVATIONS DIGITAL DATA BASE 940345: SCATTERING FROM BURIED DlELECTRIC OBJECTS IN THE PRESENCE OF AN AIR-EARTH INTERFACE: A METHOD OF MOMENTS TECHNIQUE 940582: EMISSIONS FROM ORBITING TETHERED SATELLITE SYSTEMS TO THE EARTH'S SURFACE: DATA ANALYSIS. 940208: INTERPRETATION OF TIME-DOMAIN INDUCED POLARIZATION AND RESISTIVITY DATA FOR EARTH MODELING 940122: EARTH CRUST TENSION AND RECENT GEODYNAMIC ACTIVITY OF THE STRAIT OF SICILY 940399: MICROWAVE LJMB SOUNDING OF THE EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE: UARS RESULTS AND EOS PLANS 940801: TWO-DIMENSIONAL APERTURE SYNTHESIS RADIOMETERS IN A LOW EARTH ORBIT MISSION AND INSTRUMENT ANALYSIS 940855: END-TO-END SPECTRAL RESPONSE CHARACTERIZATION OF THE CLOUDS AND THE EARTH'S RADIANT ENERGY SYSTEM SENSORS FROM 0.3 TO 200 mm 940838: L-BAND SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETERS FOR EARTH REMOTE SENSING 940054: HORIZON SENSOR-BASED 14-16 MICRON RADIATION MEASUREMENTS FROM IRS-lB 940759: AN EARLY EOS PROGRESS REPORT 940913: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY-A CLASSROOM RESOURCE 940014: REMOTE SENSING OF TROPOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY 940271: THE SIR-C EDUCATION PROGRAM (SIR-CED) 940293: CRUSH: A COMPARATIVE LOSSLESS COMPRESSION PACKAGE 940674: TEACHING WITH SATELLITE DIRECT READOUT 940794: ANALYSIS OF MULTI-INCIDENCE ANGLE SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER DATA FROM THE DMSP SSM/I 940902: DIRECTIONAL VEGETATION INDEX INTERACTIONS IN ASAS IMAGERY 940912: NASA-SPONSORED EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH INITIATIVE 940914: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY ON LASER DISC: A WINNING COMBINATION FOR THE CLASSROOM 940252: GROUND TRUTH STUDIES: USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA IN K-12 EDUCATION 940283: ASF DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR RADARSAT/ERS-2 940426: AN AUTOMATED METHOD FOR MAKING MOSAIC OUT OF NOAA/AVHRR IMAGES FOR GLOBAL MONITORING 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940542: AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM AIRBORNE POLDER DATA BY MULTIPLE SCATTERING MODEL 940585: THE GERMAN PROCESSING AND ARCHIVING CENTER FOR ENVISAT 940691: AN EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF LIGHT SCATTERING MECHANISMS FROM SOILS USING POLARIZED BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE 940741: FREQUENCY SELECTION AND MULTIPOLARIMETRY FOR HARD TARGET DETECTION 940755: MONITORING AND MODELING SEMI-ARID LANDSCAPE RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE 940909: LIMITS OF SPACE BASED REMOTE SENSING FOR SOURCE CHARACTERIZATION 941006: DEVELOPMENT OF AN AEROSOL OPACITY RETRIEVAL ALGORITHM FOR USE WITH MULTI-ANGLE LAND SURFACE IMAGES 940004: ASSESSING THE LANG SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE WITH INFRARED AND MICROWAVE DATA 940015: VISIBLE AND NEAR INFRARED (0.4-1.1\\mu m) ANALYSIS OF ARID AND SEMIARID SOILS 940016: SIMULTANEOUS EVALUATION OF SPECTRAL FEATURELESS CONSTITUENTS IN SOILS USING NEAR INFRARED ANALYSIS (NIRA) TECHNIQUE 940017: A RAPID TRANSMITTANCE ALGORITHM FOR MICROWAVE SOUNDING FREQUENCIES 940019: DESIGN OF NEW PHOTODIODE STANDARDS FOR USE IN THE MISR IN-FLIGHT CALIBRATOR 940020: CONTRASTING TARGET, STRAY-LIGHT, AND OTHER PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR MISR 940002: THE AIRSAR-93 AND SAREX-92 CAMPAIGNS IN GUYANA AND COLUMBIA 940036: EXPORT OF OZONE AND ITS PRECURSORS FROM NORTH AMERICA TO THE GLOBAL TROPOSPHERE 940045: INDUCED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD ASSOCIATED WITH WAKES - SIGNAL PROCESSING ASPECTS 940071: A REMOTE SENSING MONITORING SYSTEM FOR A COLONIZATION AREA IN TROPICAL RAIN FOREST 940092: SELF-CONSISTENT MEASUREMENTS OF DIFFERENTIAL PHASE AND DIFFERENTIAL REFLECTIVlTY IN RAIN 940094: INDOOR EXPERIMENT OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL SUPERSYNTHESIS RADIOMETER 940128: A GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FINALISED TO THE GOME INSTRUMENTS (ERS-2 MISSION) 940134: THE OUTCOMES OF EMPLOYMENT OF NEW INSTRUMENT AND SOFTWARE OF THERMAL REMOTE SENSING AT SEARCH OF OIL AND GAS DEPOSITS 940135: ON OPPORTUNITY OF ASSESSMENT OF UNDERWATER SOLAR RADIATION IN THE GLOBAL OCEAN ON SATELLITE DATA. 940142: ICE LEAD ORIENTATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE WINTER BEAUFORT SEA 940143: RAY PATHS IN REFRACTIVE RANDOM MEDIA 940150: RETRIEVAL OF RAINRATE OVER ROUGH SEA SURFACES AS MEASURED BY THE ADVANCED MICROWAVE PRECIPITATION RADIOMETER (AMPR) 940156: MARINE MODIFICATIONS TO LOWTRAN RADIANCE PREDICTIONS 940170: IMAGING TARGETS EMBEDDED IN A LOSSY HALF-SPACE WITH SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR 940175: THE DOPPLER PROPERTIES OF THE ELLIPTICAL ORBITING RADAR 940176: SPECTRAL ERROR CHARACTERIZATION AND DATABASE DEVELOPMENT 940196: REMOTE MONITORING OF ARID AND SEMI-ARID LANDS 940212: PROPOSED ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION FOR THE SOLAR-REFLECTIVE BANDS OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER 940213: ABSOLUTE-RADIO CALIBRATION OF LANDSAT-5 THEMATIC MAPPER AND THE PROPOSED CALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER 940216: AN INTEGRATED DATA BASE APPROACH IN SUPPORT OF REMOTE SENSING STUDIES OF AGRICULTURAL AREAS 940222: COMPARISON BETWEEN PREDICTED PERFORMANCES OF BISTATIC AND MONOSTATIC RADAR IN VEGETATION MONITORING 940239: ASSIMILATING REMOTELY-SENSED DATA INTO A DYNAMIC-THERMODYNAMIC ICE MODEL 940272: CLASSIFICATION OF THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST USING JERS-1 SAR DATA 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren 940280: AIRBORNE AND SPACEBORNE CLOUD RADAR DESIGNS 940308: OPTICAL AND MICROWAVE RESPONSE TO THERMALLY DYNAMIC SALINE ICE SHEETS 940309: OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MULTIYEAR AND FIRST YEAR SEA ICE 940311: DETERMINATION OF WIND SPEED, WIND DIRECTION AND ATMOSPHERIC STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR DATA DURING NORCSEX'91 940324: RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF AIRBORNE SAR IMAGERY 940330: A SNOW INDEX FOR THE LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER AND MODERATE RESOLUTION IMAGING SPECTRORADIOMETER 940356: ASTER ROUDN-ROBIN RADIOMETERS FOR THE PREFLIGHT CROSS-CALIBRATION OF EOS AM1 INSTRUMENTS 940357: BEYOND THE OBVIOUS: SOME REFLECTIONS 940358: A PLEA FOR RADAR BRIGHTNESS 940376: FIELD OF VIEW CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE 940381: PASSIVE MICROWAVE HUMIDITY PROFILE RETRIEVALS USING NEURAL NETWORKS 940387: A HYBRID NEURAL NETWORK MODEL EOR CLASSIFICATION OF MULTIANGLE AND MULTISPECTRAL ASAS RADIANCE MEASUREMENTS 940397: MULTI-TEMPORAL COMPARISONS OF ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA FOR LAND APPLICATIONS 940398: UARS MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER OBSERVATIONS OF UPPER ATMOSPHERE OZONE AND CHLORINE MONOXIDE. 940416: ESTIMATORS AND DISTRIBUTIONS IN SINGLE AND MULTI-LOOK POLARIMETRIC AND INTERFEROMETRIC DATA 940420: STATISTICAL BEHAVIOR OF A MULTIPARAMETER POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATASET 940423: A SHORTWAVE RADIATION MODEL FOR RADIOMETRIC CORRECTION OF OPTICAL SATELLITE DATA IN RUGGED TERRAIN 940469: TRMM PRECIPITATION RADAR: CALIBRATION AND DATA COLLECTION STRATEGIES 940472: CONSTRUCTION OF AN AIRBORNE 93 GHz IMAGING RADIOMETER 940481: RADIOSITY BASED MODEL FOR TERRAIN EFFECTS ON MULTI-ANGULAR VIEWS 940520: PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS OF CHLORINE MONOXIDE MEASUREMENTS MADE BY THE GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RECEIVER OF THE PLATEAU DE BURE, FRANCE 940525: ESTIMATING FRACTIONAL VEGETATION COVER AT THE SUB PIXEL SCALE IN A SEMIARID REGION USING A STATISTICAL MIXTURE MODEL AND REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940528: THE ALASKA SAR FACILITY: AN INTRODUCTION 940534: A NEW APPROACH IN REMOTE SENSING IMAGE ANALYSIS FOR NATURAL ENVIRONMENT CARTOGRAPHY 940595: QUEST: AN ENVIRONMENT FOR CONTENT-BASED ACCESS TO GEOSCIENCE DATASETS 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940696: KA-BAND PROPAGATION MEASUREMENTS FROM THE ADVANCED COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY SATELLITE (ACTS) 940731: COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940732: SEGMENTATION BASED CHANGE DETECTION IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940735: OPTIMIZATION METHOD FOR B/H RATIO DETERMINATION TAKING OCCLUSION EFFECT AND MTF DEGRADATION DUE TO ATMOSPHERE INTO ACCOUNT 940753: GEOMETRIC MIXTURE ANALYSIS OF IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA 940754: THE EFFECTS OF SUB-VISUAL CIRRUS CLOUDS ON IMAGING SPECTROMETRY DATA 940756: COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE MULTISPECTRAL IMAGERY FOR APPLICATIONS REQUIRING HIGH-QUALITY RADIOMETRY 940815: ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OVER THE OSAKA BAY AREA BY SATELLITE 940816: AEROSOL RETRIEVAL BASED ON PHOTOPOLARIMETRY 940854: CROSS CALIBRATION OF A BLACKBODY STANDARD WITH AN ACTIVE CAVITY RADIOMETER 940869: RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE 940870: ESTIMATION OF WIND SPPED AND WIND DIRECTION FROM ERS-1 IMAGERY 940871: SIMULATION OF SAR IMAGES OF SUBMESOSCALE OCEAN PHENOMENA 940885: MONITORING THE TOTAL SOLAR IRAADIANCE OF THE GEOSPHERE 940901: A SYSTEMS BASED MODIFICATION OF THE NDVI TO MINIMIZE SOIL AND ATMOSPHERIC NOISE 940908: MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA 940939: A MULTIFRACTAL APPROACH FOR TERRAIN CHARACTERIZATION AND CLASSIFICATION ON SAR IMAGES 940948: COMPARISON OF LONG VALLEY TOPSAR DATA WITH KINEMATIC GPS SURVEY MEASUREMENTS 940955: RETRIEVAL OF SURFACE REFLECTANCE AND ATMOSPHERIC PROPERTIES USING ASAS IMAGERY 940963: PRECISE SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL MEASUREMENT OF GRAVITY-CAPILLARY WAVES AND ASSOCIATED RADAR BACKSCATTER 940964: MICROWAVE STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF BRINE LAYERS ON HOMOGENEOUS SALINE ICE SHEETS 940965: STUDY OF THE TEMPORAL NATURE OF THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES OF LEADS DURING SPRING 940967: IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 940975: EXTRACTING SEASONAL PARAMETERS OF SEA ICE MORPHOLOGY FROM SAR IMAGERY: SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF FIRST-YEAR ICE 940977: ENGINEERING PFRORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE TOPEX RADAR ALTIMETER 941028: METHODOLOGIES FOR ESTIMATING THE VERTICAL PROFILE OF REELECTIVITY THROUGH C-BAND DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 941033: ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMS FOR SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE DATA PROCESSING 941055: BAND PASS OPTIMIZATlON FOR TOTAL COLUMN MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC CO AND CH4 USING A LENGTH MODULATED GAS FILTER CORRELATION RADIOMETER. 941076: ANALYSIS OF RADAR SCATTERED SIGNAL FROM TERRAIN BASED ON FRA CTAL CHARACTERISTICS 941088: A MATCHING PROCEDURE FOR REMOTE SENSING IMAGES 941101: SOME ASPECTS OF CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE APPLICATION IN REMOTE SENSING 941102: STEADY-STATE CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE RED/FAR-RED EMISSION RATIO INCREASES DETECTED FROM PINUS STROBUS AFTER SHORT-TERM OZONE EXPOSURE 941114: AN ASSESSMENT OF SST ESTIMATION ACCURACY WITH ADEOS/OCTS DATA WT01-B02-230IA055-000915-B047-163http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ers1.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210195957 text/html 24309HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:58:32 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " ERS-1" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " ERS-1" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940373: PRACTICAL USE OF ERS-1 SAR IMAGES IN POLLUTION MONITORING 940483: CONTRIBUTION OF ERS-1 WIND SCATTEROMETER DATA TO THE STUDY OF TERRESTRIAL VEGETATION 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940128: A GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FINALISED TO THE GOME INSTRUMENTS (ERS-2 MISSION) 940323: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA 940406: GLOBAL VERIFICATION RESULTS FOR TOPEX/POSEIDON AND ERS-1 ALTIMETRY 940543: AN EVALUATION OF ERS-1 PRI DATA IN THE CONTEXT OF THE RAPID ESTIMATION OF CROP ACREAGES IN EUROPE. 940719: PROGRESS IN POLAR OCEANS RESEARCH USING ERS-1 DATA 941067: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF FREEZING AND THAWING PERMAFROST IN ALASKA WITH ERS-1 940063: ERS-1 SAR IMAGES OF ATMOSPHERIC GRAVITY WAVES 940283: ASF DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR RADARSAT/ERS-2 940311: DETERMINATION OF WIND SPEED, WIND DIRECTION AND ATMOSPHERIC STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR DATA DURING NORCSEX'91 940374: ERS-1 SAR IMAGING OF OCEAN FEATURES iN THE VESTFJORDEN AREA 940610: ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. 940628: RADAR BACKSCATTERING STUDIES OF RICE FIELDS USING ERS-1 SAR DATA 940677: MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940711: MODEL FOR ESTIMATING SURFACE ROUGHNESS OF LEVEL AND RIDGED SEA ICE USINg ERS-1 SAR 940775: THE GENERATION AND PROPAGATION OF INTERNAL WAVE FORMS IN THE STRAIT OF GIBRALTAR STUDIED BY ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY AND A NUMERICAL MODEL 940776: ERS-1 SAR VIEWS THE OCEAN: AN ASSESSMENT 940868: USING ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY TO MONITOR VARIATIONS IN BURN SEVERITY IN AN ALASKAN FIRE-DISTURBED BOREAL FOREST ECOSYSTEM 940869: RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE 940870: ESTIMATION OF WIND SPPED AND WIND DIRECTION FROM ERS-1 IMAGERY 940982: ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE 941065: DEM CORRECTED ERS-1 SAR DATA FOR SNOW MONITORING IN ALPINE REGIONS 940056: WAVE EVOLUTION IN THE MARGINAL ICE ZONE USING ERS-1 SAR 940101: CALIBRATION EXPERIMENTS OF ERS-1 SAR WITH ACTIVE RADAR CALIBRATOR IN JAPAN 940123: EVALUATION OF AN AUSTRALIAN ERS-1 SAR SCENE PERTAINING TO SOIL MOISTURE MEASUREMENT 940233: OBSERVING SEASONAL TRANSITIONS ON SEA ICE IN THE ARCTIC USING THE ERS-1 SAR 940391: DTM GENERATION FROM 35-DAY REPEAT PASS ERS-1 INTERFEROMETRY 940397: MULTI-TEMPORAL COMPARISONS OF ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA FOR LAND APPLICATIONS 940408: DETERMINATION OF SURFACE FEATURES ON GLACIERS IN ALASKA FROM ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS 940477: REGIONALIZATION OF SOIL PHYSICAL PARAMETERS USING ERS-1 PRI SAR DATA 940491: ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER MODELLING AND INTERPRETATION OF SEA ICE SIGNATURES 940541: SCANSAR SIMULATION AND PROCESSING USING ERS-1 DATA 940568: MONITORING AGRICULTURAL SURFACES USING ERS-1 MULTITEMPORAL SAR DATA. 940655: ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS OF INTERNAL WAVES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940731: COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940777: ON THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION FOR INVERTING ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SPECTRA INTO OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 940065: A KNOWLEDGE BASED CLASSIFICATION OF MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA OVER THE TROPICS 940253: ICE EDGE DETECTION AND ICE/WATER CLASSIFICATION UTILIZING THE ERS-1 AND TOPEX ALTIMETERS 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940361: INTEGRATED GEOPHYSICAL IMAGING OF THE SUDBURY STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR AND OTHER AIRBORNE GEOPHYSICAL DATA 940453: EVALUATION OF A MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 DATASET FOR HYDROLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940470: DETECTION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES USING NEURAL NETWORK TECHNOLOGY 940679: APPLICATION OF ERS-1 SAR-DATA IN LARGE AREA FOREST INVENTORY 940732: SEGMENTATION BASED CHANGE DETECTION IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940771: CLASSIFICATION OF ERS-1/JERS-1 COMPOSITE SAR IMAGES 940878: RESULTS FROM AN ERS-1 PILOT APPLICATION PROJECT FOR POLAR OPERATIONS 940908: MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA 940952: HIGH WIND STUDY: A VALIDATION WIND DATA BASE FOR AMI ON ERS-1 941012: DETECTION OF SURFACE CURRENT FEATURES WITH ERS-1 SAR IMAGING RADAR 940585: THE GERMAN PROCESSING AND ARCHIVING CENTER FOR ENVISAT 940833: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOME DATA PROCESSOR 940098: TOWARDS OPERATIONAL USE OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RAOAR CAGES IN SEA ICE MONITORING 940709: RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF FAST-DELIVERY SAR IMAGES 940257: EFFECTIVE NUMBER OF LOOKS FOR A MULTILOOK INTERFEROMETRIC PHASE DISTRIBUTION 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren 940678: SEASONAL EFFECTS ON C- AND X-BAND BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF FINNISH BOREAL FORESTS 940082: ACTIVE/PASSIVE OBSERVATIONS OF A P0LYNYA AREA IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940125: SPACEBORNE SAR CALIBRATION STUDIES: PREPARATION FOR RADARSAT 940148: THE INFLUENCE OF ALTITUDE AND LOOK ANGLE ON SAR OCEAN WAVE IMAGING: A PRACTICAL COMPROMISE 940180: ANTARCTIC PASSIVE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES DURING SUMMAR AND AUTUMN 940206: OPERATIONAL USE OF SATELLITE DATA FOR SEA ICE ANALYSIS AT THE US AND CANADIAN NATIONAL ICE CENTERS 940256: AN EXAMINATION OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER OF SEA ICE IN THE EAST SIBERIAN AND CHUKCHI SEAS 940282: ASF SAR PROCESSING SYSTEM OVERVIEW 940422: MAPPING COASTAL CURRENTS WITH SAR, USING NATURALLY- OCCURRING SURFACE SLICK PATTERNS 940447: A SAR PROCESSOR BASED ON TWO-DIMENSIONAL EXACT TRANSFER FUNCTION 940451: INFORMATION CONTENT OF COMPRESSED REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940452: SIMULATION OF RADARSAT SCANSAR FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 940498: ON THE EFFECT OF SOIL SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON THE RADAR BACKSCATTER RESPONSES TO SOIL MOISTURE 940528: THE ALASKA SAR FACILITY: AN INTRODUCTION 940556: MEASUREMENTS OF LAND SUBSIDENCE WITH SAR INTERFEROMETY 940609: SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS'92 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940708: CONTRIBUTION OF MULTI-TEMPORAL DATA TO IMPROVE THE RADIOMETRIC RESOLUTION OF SAR IMAGES 940772: LAND COVER CLASSIFICATION BY SAR 940835: IDENTIFYING AND MAPPING WETLANDS USING COMBINED SAR AND LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER DATA 940849: ACTIVE MICROWAVE MEASUREMENTS OF SNOWCOVER: PROGRESS IN POLARIMETRIC SAR 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 940999: SPACE AND TIME ALIASING STRUCTURE IN MEAN POLAR-ORBITING SATELLITE DATA 941060: AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 941096: A STUDY ON GLACIER MOVEMENT USING SATELLITE SAR AND VISIBLE/NEAR-IR IMAGERY 940012: THE VIERS RADAR BACKSCATTER MODEL DEVELOPMENT FOR WIND FIELD RETRIEVAL 940018: OIL LEAKAGE EXPANSION AND SIMULATION MODEL BASED ON FRACTAL TECHNIQUES 940037: USE OF TIME-SERIES SAR DATA TO RESOLVE ICE TYPE AMBIGUITIES IN NEWLY-OPENED LEADS 940047: VAGSAT: A PROPOSAL FOR A SMALL SATELLITE MISSION FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA WITH A REAL-APERTURE RADAR 940126: SATELLITE OBSERVATION OF SURFACE FORCING OVER THE WARM POOL 940133: FOOTPRINTS OF STORMS ON THE SEA: A VIEW FROM SPACEBORNE SAR 940142: ICE LEAD ORIENTATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE WINTER BEAUFORT SEA 940151: THE UTILIZATION OF MODELED SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN THE ESTIMATION OF SAR BACKSCATTER FROM FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE 940166: EVALUATION OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODELS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SOIL MOISTURE IN TROPICAL AGRICULTURAL SOILS 940167: MULTI-SCALE TEXTURE IN SAR IMAGERY: LANDSCAPE DYNAMICS OF THE PANTANAL, BRAZIL 940178: MEASUREMENTS OF OCEAN CURRENTS WITH SAR INTERFEROMETRY AND HF RADAR 940217: SEGMENTATION OF COMBINED HIGH RESOLUTION OPTICAL AND RADAR IMAGERY FOR THE DETERMINATION OF FIELD INHOMOGENITIES 940238: RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA 940255: ALTIMETRICALLY DERIVED FRONT AND EDDY POSITIONS FOR OPERATIONAL NOWCASTS 940288: ON THE DERIVATION OF COSEISMIC DISPLACEMENT FIELDS USING DIFFERENTIAL RADAR INTERFEROMETRY: THE LANDERS EARTHQUAKE 940346: SURFACE ELEVATION CHANGES OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET FROM AN ANALYSIS OF SEASAT & GEOSAT ALTIMETER DATA 940358: A PLEA FOR RADAR BRIGHTNESS 940392: PHASE-UNWRAPPING OF SAR INTERFEROGRAM WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY OR MULTI-BASELINE 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940454: THE CHINA GLOBESAR PROGRAMME 940461: LINEAR RESPONSE OF SEA LEVEL TO WIND FORCING DETERMINED FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER DATA 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940552: CHARACTERIZATION OF CANOPY PHYSIOLOGY AT BOREAS WITH SAR 940580: A 2D-SPECAN SAR PROCESSOR 940606: MONITORING OF CARBON RELEASE IN ALAS- BOREAL FORESTS 940652: AN OVERVIEW OF THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940654: MULTI-FREQUENCY, POLARlMETRIC AND INTERFEROMETRIC SAR OBSERVATIONS OF OCEAN FEATURES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940810: A SAR INSTRUMENT FOR GLOBAL MONITORING OF LAND SURFACES AND POLAR ICE 940819: RADAR SATELLITE SNOWMELT DETECTION IN THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ANTHONY WANKIEWICZ MAXFIELD 940822: COMBINATION OF INTERFEROGRAMS FROM ASCENDING AND DESCENDING ORBITS 940824: ESTIMATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF COHERENCE IN SAR INTERFEROGRAMS. 940865: MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL 940920: SEAWINDS: A SCANNING SCATTEROMETER FOR ADEOS II-- SCIENCE OVERVIEW 940940: LOCOSAR : A SAR IMAGE SIMULATOR 940975: EXTRACTING SEASONAL PARAMETERS OF SEA ICE MORPHOLOGY FROM SAR IMAGERY: SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF FIRST-YEAR ICE 940976: ROBUSTNESS OF A MATHEMATICAL SYMBIOTIC SYSTEM ON SEGMENTING SAR IMAGERY 940979: MODELING THE NEAR-SURFACE OCEANIC WIND VORTICITY 940983: ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGING FROM SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 941000: SYNERGISTIC USE OF REMOTELY SENSED DATA FOR EVALUATION OF THE BOUNDARY LAYER IN SYNOPTIC STORMS AND FRONTS 941037: INVERSION OF SOIL MOISTURE WITH RADAR BACKSCATTERING DATA 941046: GEOMETRIC PROCESSING OF DISSIMILAR MAGELLAN RADAR IMAGES 941078: INVERSION OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA BY A DYNAMIC LEARNING NEURAL NETWORK 941081: REMOTE MEASUREMENTS AND COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION 941098: ANALYSIS OF DOPPLER AND CORRELATION RADAR METHODS FOR OCEAN CURRENTS VELOCITY MESOSCALE FIELD RECONSTRUCTION WT01-B02-231IA055-000915-B048-1http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/feature.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200015 text/html 10719HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:58:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " feature" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " feature" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940545: A NEW APPROACH FOR FEATURE TRANSFORMATION TO EUCLIDEAN SPACE USEFUL IN THE ANALYSIS OF MULTISPECTRAL DATA. Kulkarni Linganagouda, P.Nagabhushan & K.Chidananda Gowda * S.J.College" 940958: MODEL-BASED FEATURE CLASSIFICATION AND CHANGE DETECTION 941021: DISCRETE FEATURE ANALYSIS OF SIDESCAN-SONAR UNDER-ICE IMAGERY 940203: COMPARISON AND VISUALIZATION OF FEATURE SPACE BEHAVIOUR OF STATISTICAL AND NEURAL CLASSIFIERS OF SATELLITE IMAGERY 940511: A TEST OF AUTOMATIC FEATURE SELECTION IN AVIRIS DATA 941070: FEATURE-SELECTION FOR REMOTE-SENSING DATA CLASSIFICATION 940277: HIGH DIMENSIONAL FEATURE REDUCTION VIA PROJECTION PURSUIT 940302: FEATURE EXTRACTION FROM POL-SAR IMAGERY FOR BADAR TARGET IDENTIFICATION AND CLASSIFICATION 940989: DETECTION, ESTIMATION OF DIRECTIONAL FEATURES ON OCEAN SURFACE IMAGES 940385: A NEW REGISTRATION ALGORITHM FOR OF ASAS MULTI-ANGLE IMAGES 940070: COAST LINE DETECTION FROM SAR IMAGES 940149: SYNERGY BETWEEN OPOTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING 940305: SNOWCOVER MAPPING WITH THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER 940470: DETECTION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES USING NEURAL NETWORK TECHNOLOGY 940561: CLASSIFICATION OF AVRIS DATA FROM ICELAND-GEOLOGIC APPLICATIONS 941095: A LANDCOVER CLASSIFICATION METHOD WITH THE AID OF SPATIAL INFORMATION USING NEWRAL NETWORK 940015: VISIBLE AND NEAR INFRARED (0.4-1.1\\mu m) ANALYSIS OF ARID AND SEMIARID SOILS 940045: INDUCED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD ASSOCIATED WITH WAKES - SIGNAL PROCESSING ASPECTS 940138: GLOBAL AND REGIONAL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANALYSES AT FLEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER 940278: EFFECT OF RADIANCE-TO-REFLECTANCE TRANSFORMATION AND ATMOSPHERE REMOVAL ON MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF HIGH-DIMENSIONAL REMOTE SENSING DATA 940367: DETECTION OF SHIP TRACKS IN AVHRR CLOUD IMAGERY WITH NEURAL NETWORKS 940368: ADAPTIVE MAXIMIZATION OF LOSSLESS IMAGE COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE IMAGES 940374: ERS-1 SAR IMAGING OF OCEAN FEATURES iN THE VESTFJORDEN AREA 940402: PRESENTING THE NASA\\GSFC RAIN-SEA INTERACTION FACILITY 940410: DETERMINATION OF PARTICULATE RESUSPENSION AND MIXING NEAR AN OCEAN OUTFALL USING HYPERSPECTRAL OCEAN COLOR IMAGERY 940421: SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF A DISTRIBUTED FIBER OPTIC SENSOR FOR REMOTE TEMPERATURE MONITORING 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940444: EFFECTS OF RESOLUTION AND SPATIAL PROPERTIES ON TEXTURAL CLASSIFICATION 940446: IMPROVING PERFORMANCE OF SUPERVISED CLASSIFIERS USING A SIMPLE ITERATIVE ESTIMATION PROCEDURE AND ITS CONVERGENCE ISSUES 940448: NEW FEATURES FOR TEXTURE ANALYSIS 940484: THE LMMSE POLARIMETRIC WISHART AND THE LMMSE TEXTURAL VECTOR SPECKLE FILTERS FOR SAR IMAGES 940571: SAT-GIS: A CUSTOMIZED SYSTEM FOR SATELLITE IMAGE PROCESSING, DIGITAL CARTOGRAPHY AND TOPOGRAPHIC ANALYSES IN A GIS ENVIRONMENT, BASED UPON A WORLDWIDE SEAMLESS DATABASE 940572: INTERPRETATION AND PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BLUE-GREEN AND RED VEGETATION FLUORESCENCE 940576: UNDERSTANDING THE RADIATION REGIME OF A CROP CANOPY: MONTE CARLO RAY TRACING SIMULATIONS 940623: AN APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF CLOUDE APPROACH IN RADAR POLARIMETRY 940626: IMPROVING DEM GENERATION WITH ADDITIONAL CONSTRAINT INFORMATION 940639: A SELF-ORGANISING MAP MODEL FOR REMOTE SENSING IMAGERY ANALYSIS 940650: A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF CONVENTIONAL AND NEURAL NETWORK CLASSIFICATION OF MULTISPECTRAL DATA 940685: COMPARISONS OF NEURAL NETWORKS TO STANDARD TECHNIQUES FOR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND CORRELATION 940704: MULTISPECTRAL CLASSIFICATION BY A MODULAR NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 940715: SATELLITE IMAGE CLASSIFICATION BASED ON MULTI-SOURCE INFORMATION-FUSION WITH POSSIBILITY THEORY 940718: MULTISPECTRAL LANDSAT IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING NEURAL NETWORKS AND MULTI-EXPERTS APPROACHES 940731: COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940732: SEGMENTATION BASED CHANGE DETECTION IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940734: POINT PROCESS MODELS FOR WEATHER RADAR IMAGES 940745: SHIPWAKE DETECTION AND CHARACTERIZATION IN SAR IMAGES USING WAVELET TRANSFORM 940800: REPRESENTING FLUXES IN THE ATMOSPHERIC PLANETARY BOUNDARY LAYER ABOVE HETEROGENE0US SURFACES 940850: SHIP BORNE REMOTE SENSING OF SUB-MESOSCALE OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES ALONG THE NORTH BOUNDARY OF THE GULF STREAM. 940887: ANALYSIS OF REAL IR SCENES ACQUIRED FOR SWOE JT&E 940932: VERY LOW SIDE-LOBE LEVEL PULSE COMPRESSION FOR RAIN RADAR 940957: AUTOMATED MULTI-SENSOR IMAGE MAPPING SYSTEM(1) 940967: IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION 941000: SYNERGISTIC USE OF REMOTELY SENSED DATA FOR EVALUATION OF THE BOUNDARY LAYER IN SYNOPTIC STORMS AND FRONTS 941060: AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 941089: A KALMAN FILTER FOR SPECKLE REDUCTION IN SAR DATA WT01-B02-232IA055-000915-B048-40http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/fire.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200038 text/html 2227HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:59:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " fire" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " fire" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940589: ELABORATION OF A WILD FIRE HAZARD MODEL FOR THE EPARCHY OF PYLIAS (SW-MESSINIA, GREECE) BASED UPON REMOTE SENSING AND GIS 940868: USING ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY TO MONITOR VARIATIONS IN BURN SEVERITY IN AN ALASKAN FIRE-DISTURBED BOREAL FOREST ECOSYSTEM 940869: RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE 940404: IMAGING SPECTROMETER MEASURED LEAF WATER AND CELLULOSE IN THE SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS PRIOR TO THE 1993 ALTADENA FIRE 940504: RADIATIVE AND MICROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CIRRUS OBSERVED BY REMOTE SENSORS AT FIRE II 940136: A METHOD FOR ASSESSING THE LOCATING ACCURACY AND DETECTION EFFICIENCY OF OPERATIONAL LIGHTNING SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS 940246: COMPARISON OF WATER VAPOR MEASUREMENTS BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS AND RAMAN LIDAR 940914: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY ON LASER DISC: A WINNING COMBINATION FOR THE CLASSROOM 940923: STUDIES OF RADIATIVELY-IMPORTANT CLOUDS WITH 8-MILLIMETER WA~ENGTH DOPPLER RADAR WT01-B02-233IA055-000915-B048-74http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/flood.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200101 text/html 2095HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 19:59:44 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " flood" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " flood" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940865: MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL 940988: DERIVING ANTECEDENT MOISTURE CONDITIONS FROM AIRBORNE SAR FOR INPUT INTO A FLOOD FORECASTING MODEL 940531: VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940272: CLASSIFICATION OF THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST USING JERS-1 SAR DATA 940300: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940913: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY-A CLASSROOM RESOURCE WT01-B02-234IA055-000915-B048-110http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/forest.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200131 text/html 15433HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:00:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " forest" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " forest" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940515: P-BAND RADAR MAPPING OF FOREST BIOMASS IN BOREAL FOREST OF INTERIOR ALASKA 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940323: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA 940736: THE POTENTIAL OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS IN MONITORING FOREST BIOMASS 940205: VALIDATION OF CANOPY BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE MODELS WITH ASAS IMAGERY OF A SPRUCE FOREST IN MAINE 940272: CLASSIFICATION OF THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST USING JERS-1 SAR DATA 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940679: APPLICATION OF ERS-1 SAR-DATA IN LARGE AREA FOREST INVENTORY 940705: ESTIMATING OF SURFACE TEMPERATURES ON FOREST STANDS USING AIRBORNE MSS EMITTANCE DATA 940929: MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM FOREST CANOPIES 940140: CONSIDERATIONS IN USING SPECTRAL VEGETATION INDICES TO DETERMINE BIOPHYSICAL VARIABLES IN THE BOREAL FOREST 940261: FOREST MODELING OF JACK PINE TREES FOR BOREAS 940974: AN UNMANNED AIRCRAFT VEHICLE SYSTEM FOR BOUNDARY-LAYER FLUX MEASUREMENTS OVER FOREST CANOPIES 940917: SEMI-EMPIRICAL METHOD FOR ESTIMATION OF FOREST BIOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES FROM MULTIFREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR 940383: REMOTE SENSING OF FOREST STRUCTURE AND CHANGE USING ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 940286: ESTIMATION OF FOREST CANOPY LEAF AREA INDEX USING DIRECTIONAL ASAS MEASUREMENTS 940390: ESTIMATION OF FOREST STAND STRUCTURE FROM LANDSAT TM THROUGH INVERSION OF THE LI-STRAHLER MODEL 940728: COMPUTATION OF CARBON AND WATER CYCLES IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS FROM A BIOGEOCHEMICAL MODEL WITH REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940514: CIRCULAR POLARIZATION FOR MAPPING FOREST BIOMASS AT P-BAND? 940868: USING ERS-1 SAR IMAGERY TO MONITOR VARIATIONS IN BURN SEVERITY IN AN ALASKAN FIRE-DISTURBED BOREAL FOREST ECOSYSTEM 941050: USE OF AIRBORNE X/C-BAND SAR DATA FOR THE MONITORING OF TROPICAL FOREST AND SHIFTING CULTIVATION 940071: A REMOTE SENSING MONITORING SYSTEM FOR A COLONIZATION AREA IN TROPICAL RAIN FOREST 940707: ASSESSMENT OF FOREST CANOPY CHEMISTRY WITH ISM 940516: MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS IN TAIGA FORESTS USING ERS-1 SAR 940678: SEASONAL EFFECTS ON C- AND X-BAND BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF FINNISH BOREAL FORESTS 940184: MULTI-STAND RADAR MODELING FROM PRE-BOREAS EXPERIMENT 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940222: COMPARISON BETWEEN PREDICTED PERFORMANCES OF BISTATIC AND MONOSTATIC RADAR IN VEGETATION MONITORING 940300: AN ECOLOGICAL APPROACH TO RADAR MAPPING OF BIOMASS IN INTERIOR ALASKA BOREAL FORESTS 940667: INVESTIGATIONS ON THE BIOCHEMICAL COMPONENTS NIR ABSORTION FEATURES IN AVIRIS AND LABORATORY REFLECTANCE SPECTRA OF VEGETATION. 940722: LAND COVER DISCRIMINATION USING SAREX DATA 940819: RADAR SATELLITE SNOWMELT DETECTION IN THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ANTHONY WANKIEWICZ MAXFIELD 940007: ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK MODEL FOR RECOGNITION OF LAND C0VER TYPE OF REMOTE SENSING 940269: MAPPING VEGETATION TYPES USING POLARIMETRIC RADAR 940453: EVALUATION OF A MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 DATASET FOR HYDROLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940463: ESTIMATION OF CONIFER BI-DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE USING A MONTE CARLO METHOD 940552: CHARACTERIZATION OF CANOPY PHYSIOLOGY AT BOREAS WITH SAR 940681: DIURNAL VARIATIONS OF BACKSCATTERING COEFFICIENT OF BACKSCATTERING PROPERTIES OF PINE TREES AT C- AND X-BANDS 940703: RADAR MEASUREMENTS OVER THE FRENCH GUIANA MANGROVE 941091: DOMINANT PLANT PHYSIOGNOMIES IN THE SOUTH OF THE BRASILIAN PANTANAL 940043: THE DEVELOPMENT OF A LIDAR INSTRUMENT FOR PRECISE TOPOGRAPHIC MAPPING 940207: UHF WIDEBAND SAR DESIGN AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren 940331: CANOPY PENETRATION STUDY FOR TROPICAL RAINFORESTS: MODELED RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM AMAZON FLOODPLAIN FORESTS AT C-, L-, AND P-BAND 940531: VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA 940623: AN APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF CLOUDE APPROACH IN RADAR POLARIMETRY 940803: INVENTORY BY COMPARTMENTS USING RADAR-DERIVED STAND PROFILES 940865: MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL 940002: THE AIRSAR-93 AND SAREX-92 CAMPAIGNS IN GUYANA AND COLUMBIA 940059: ON THE USE OF THE MULTILOOK AMPLITUDE K DISTRIBUTION FOR SAR IMAGE ANALYSIS 940105: STUDIES ON POLARIZATION SYNTHESIS AND DIFFERENTIAL BACKSCATTER PHASE OBSERVATIONS 940136: A METHOD FOR ASSESSING THE LOCATING ACCURACY AND DETECTION EFFICIENCY OF OPERATIONAL LIGHTNING SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS 940196: REMOTE MONITORING OF ARID AND SEMI-ARID LANDS 940274: RESULTS OF 1993 REPEAT-PASS SAR INTERFEROMETRY EXPERIMENTS 940306: LASER ALTIMETRY WAVEFORM MEASUREMENT OF VEGETATION CANOPY STRUCTURE 940385: A NEW REGISTRATION ALGORITHM FOR OF ASAS MULTI-ANGLE IMAGES 940389: NEURAL NETWORKS FOR COARSE-SCALE LAND-COVER CHARACTERIZATION USING MULTISOURCE DATA: ASSESSMENT AND COMPARISON TO A BIOPHYSICAL THRESHOLDlNG TECHNIQUE 940412: ANALYSIS OF ACTIVE CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE FROM DOUGLAS FIR. EFFECTS OF AIR POLLUTANTS ON FLUORESCENCE YIELD AND FLUORESCENCE BAND RATIO. 940420: STATISTICAL BEHAVIOR OF A MULTIPARAMETER POLARIMETRIC RADAR DATASET 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940439: REMOTE SENSING OF PAR INTERCEPTION AND NET PRIMARY PRODUCTION IN TREMBLING ASPEN AND BLACK SPRUCE STANDS 940525: ESTIMATING FRACTIONAL VEGETATION COVER AT THE SUB PIXEL SCALE IN A SEMIARID REGION USING A STATISTICAL MIXTURE MODEL AND REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940553: MICRO CLIMATE, WATER POTENTIAL, TRANSPIRATION, AND BOLE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT OF CONIFERS AND DECIDUOUS TREE SPECIES IN THE CONTINENTAL BOREAL ECOTONE IN CENTRAL ALASKA 940606: MONITORING OF CARBON RELEASE IN ALAS- BOREAL FORESTS 940621: ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING MODEL FOR A TREE TRUNK ABOVE A GROUND PLANE 940622: ARTIFICIAL DISTRIBUTED TARGETS FOR THE CALIBRATION OF IMAGING RADAR SYSTEMS 940637: CALIBRATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE X-SAR SYSTEM 940677: MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940738: MEASUREMENT OF TOPOGRAPHIC SURFACE SLOPES IN POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940804: STATISTICS OF BACKSCATTERING SOURCE DISTRIBUTION OF BOREAL CONIFEROUS FORESTS AT C- AND X-BAND 940811: STATISTICAL MODELS FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA 940834: DETERMINATION OF PROPORTIONS OF LAND USE BLEND IN PIXELS OF A SATELLITE IMAGE 940838: L-BAND SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETERS FOR EARTH REMOTE SENSING 940869: RELATING SOIL WATER MEASUREMENTS AT FIRE DISTURBED SITES IN ALASKA TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SIGNATURE 940908: MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA 940913: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY-A CLASSROOM RESOURCE 940927: ANALYSIS OF NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHZ DATA OVER VEGETATED LAND SURFACES: THEORY AND EXAMPLES 940971: THE ADVANCED SOLID-STATE ARRAY SPECTRORADIOMETER DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM 941056: FLUORESCENCE LIDAR REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION: RESEARCH ADVANCES IN EUROPE 941101: SOME ASPECTS OF CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE APPLICATION IN REMOTE SENSING WT01-B02-235IA055-000915-B048-145http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ice.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200151 text/html 21783HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:00:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " ice" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " ice" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 941086: RADIATIVE TRANSFER IN SEA ICE AND THE MEASUREMENT OF IN-ICE OFTICAL PROFILES 940574: DEVELOPMENT OF A HIGH RESOLUTION ICE ECHO SOUNDER FOR ARCTIC ICE SHEET 940191: A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL FOR THE LABRADOR PACK ICE 940975: EXTRACTING SEASONAL PARAMETERS OF SEA ICE MORPHOLOGY FROM SAR IMAGERY: SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF FIRST-YEAR ICE 940264: POLARIMETRIC BACKSCATTERING FROM THIN SALINE ICE RELATED TO ICE PHYSICAL AND MORPHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS 940038: DETERMINATION OF ICE AGE: A PROPOSED SCHEME FOR A RADARSAT SEA ICE GEOPHYSICAL PROCESSOR SYSTEM 940236: UTILIZING THE DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF SEA ICE FOR DETERMINING ICE THICKNESS DISTRIBUTIONS IN SAR IMAGERY 940189: OPERATIONAL USE OF SSM/I ICE CONCENTRATION IN THE INITIALIZATION OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL 940190: TESTING OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL IN A SEA ICE FORECASTING SYSTEM 940206: OPERATIONAL USE OF SATELLITE DATA FOR SEA ICE ANALYSIS AT THE US AND CANADIAN NATIONAL ICE CENTERS 940495: AIRBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF BALTIC SEA ICE 940253: ICE EDGE DETECTION AND ICE/WATER CLASSIFICATION UTILIZING THE ERS-1 AND TOPEX ALTIMETERS 940263: POLARIMETRlC BACKSCATTERING SIGNATURES FROM THIN SALINE ICE UNDER CONTROLLED LABORATORY CONDITIONS 940400: THE DISTRIBUTION OF BIOGENIC MATERIAL IN ARCTIC SEA ICE 940597: LASER PROPAGATION IN SALT WATER ICE 941060: AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 940056: WAVE EVOLUTION IN THE MARGINAL ICE ZONE USING ERS-1 SAR 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940151: THE UTILIZATION OF MODELED SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN THE ESTIMATION OF SAR BACKSCATTER FROM FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE 940610: ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. 940711: MODEL FOR ESTIMATING SURFACE ROUGHNESS OF LEVEL AND RIDGED SEA ICE USINg ERS-1 SAR 940915: OBSERVED AND SIMULATED ICE MOTION FOR AN ANNUAL CYCLE IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940964: MICROWAVE STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF BRINE LAYERS ON HOMOGENEOUS SALINE ICE SHEETS 940309: OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MULTIYEAR AND FIRST YEAR SEA ICE 941021: DISCRETE FEATURE ANALYSIS OF SIDESCAN-SONAR UNDER-ICE IMAGERY 940098: TOWARDS OPERATIONAL USE OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RAOAR CAGES IN SEA ICE MONITORING 940476: MICROWAVE EMISSION FROM NEW AND YOUNG CONGELATION SALINE ICE 940609: SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS'92 940689: AN EXPERMENTAL STUDY OF RELATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS FROM SURFACE AND VOLUME SCATTERING MECHANISMS IN SALINE ICE 940694: BACKSCATTERING FROM SEA ICE WITH VERTICAL STRUCTURAL VALUATION: A MODEL ANALYSIS 940319: HEIGHT AND LARGE-SCALE HEIGHT ROUGHNESS INFORMATION FROM CCRS INTERFEROMETRIC SAR DATA OF ARCTIC SEA ICE. 940642: INVERSION ALGORITHMS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE 940719: PROGRESS IN POLAR OCEANS RESEARCH USING ERS-1 DATA 940037: USE OF TIME-SERIES SAR DATA TO RESOLVE ICE TYPE AMBIGUITIES IN NEWLY-OPENED LEADS 940596: DOES SNOW COVER MASK THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURE OF SEA ICE? 940969: EARLY STAGES OF SEA ICE GROWTH OBSERVED WITH SATELLITE DATA 940239: ASSIMILATING REMOTELY-SENSED DATA INTO A DYNAMIC-THERMODYNAMIC ICE MODEL 940256: AN EXAMINATION OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER OF SEA ICE IN THE EAST SIBERIAN AND CHUKCHI SEAS 940346: SURFACE ELEVATION CHANGES OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET FROM AN ANALYSIS OF SEASAT & GEOSAT ALTIMETER DATA 940797: HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF ICE PARTICLES IN WINTERTIME THUNDERCLOUDS OBSERVED BY A DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 940982: ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE 940491: ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER MODELLING AND INTERPRETATION OF SEA ICE SIGNATURES 940549: DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN YOUNG SEA ICE TYPES FROM SINGLE LOOK SAR IMAGE DATA. 940699: A FORMULATION OF MILLIMETER WAVE SCATTERING AMPLITUDE MATRICES FOR ICE CRYSTALS 940040: EXPERIMENTAL DISCOVERY OF SEGNETOELECTRICAL ICE IN THE FREEZEN SAND 940127: SPATIAL TEXTURE IN AIRSAR IMAGE OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET 940233: OBSERVING SEASONAL TRANSITIONS ON SEA ICE IN THE ARCTIC USING THE ERS-1 SAR 940369: APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS FOR DETECTION OF SEA ICE COVERAGE AND MOVEMENTS FROM SATELLITE IMAGERY 940680: RETRIEVAL OF SNOW AND SEA ICE PARAMETERS FROM SSM/I DATA 940690: MODELING INTERPRETATION OF SCATTERING FROM SNOW-COVERED SEA ICE 940965: STUDY OF THE TEMPORAL NATURE OF THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES OF LEADS DURING SPRING 940967: IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION 940093: ESTIMATION OF ICE WATER CONTENT USING MULTI-PARAMETER RADAR MEASUREMENTS 940169: NO SIGNIFICANT TREND IN ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC ICE CONCENTRATIONS FROM 1973 TO 1991 940234: FORWARD AND INVERSE SIGNATUUE MODELING FOR CONGELATION ICE 940452: SIMULATION OF RADARSAT SCANSAR FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 940641: RADIATIVE TRANSFER THEORY FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE 940682: STUDIES ON PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF ICE AND LIQUID WATER PATHS 940840: EXPERIMENTAL MEASUREMENTS AND THEORETICAL BOUNDS ON THE COMPLEX PERMITTIVITY OF SEA ICE AT Ka BAND (26.5-40 GHz) 940142: ICE LEAD ORIENTATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE WINTER BEAUFORT SEA 940308: OPTICAL AND MICROWAVE RESPONSE TO THERMALLY DYNAMIC SALINE ICE SHEETS 940475: ANALYSIS OF SURFACEBASED PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS DURING LEADEX `92 940700: MILLIMETER WAVE SCATTERING FROM ICE CRYSTAL DISTRIBUTIONS 940076: APPLICATION OF A COMPACT RANGE ANTENNA FOR ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM SEA ICE 940180: ANTARCTIC PASSIVE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES DURING SUMMAR AND AUTUMN 940810: A SAR INSTRUMENT FOR GLOBAL MONITORING OF LAND SURFACES AND POLAR ICE 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 940997: FAR-INFRARED ABSORPTION OF CO2 CLATHRATE HYDRATE 940752: AIRSAR/TOPSAR STUDIES OF TROPICAL GLACIERS IN THE CORDILLERA REAL, BOLIVIA 940082: ACTIVE/PASSIVE OBSERVATIONS OF A P0LYNYA AREA IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940230: DETECTION OF VOLUME SCATTERING EFFECTS IN BEAMWIDTH LIMITED ALTIMETRY DATA 940923: STUDIES OF RADIATIVELY-IMPORTANT CLOUDS WITH 8-MILLIMETER WA~ENGTH DOPPLER RADAR 941096: A STUDY ON GLACIER MOVEMENT USING SATELLITE SAR AND VISIBLE/NEAR-IR IMAGERY 940005: MARITIME PRECIPITATION DISTRIBUTIONS DETERMINED FROM AIRBORNE RADAR AND MULTI-FREQUENCY RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS 940168: MAPPING THE DIAGENETIC ZONE TRANSITIONS OF GREENLAND USING THE AAFE RADAR ALTIMETER 940238: RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA 940305: SNOWCOVER MAPPING WITH THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER 940408: DETERMINATION OF SURFACE FEATURES ON GLACIERS IN ALASKA FROM ERS-1 SAR OBSERVATIONS 940504: RADIATIVE AND MICROPHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF CIRRUS OBSERVED BY REMOTE SENSORS AT FIRE II 940557: MELTING LAYER OBSERVATIONS WITH RADAR AND AIRCRAFT 940592: ANTARCTIC POLYNYA AREAS DERIVED WITH SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY AND THEIR IMPACT ON OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE 940765: EFFECT OF SNOW STEREOLOGY ON MILLIMETER WAVE EXTINCTION 940857: A DETAILED STUDY OF THE BACKSCATTER CHARACTERISTICS OF SNOWCOVER MEASURED AT 35, 95 AND 225 GHZ 940859: A 95 GHz AIRBORNE RADAR FOR HIGH RESOLUTION POLARIMETRIC CLOUD MEASUREMENTS 940878: RESULTS FROM AN ERS-1 PILOT APPLICATION PROJECT FOR POLAR OPERATIONS 940885: MONITORING THE TOTAL SOLAR IRAADIANCE OF THE GEOSPHERE 940032: SCATTERING OF MILLIMETER RADI0WAVES BY DRY SNOWFLAKES 940039: LABORATORY INVESTIGATION OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN DIELECTRICAL AND RADIATION PROPERTIES OF FREEZEN SAND 940083: A TWO-PHASE ALGORITHM TO CORRECT FOR ATMOSPHERIC EFFECTS ON THE 85 GHZ CHANNELS OF THE SSM/I IN THE ARCTIC REGION 940137: CO2 LIDAR: A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT VIEW OF CLOUDS 940251: INVESTIGATION OF THE VERTICAL PROFILES OF LINEAR DEPOLARIZATION RATIO AND REFLECTIVITY AT S, X AND K BAND WAVELENGTHS 940260: THE INFLUENCE OF LAYERING AND GRAIN SIZE OF MICROWAVE EMISSION FROM POLAR FIRN 940304: MEASUREMENT AND MODELING OF THE BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE OF SNOW 940318: PROGRESS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CCRS ALONG-TRACK INTERFEROMETER 940325: HEAVY PRECIPITATION MEASUREMENTS AT S-BAND WITH A POLARIMETRIC RADAR 940364: ON THE REMOTE SENSING OF CLOUDS 940472: CONSTRUCTION OF AN AIRBORNE 93 GHz IMAGING RADIOMETER 940607: ARMAR OBSERVATIONS DURING TOGA/COARE 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940675: SIMULATION OF THE RADAR PROBING OF THE MARTIAN SUBSURFACE STRUCTURE 940687: FULLY POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF ROBOTICALLY FABRICATED DENSE MEDIA TARGETS 940819: RADAR SATELLITE SNOWMELT DETECTION IN THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ANTHONY WANKIEWICZ MAXFIELD 940843: INTERACTIVE INTEGRATION OF INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGERY, SATELLITE ALTIMETERY, AND IN SITU MEASUREMENTS INTO THE PRODUCTION OF AN OPERATIONAL OCEAN FEATURES ANALYSIS PRODUCT 940849: ACTIVE MICROWAVE MEASUREMENTS OF SNOWCOVER: PROGRESS IN POLARIMETRIC SAR 940870: ESTIMATION OF WIND SPPED AND WIND DIRECTION FROM ERS-1 IMAGERY 940888: NONLINEAR STATISTICAL PRECIPITATION RETRIEVALS USING SIMULATED PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY 940983: ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGING FROM SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940986: BISTATIC SCATTERING CHARACTERISTICS OF DENSE RANDOMLY DISTRIBUTED CYLINDERS 940987: COMPARISON OF LANDSAT TM AND SAR MAPPING OF ALPINE SNOW AND GLACIERS: RESULTS OF RECENT CRYSYS RESEARCH AT WAPTA ICEFIELD, ALBERTA 940998: EFFECT OF LATENT HEAT TRANSFER ON DIURNAL AND ANNUAL PREDICTION OF TEMPERATURE AND RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF NORTHERN PRAIRIE 941007: USING THE MOSART CODE FOR ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION 941020: REMOTE SENSING THROUGH CIRRUS CLOUDS: VISUAL AND SUB-VISUAL 941071: SLICK DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES 941089: A KALMAN FILTER FOR SPECKLE REDUCTION IN SAR DATA WT01-B02-236IA055-000915-B048-179http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/leaf.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200206 text/html 8315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:00:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " leaf" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " leaf" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940669: INVESTIGATION OF LEAF BIOCHEMISTRY BY STATISTICS AND MODELS 940928: ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940286: ESTIMATION OF FOREST CANOPY LEAF AREA INDEX USING DIRECTIONAL ASAS MEASUREMENTS 940388: MODELING SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN SATELLITE-BASED ESTIMATES OF LEAF AREA INDEX USING A SCENE SIMULATION MODEL 940404: IMAGING SPECTROMETER MEASURED LEAF WATER AND CELLULOSE IN THE SAN GABRIEL MOUNTAINS PRIOR TO THE 1993 ALTADENA FIRE 940414: BLUE-GREEN FLUORESCENCE EXCITED BY UV LASER ON LEAVES OF DIFFERENT SPECIES ORIGINATES FROM CUTIN AND IS SENSITIVE TO LEAF TEMPERATURE 940529: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN LEAF CHEMISTRY AND REFLECTANCE FOR PLANT SPECIES FROM JASPER RIDGE, CALIFORNIA 941112: FIELD AND LEAF LEVEL FLUORESCENCE FOR DISTINGUISHING PLANT GROWTH DIFFERENCES DUE NITROGEN FERTIlIZATION IN A CORN CANOPY 940463: ESTIMATION OF CONIFER BI-DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE USING A MONTE CARLO METHOD 940050: RELATIONS BETWEEN OPTICAL AND PASSIVE MICROWAVE VEGETATION INDICES TO CROP BIOMASS CHARACTERISTICS 940783: THE REFLECTION FOR DENSE PLANT CANOPIES FROM THE ONE-ANGLE RADIATIVE TRANSFER EQUATION 940202: 3D-RECONSTRUCTION OF LASER-INDUCED CHLOROPHYLL-FLUORESCENCE OF BEECH (FAGUS SYLVATICA L) LEAVES 940724: ANALYSIS OF TIME-RESOLVED CHLOROPHYLL FLORESCENCE AND BACKSCATTERED SIGNAL FROM VEGETATION 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940389: NEURAL NETWORKS FOR COARSE-SCALE LAND-COVER CHARACTERIZATION USING MULTISOURCE DATA: ASSESSMENT AND COMPARISON TO A BIOPHYSICAL THRESHOLDlNG TECHNIQUE 940459: CHARACTERIZATION OF COMPOUNDS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE VARIATION IN BLUE BAND FLUORES CENCE FROM NITROGEN DEFICIENT SOYBEANS 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940576: UNDERSTANDING THE RADIATION REGIME OF A CROP CANOPY: MONTE CARLO RAY TRACING SIMULATIONS 940667: INVESTIGATIONS ON THE BIOCHEMICAL COMPONENTS NIR ABSORTION FEATURES IN AVIRIS AND LABORATORY REFLECTANCE SPECTRA OF VEGETATION. 941002: TEMPORAL AND SPATIAL RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TOPOGRAPIlY, ATMOSPIIEUC WATER VAPOR, LIQUID WATER AND ENDMEMBER ABUNDANCES OF VEGETATION DETERMINED USING AVIRIS 940149: SYNERGY BETWEEN OPOTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING 940412: ANALYSIS OF ACTIVE CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE FROM DOUGLAS FIR. EFFECTS OF AIR POLLUTANTS ON FLUORESCENCE YIELD AND FLUORESCENCE BAND RATIO. 940509: FLUORESCENCE SIGNATURES APPLIED TO CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS: CASE STUDIES WITH MEDITERRANEAN OAK ECOSYSTEMS. 940562: REMOTE SENSING AND SYNCHRONOUS LAND SURFACE MEASUREMENTS OF SOIL MOISTURE AND SOIL TEMPERATURE 940563: MEASUREMENTS OF CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE IN SEVERAL PLANT SPECIES IN DIFFERENT AIR POLLUTION AFFECTED SITES IN VARANGER, NORTHERN NORWAY, COMPARED WITH REMOTE SENSING DATA 940572: INTERPRETATION AND PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BLUE-GREEN AND RED VEGETATION FLUORESCENCE 940604: BIOPHYSICAL PARAMETER RETRIEVALS USING ASAS BIDIRECTIONAL MEASUREMENTS 940628: RADAR BACKSCATTERING STUDIES OF RICE FIELDS USING ERS-1 SAR DATA 940728: COMPUTATION OF CARBON AND WATER CYCLES IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS FROM A BIOGEOCHEMICAL MODEL WITH REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940785: APPLICATION OF AN AGROMETEOROLOGICAL MODEL AND LANDSAT- TM DATA TO ESTIMATE ACTUAL TRANSPIRATION OF CORN 940786: YIELD ESTIMATION OF CORN WITH MULTITEMPORAL AND MULTISENSORAL REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940876: MODEL VALIDATION FOR POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY OF CROPS AT FELTWELL, UK 940903: INFLUENCE OF SUN-VIEW GEOMETRIES ON THE RELATIONSHIPS AMONG VEGETATION INDICES, LAI, AND ABSORBED PAR 940917: SEMI-EMPIRICAL METHOD FOR ESTIMATION OF FOREST BIOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES FROM MULTIFREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR 940984: COLLECTIVE SCATTERING EFFECTS IN VEGETATION CANOPIES AT MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES BASED ON MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS 941030: ASSESSMENT OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (A_par_) USING HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTlON REFLECTANCE BANDS 941101: SOME ASPECTS OF CHLOROPHYLL FLUORESCENCE APPLICATION IN REMOTE SENSING WT01-B02-237IA055-000916-B001-34http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/method.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200249 text/html 41754HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:01:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " method" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " method" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940426: AN AUTOMATED METHOD FOR MAKING MOSAIC OUT OF NOAA/AVHRR IMAGES FOR GLOBAL MONITORING 941095: A LANDCOVER CLASSIFICATION METHOD WITH THE AID OF SPATIAL INFORMATION USING NEWRAL NETWORK 940449: TEXTURE ANALYSIS FOR LANDSCAPE RECOGNITION: THE PAPRI METHOD 940160: A METHOD FOR THE CALCULATION OF THE FIELD OF THRE-DIMENSIONAL BODIES WITH A HOMOGENEOUS MAGNETIZATION 940463: ESTIMATION OF CONIFER BI-DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE USING A MONTE CARLO METHOD 940136: A METHOD FOR ASSESSING THE LOCATING ACCURACY AND DETECTION EFFICIENCY OF OPERATIONAL LIGHTNING SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS 940192: A NEW METHOD FOR INHERENT HYDRO-OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS EVALUATION 940829: DESCRIPTION OF A RADAR/RADIOMETER METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION TO AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS OVER- STRATIFORM RAIN IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC 940153: MODELING SURFACE EFFECTS WITH THE PARABOLIC EQUATION METHOD 940598: A GENERAL IN-SCENE PARAMETER ESTIMATION METHOD FOR QUANTITATIVE IMAGE ANALYISIS 940030: NONSTATISTICAL METHOD OF TEMPERATURE PROFILE RETRIEVAL BY SATELLITE RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS IN OXYGEN SPECTRA 940031: TIKHONOV'S METHOD OF THE GROUND-BASED RADIOMETRIC RETRIEVAL OF THE OZONE PROFILE 940068: RADIATIVE TRANSFER IN ANISOTROPICALLY SCATTERING ATMOSPHERES: THE FINITE ELEMENT METHOD 940080: A NOVEL METHOD FOR CO-DIMENSIONAL PHASE ESTIMATION 940345: SCATTERING FROM BURIED DlELECTRIC OBJECTS IN THE PRESENCE OF AN AIR-EARTH INTERFACE: A METHOD OF MOMENTS TECHNIQUE 940735: OPTIMIZATION METHOD FOR B/H RATIO DETERMINATION TAKING OCCLUSION EFFECT AND MTF DEGRADATION DUE TO ATMOSPHERE INTO ACCOUNT 940781: MULTI-DIMENSI0NAL RADIATIVE TRANSFER COMPUTATIONS USING A SCALABLE PARALLEL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DISCRETE-ORDINATES METHOD 940889: ANALYSIS OF SCATTERING FROM ROUGH SURFACES AT SMALL GRAZING ANGLES USING A PERIODIC-SURFACE MOMENT METHOD 940187: A PROXY METHOD OF SOLAR SOFT X-RAY DETERMINATIONS AND RESULTANT NO PRODUCTION AND TRANSPORT 940338: A NEW METHOD FOR WIDE FIELD SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR PROCESSING 940917: SEMI-EMPIRICAL METHOD FOR ESTIMATION OF FOREST BIOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES FROM MULTIFREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR 941072: A METHOD FOR SURFACE TEMPERATURE RETRIEVAL WITH ASTER/TIR 940511: A TEST OF AUTOMATIC FEATURE SELECTION IN AVIRIS DATA 940558: EFFECT OF DOPPLER CENTROID MIS-TRACKING ON THE PARAMETER ESTIMATION OF POINT TARGET COMPLEX SIGNALS 940899: COMPARISON OF TWO SPECTRAL-TEXTURE CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS 940161: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE INVERSE MAGNETIC FIELD PROBLEM OF MAGNETIZED BODIES 940336: MOTION COMPENSATION FOR AIRBORNE SAR BASED ON INERTIAL DATA, RDM AND GPS 940417: EXTRACT OF POLLUTED AREA IN INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX BY MOS-1(MESSR) IMAGE DATA 941088: A MATCHING PROCEDURE FOR REMOTE SENSING IMAGES 940685: COMPARISONS OF NEURAL NETWORKS TO STANDARD TECHNIQUES FOR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND CORRELATION 940818: METHODS FOR THE RETRIEVAL OF ATMOSPHERIC STATE PARAMETERS FROM HIGH RESOLUTION SPECTRAL RADIANCE DATA 940131: A BROADBAND CIRCULAR MICROSTRIP ANTENNA 940278: EFFECT OF RADIANCE-TO-REFLECTANCE TRANSFORMATION AND ATMOSPHERE REMOVAL ON MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF HIGH-DIMENSIONAL REMOTE SENSING DATA 940448: NEW FEATURES FOR TEXTURE ANALYSIS 940522: MULTISCALE ANALYSIS OF SHAPES APPLIED TO THERMAL INFRARED SEA SURFACE IMAGES 940540: CORRECTION FOR QUADRATURE ERRORS 940717: FUZZY SEGMENTATION AND SAMPLE-BASED OBJECT RECOGNITION IN REMOTE SENSING IMAGES 941030: ASSESSMENT OF ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETICALLY ACTIVE RADIATION (A_par_) USING HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTlON REFLECTANCE BANDS 941074: MONOSTATIC POLARIMETRIC CALIBRATION VIA TARGET SPINOR X. Fbregas, A. Broquetas. J. Romeu, L. Jofre E.T.S. Ing. Telecomunicacin Barcelona P.O.Box 30002, 08080 Barcelona, Spain 940061: RETRIEVAL OF PROPAGATION INDUCED ATTENUATION FROM RADAR DERIVED ACCUMULATED DIFFERENTIAL PHASE MEASUREMENTS 940211: SOLAR-RADIATION-BASED ABSOLUTE CALIBRATION OF OPTICAL SENSORS: SeaWiFS AND A DAEDALUS 1268 940212: PROPOSED ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION FOR THE SOLAR-REFLECTIVE BANDS OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER 940213: ABSOLUTE-RADIO CALIBRATION OF LANDSAT-5 THEMATIC MAPPER AND THE PROPOSED CALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER 940235: ESTIMATING FIRN TEMPERATURES IN GREENLAND AND ANTARCTICA FROM DUAL POLARIZATION C-BAND MICROWAVE EMISSION OBSERVATIONS 940471: OPTIMIZATION OF THE SCAN GEOMETRY OF IMAGING MICROWAVE RADIOMETER 940592: ANTARCTIC POLYNYA AREAS DERIVED WITH SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY AND THEIR IMPACT ON OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE 940644: DOPPLER PARAMETER ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS FOR SAR PROCESSING WITH THE CHIRP SCALING APPROACH 940682: STUDIES ON PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF ICE AND LIQUID WATER PATHS 940715: SATELLITE IMAGE CLASSIFICATION BASED ON MULTI-SOURCE INFORMATION-FUSION WITH POSSIBILITY THEORY 940756: COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE MULTISPECTRAL IMAGERY FOR APPLICATIONS REQUIRING HIGH-QUALITY RADIOMETRY 940826: SPOT3: FIRST IN FLIGHT RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION RESULTS 940963: PRECISE SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL MEASUREMENT OF GRAVITY-CAPILLARY WAVES AND ASSOCIATED RADAR BACKSCATTER 941076: ANALYSIS OF RADAR SCATTERED SIGNAL FROM TERRAIN BASED ON FRA CTAL CHARACTERISTICS 940002: TESTS OF DISTRIBUTION - FREE NON-GAUSSIAN NOISE REMOVAL IN SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF METEOROLOGICAL RADAR ECHO 940003: THREE DIMENSIONAL SURFACE RECONSTRUCTION ON A PARALLEL PROCESSOR 940015: VISIBLE AND NEAR INFRARED (0.4-1.1\\mu m) ANALYSIS OF ARID AND SEMIARID SOILS 940065: A KNOWLEDGE BASED CLASSIFICATION OF MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA OVER THE TROPICS 940145: A FUZZY NEURAL NETWORK MODEL (FNN MODEL) FOR CLASSIFICATION USING LANDSAT TM IMAGE DATA 940147: A MULTIBAND ROAD EXTRACTION SCHEME FOR LANDSAT-TM IMAGERY 940159: A RADAR LAND CLUTTER MODEL AND ITS VERIFICATION 940171: IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION METHODS FOR MIRAS 940217: SEGMENTATION OF COMBINED HIGH RESOLUTION OPTICAL AND RADAR IMAGERY FOR THE DETERMINATION OF FIELD INHOMOGENITIES 940314: TWO-DIMENSIONAL PHASE UNWRAPPING OF SAR INTERFEROGRAMS BY CHARGE CONNECTION THROUGH NEUTRAL TREES 940324: RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF AIRBORNE SAR IMAGERY 940365: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED INVERSION TECHNIQUE FOR SAR IMAGES OF OCEAN SURFACE WAVES 940367: DETECTION OF SHIP TRACKS IN AVHRR CLOUD IMAGERY WITH NEURAL NETWORKS 940391: DTM GENERATION FROM 35-DAY REPEAT PASS ERS-1 INTERFEROMETRY 940392: PHASE-UNWRAPPING OF SAR INTERFEROGRAM WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY OR MULTI-BASELINE 940409: A TECHNIQUE FOR LOSSLESS COMPRESSION OF GMS IMAGES 940422: MAPPING COASTAL CURRENTS WITH SAR, USING NATURALLY- OCCURRING SURFACE SLICK PATTERNS 940432: RADAR IMAGE CLASSIFICATION AND MULTIRESOLUTION ANALYSIS 940442: DISCUSSION OF DIFFERENT SOLUTIONS TO THE PROBLEM OF UNCLASSIFIED PIXELS 940464: SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF SHORTWAVE ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION THROUGH COMBINED RADIATIVE TRANSFER AND MULTI-ANGULAR METHODS 940470: DETECTION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES USING NEURAL NETWORK TECHNOLOGY 940485: AN EFFICIENT WATER CONCEPT FOR MONITORING VEGETATION IN WEST AFRICA 940493: COMBINED USE OF SPECTRAL MEASUREMENTS: A PROMISE FOR SURFACE PARAMETER RETRIEVAL 940521: STRATOSPHERIC OZONE MEASUREMENTS MADE BY A GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETER AT THE BORDEAUX OBSERVATORY, FRANCE 940546: SEGMENTATION AND INTERPRETATION OF NOAA-AVHRR MULTI-TEMPORAL NDVI BASED DATA SETS IN TEMPERATE REGIONS 940610: ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. 940620: CHARACTERIZATION OF SOIL MOISTURE USING A MICROSTRIP RESONATOR 940623: AN APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF CLOUDE APPROACH IN RADAR POLARIMETRY 940626: IMPROVING DEM GENERATION WITH ADDITIONAL CONSTRAINT INFORMATION 940648: ESTIMATION OF TURBULENT PARAMETERS OF THE ATMOSPHERIC AEROSOL BY LASER RADAR 940671: INTERPRETATION OF PARAMETRlC MAPS OBTAINED BY MEANS OF "BLUE TO GREEN RATIO" OVER COASTAL WATERS 940679: APPLICATION OF ERS-1 SAR-DATA IN LARGE AREA FOREST INVENTORY 940693: NUMERICAL SIMULATION OF OMNIDIRECTIONAL SCATTERING FROM THREE-DIMENSIONAL RANDOMLY ROUGH DIELECTRIC SURFACES 940718: MULTISPECTRAL LANDSAT IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING NEURAL NETWORKS AND MULTI-EXPERTS APPROACHES 940731: COMPARISON OF SEGMENTATION METHODOLOGIES APPLIED TO ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940732: SEGMENTATION BASED CHANGE DETECTION IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES 940803: INVENTORY BY COMPARTMENTS USING RADAR-DERIVED STAND PROFILES 940825: HOW TO DOUBLE THE SPATIAL RESOLUTION OF A PUSH-BROOM INSTRUMENT 940890: NUMERICAL PREDICTION OF SHADOWING IN EM SCATTERING FROM A ROUGH OCEAN WAVE AT GRAZING INCIDENCE 940906: A HIGH PRECISION SUN PHOTOMETER FOR DETERMINATION OF AEROSOL OPTICAL DEPTH, COLUMNAR WATER VAPOR AND OZONE 940939: A MULTIFRACTAL APPROACH FOR TERRAIN CHARACTERIZATION AND CLASSIFICATION ON SAR IMAGES 940942: STRATOSPHERIC AND MESOSPlHERIC WATER VAPOR DISTRIBU'IION OVER NORTHERN EUROPE MEASURED WITH AN AIRBORNE A-WAVE SENSOR 941003: UNIFIED APPROACH FOR OBTAINING BEST ESTIMATES OF SPECTRAL OPTICAL DEPTHS AND CALIBRATION INTERCEPTS FROM SUNPHOTOMETER DATA SETS CORRUPTED BY TEMPORAL VARIATIONS 941037: INVERSION OF SOIL MOISTURE WITH RADAR BACKSCATTERING DATA 941063: AUTOMATIC MAPPING OF THE VARIOUS TYPES OF LIGNEOUS VEGETATION COVERS ACCORDING TO THEIR DENSITY 941075: OPERATING DECAMETER RASS NEAR N.NOVGOROD AND ITS PERSPECTIVES CONNECTED WITH POWERFUL HF-RADAR "SURA" 941077: A NEURAL CLASSIFIER OF TERRAIN COVERS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA 941099: LASER PROBING OF THE SEA IN THE SECTION OF ATLANTIC 940011: THEORETICAL PREDICTION AND MEASUREMENT OF THE SCATTERING FROM THIN WIRES WITH ONE-DIMENSIONAL RANDOM ORIENTATION 940023: NEW ARRANGEMENT FOR REMOTE VELOCITY MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC INHOMOGENEITIES BY IMAGING AND DATA PROCESSING 940032: SCATTERING OF MILLIMETER RADI0WAVES BY DRY SNOWFLAKES 940034: LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WAVE-HEIGHTS SPECTRA IN THE OCEAN 940039: LABORATORY INVESTIGATION OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN DIELECTRICAL AND RADIATION PROPERTIES OF FREEZEN SAND 940049: DETECTION OF ATMOSPHERIC CHLORINE-COMPOUNDS WITH AN AIRBORNE SUBMILLIMETER RECEIVER 940057: THE ESTIMATION ON WATERSIlED DESIGN PEAK FLOW RATES BASED ON GIS AND REMOTE SENSING TECIINOLOGIES 940059: ON THE USE OF THE MULTILOOK AMPLITUDE K DISTRIBUTION FOR SAR IMAGE ANALYSIS 940077: A NEW APPROACH FOR IMAGE REGISTRATION IN INTERFEROMETRIC PROCESSING 940089: MILLIMETER WAVE MEASUREMENTS AT THE ARCTIC NDSC STATION NY-ALESUND IN THE WINTERS 1992/93 AND 1993/94 940090: INTERFEROMETRIC SAR PHASE DIFFERENCE CALIBRATION: METHODS AND RESULTS 940123: EVALUATION OF AN AUSTRALIAN ERS-1 SAR SCENE PERTAINING TO SOIL MOISTURE MEASUREMENT 940137: CO2 LIDAR: A SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT VIEW OF CLOUDS 940154: VARIABILITY OF COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTIVITY 940157: LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF STRATOSPHERIC OZONE AND TEMPERATURE AT TABLE MOUNTAIN, CA, AND MAUNA LOA, HI, AND COMPARISON WITH UARS RESULTS. 940198: MULTISCALE OBJECTS DETECTING IN THE MM - WAVE IMAGING OF OCEAN SURFACE. 940230: DETECTION OF VOLUME SCATTERING EFFECTS IN BEAMWIDTH LIMITED ALTIMETRY DATA 940231: SMALL SLOPE APPROXIMATION FOR MICROWAVE POLARIMETRIC OBSERVATION OF THE SEA SURFACE 940234: FORWARD AND INVERSE SIGNATUUE MODELING FOR CONGELATION ICE 940245: NOISE RESISTANT ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES FOR SAR IMAGE REGISTRATION AND STEREO MATCHING 940250: STATISTICS OF OCEANIC RAINFALL TO HELP INTERPRET TRMM DATA 940279: NEW PERSPECTIVES ON ACTIVE TECTONICS: OBSERVING FAULT MOTION, MAPPING EARTHQUAKE STRAIN FIELDS, AND VISUALIZING SEISMIC EVENTS IN MULTIPLE DIMENSIONS USING SATELLITE IMAGERY AND GEOP" 940295: LOSSLESS COMPRESSION AND MULTIRESOLUTION DECOMPRESSION OF THE GLOBAL AVHRR 1 KM DATA SET 940305: SNOWCOVER MAPPING WITH THE AIRBORNE VISIBLE/INFRARED IMAGING SPECTROMETER 940311: DETERMINATION OF WIND SPEED, WIND DIRECTION AND ATMOSPHERIC STRUCTURE USING ERS-1 SAR DATA DURING NORCSEX'91 940313: RADAR SENSING OF HYDROCARBON GAS SEEPAGE 940320: CLASSIFICATION OF REMOTELY SENSED IMAGES USING MATHEMATICAL MORPHOLOGY 940321: CLASSIFICATION OF MULTIPOLARISATION AIRBORNE RADAR IMAGES IN AGRICULTURAL AREAS 940327: TRANSMITTED RADIATION OF SEARCHLIGHT IN TURBID ATMOSPHERE 940330: A SNOW INDEX FOR THE LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER AND MODERATE RESOLUTION IMAGING SPECTRORADIOMETER 940353: COMPREHENSIVE MODELING OF THE WIND WAVE SYSTEM WITH WIND-WAVE INTERACTION AND DISSIPATION 940356: ASTER ROUDN-ROBIN RADIOMETERS FOR THE PREFLIGHT CROSS-CALIBRATION OF EOS AM1 INSTRUMENTS 940366: LOW GRAZING ANGLE BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN - THE EFFECTS OF SHADOWING AND MULTIPLE SCATTERING 940382: THE REMOTE SENSING OF THE OCEAN SURFACE AT THE FRONTAL ZONE 940403: SPECTRAL CALIBRATION OF AN IMAGING SPECTROMETER INFLIGHT USING SOLAR AND ATMOSPHERIC ABSORPTION BANDS 940411: WAVE-CURRENT INTERACTION MODELING INCORPORATING WAVE BLOCKING 940415: VARIABILITY OF GLOBAL UPPER-TROPOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR DERIVED FOR SATELLITE INFRARED OBSERVATIONS 940434: COMPARISON OF SIMULATION TECHNIQUES FOR CORRELATED GAMMA AND K DISTRIBUTED IMAGES FOR SAR APPLICATION 940435: CROSS-SECTION ESTIMATION BY SIMULATED ANNEALING 940459: CHARACTERIZATION OF COMPOUNDS RESPONSIBLE FOR THE VARIATION IN BLUE BAND FLUORES CENCE FROM NITROGEN DEFICIENT SOYBEANS 940467: A COMPUTER-AIDED GEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION SYSTEM FOR SUBSURFACE IMAGING 940468: SET THEORETIC ESTIMATION TECHNIQUES FOR INCORPORATING DIFFUSION EFFECTS IN GEOTOMOGRAPHY 940469: TRMM PRECIPITATION RADAR: CALIBRATION AND DATA COLLECTION STRATEGIES 940478: SEGMENTATION OF POLARIMETRIC AIRSAR-DATA FOR SOIL MOISTURE DETERMINATION IN AN AGRICULATURAL AREA 940486: LINEAR MIXTURE MODELLING APPLIED TO AVHRR DATA FOR MONITORING VEGETATION 940489: TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE PROFILES OF THE MIDDLE ATMOSPHERE RETRIEVED FROM MILLIMETER WAVE ATMOSPHERIC SOUNDER (MAS) ONBOARD THE SPACE SHUTTLE MISSION ATLAS-1 940492: TEMPORAL EVOLUTIONA OF PHYSICAL PARAMETERS OVER SALT/HAPEX-SAHEL SITE 940506: APPLICATION OF PARAMETRIC METHODS SPECTRUM ESTIMATION FOR RADIO ACOUSTIC SOUNDING 940509: FLUORESCENCE SIGNATURES APPLIED TO CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS: CASE STUDIES WITH MEDITERRANEAN OAK ECOSYSTEMS. 940524: A STUDY ON WHOLE THREE YEARS DATA ANALYSIS OF NOAA AVHRR IMAGES 940527: LINKWINDS, A VISUAL DATA ANALYSIS SYSTEM AND ITS APPLICATION TO REMOTE SENSED DATA 940531: VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA 940539: PULSE-BASED INTERNAL CALIBRATION OF POLARIMETRIC SAR 940561: CLASSIFICATION OF AVRIS DATA FROM ICELAND-GEOLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940565: PREDICTIVE MODELING OF TROPHIC STATUS OF A TROPICAL RESERVOIR USING GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEMS 940568: MONITORING AGRICULTURAL SURFACES USING ERS-1 MULTITEMPORAL SAR DATA. 940573: PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF INTERFEROMETRIC SAR IMAGE- REGISTRATION TECHNIQUES 940577: PRECISE GEOMETRIC REGISTRATION OF ASAS AIRBORNE DATA: IMPACTS AND RESULTS 940588: SAR SIMULATION OF NATURAL LANDSCAPES 940600: A SYSTEM FOR GEOMETRIC AND RADIOMETRIC CORRECTION OF AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA 940601: GEOMETRIC CORRECTION OF AIRBORNE IMAGING SPECTROMETER DATA 940614: OCEAN WAVE PROPERTIES USING A Ka-BAND 3-BEAM RADAR AND THE LONGUET-HIGGTHS APPROACH 940616: MONTE CARLO SIMULATION OF ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING FROM A HETEROGENEOUS TWO-COMPONENT MEDIUM 940621: ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING MODEL FOR A TREE TRUNK ABOVE A GROUND PLANE 940625: ORBIT REFINEMENT WITH APPLICATIONS TO REMOTE SENSING 940630: ON REMOTE SENSING OF SST FROM SPACE 940640: USE OF FUZZY LOGIC FOR UNSUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION OF REMOTELY SENSED IMAGES 940641: RADIATIVE TRANSFER THEORY FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE 940647: FLUORESCENT SPECTROSCOPY OF OIL POLLUTIONS AND DISSOLVED ORGANIC SUBSTANCE IN NATURAL WATER 940661: INVESTIGATION OF VARIATIONS OF LONG SURFACE WAVE PARAMETERS BY OPTICAL TECHNIQUES DURING JUSREX 1992 940676: MONITORING THE STRATOSPHERIC OZONE PROFILE WITH GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETER 940677: MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940683: SOLVING REMOTE SENSING INVERSE PROBLEMS USING BAYESIAN MODELING TO INCORPORATE INFORMATION SOURCES 940694: BACKSCATTERING FROM SEA ICE WITH VERTICAL STRUCTURAL VALUATION: A MODEL ANALYSIS 940699: A FORMULATION OF MILLIMETER WAVE SCATTERING AMPLITUDE MATRICES FOR ICE CRYSTALS 940700: MILLIMETER WAVE SCATTERING FROM ICE CRYSTAL DISTRIBUTIONS 940709: RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF FAST-DELIVERY SAR IMAGES 940712: SMALL CLASS CLASSIFICATION FOR HYPERSPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING DATA 940714: FUZZY SET TECHNIQUE FOR SPATIAL PROBLEM SOLVING 940738: MEASUREMENT OF TOPOGRAPHIC SURFACE SLOPES IN POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940744: ALGORITHMS FOR THE DETECTION OF SHIPS AND SHIP WAKES IN SAR IMAGES 940751: PERFORMANCES OF THE 3D-SAR IMAGERY 940758: RADAR CROSS SECTION OF THE OCEAN SURFACE WHEN SURFACE FILMS ARE PRESENT: A MODEL CALCULATION USING MARANGONI WAVE DAMPING THEORY 940761: GROUND-BASED MONITORING OF WATER VAPOR IN THE MIDDLE ATMOSPHERE 940764: ELECTRICALLY BASED ABSOLUTE SPECTRAL RADIANCE CALIBRATIONS FOR REMOTE SENSING 940771: CLASSIFICATION OF ERS-1/JERS-1 COMPOSITE SAR IMAGES 940782: AIR POLLUTION MONITORING USING SnO2 SENSORS 940787: NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF WAVE SCATTERING FROM A CONDUCTING CYLINDER IN TURBULENT MEDIA 940788: APPLICATION OF A STOCHASTIC VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLE TO RANDOM ROUGH SURFACE SCATTERING 940797: HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF ICE PARTICLES IN WINTERTIME THUNDERCLOUDS OBSERVED BY A DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 940802: EFFECTS OF A REFRACTlVE ATMOSPHERE ON INTERFEROMETRIC PROCESSING 940817: RETRIEVAL OF TROPOSPHERIC OZONE FROM SIMULATIONS OF SPECTRAL RADIANCES AS OBSERVED FROM SPACE 940821: APPLICATION OF THE HOUGH TRANSFORM FOR AUTOMATED INTERPRETATION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN IMAGERIES 940834: DETERMINATION OF PROPORTIONS OF LAND USE BLEND IN PIXELS OF A SATELLITE IMAGE 940843: INTERACTIVE INTEGRATION OF INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGERY, SATELLITE ALTIMETERY, AND IN SITU MEASUREMENTS INTO THE PRODUCTION OF AN OPERATIONAL OCEAN FEATURES ANALYSIS PRODUCT 940873: RETRIEVAL OF MESOSPHERIC OZONE FROM GROUNDBASED MILLIMETER WAVE OBSERVATIONS 940883: ACCURACY OF PROFILE RETRIEVALS FROM MM-WAVE SPECTRA OF CLO AND N20 940900: A SOIL COLOR INDEX TO ADJUST FOR SOIL AND LITTER NOISE, IN VEGETATION INDEX IMAGERY OF ARID REGIONS 940908: MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA 940916: CORRECTING INFRARED SATELLITE ESTIMATES OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE FOR ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR ATTENUATION 940919: MODELLING CANOPY RADIATIVE TEMPERATURE SURFACE AND FLUX ESTIMATION 940941: MILLIMETERWAVE MEASUREMENTS OF TRACE GASES AT THE JUNGFRAUJOCH STATION 940950: A CONTEXTUAL CLASSIIFIER BASED ON MARKOV RANDOM FIELDS AND ROBUST M-ESTIMATES 940983: ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGING FROM SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940990: APPLICATIONS OF ANGULAR AND FREQUENCY CORRELATION FUNCTIONS FOR DETECTING THE CHARACTERISTICS OF GEOPHYSICAL MEDIA AT MILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS 940998: EFFECT OF LATENT HEAT TRANSFER ON DIURNAL AND ANNUAL PREDICTION OF TEMPERATURE AND RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF NORTHERN PRAIRIE 941032: DETECTION OF SHALLOWLY BURIED DIELECTRIC OBJECTS WITH MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS. 941058: HIGH SPECTRAL RESOLUTION FLUORESCENCE LIDAR: THREE YEARS OF EXPERIMENTS ON VEGETATION 941066: RADAR TARGET DECOMPOSITION THEOREMS AND UNSUPERVIZED CLASSIFICATION OF FULL POLARIMETRIC SAR DATA 941079: ANALYSIS OF SPECTRAL AND FRACTAL PROPERTIES OF A NONLINEAR SEA SURFACE 941097: RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SUB-MESOSCALE OCEAN CURRENTS FIELD BASED ON ALMAZ-1 SAR DATA 941098: ANALYSIS OF DOPPLER AND CORRELATION RADAR METHODS FOR OCEAN CURRENTS VELOCITY MESOSCALE FIELD RECONSTRUCTION 941109: SOME FEATURES OF THE BACKSCATTERED FROM THE SEA SURFACE RADAR SIGNAL FREQUENCY DOPPLER-SHIFT DISTRIBUTION STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS 941110: EFFICIENCY OF SIMULTANEOUS DOPPLER-RADAR AND DUAL-POLARIZATION RADIOMETER SENSING IN ENVIRON-MENTAL INVESTIGATIONS WT01-B02-238IA055-000916-B001-88http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/micwave.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200322 text/html 32850HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:01:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " microwave" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " microwave" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940050: RELATIONS BETWEEN OPTICAL AND PASSIVE MICROWAVE VEGETATION INDICES TO CROP BIOMASS CHARACTERISTICS 940214: COMPARISON OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER WITH OPTICALLY-DERIVED CROSS SECTIONS FROM WIND-GENERATED WAVES IN A WAVETANK 940308: OPTICAL AND MICROWAVE RESPONSE TO THERMALLY DYNAMIC SALINE ICE SHEETS 940830: PASSIVE MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION BIOMASS 940794: ANALYSIS OF MULTI-INCIDENCE ANGLE SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER DATA FROM THE DMSP SSM/I 941035: MICROWAVE SPATIAL SPECTRA OF OCEAN-ATMOSPHERE SYSTEM 940471: OPTIMIZATION OF THE SCAN GEOMETRY OF IMAGING MICROWAVE RADIOMETER 940592: ANTARCTIC POLYNYA AREAS DERIVED WITH SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY AND THEIR IMPACT ON OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE 940792: MEASUREMENT OF OCEANIC WIND VECTOR USING SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS 940793: MICROWAVE RADIATION PULSE SCATTERING BY A WATER DROP IN THE ATMOSPHERE 940983: ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGING FROM SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940004: ASSESSING THE LANG SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND MOISTURE WITH INFRARED AND MICROWAVE DATA 940095: MICROWAVE RADIOMETRY ON BARE SOILS : COMPARISON OF VARIOUS EMISSION MODELS OF LAYERED MEDIA WITH MEASUREMENTS 940149: SYNERGY BETWEEN OPOTICAL AND MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING FOR CROP GROWTH MONITORING 940150: RETRIEVAL OF RAINRATE OVER ROUGH SEA SURFACES AS MEASURED BY THE ADVANCED MICROWAVE PRECIPITATION RADIOMETER (AMPR) 940181: MICROWAVE SOIL MOISTURE PREDICTION THROUGH CORN IN WASHITA '92 940354: MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER, SURFACE FLUXES, AND INFRARED IMAGERY MEASURED FROM A BLIMP OVER THE OCEAN 940495: AIRBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF BALTIC SEA ICE 940519: REMOTE SENSING OF STRATOSPHERIC OZONE BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS 940596: DOES SNOW COVER MASK THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURE OF SEA ICE? 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940180: ANTARCTIC PASSIVE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES DURING SUMMAR AND AUTUMN 940228: SIMULATION OF MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURES USING A COUPLED LAND-SURFACE-CANOPY-ATMOSPHERE MODEL 940229: FIELD PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS OF SNOWPACK AT 37 GHz 940231: SMALL SLOPE APPROXIMATION FOR MICROWAVE POLARIMETRIC OBSERVATION OF THE SEA SURFACE 940246: COMPARISON OF WATER VAPOR MEASUREMENTS BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS AND RAMAN LIDAR 940260: THE INFLUENCE OF LAYERING AND GRAIN SIZE OF MICROWAVE EMISSION FROM POLAR FIRN 940268: SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS DESIGNS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR OCEAN WIND REMOTE SENSING 940381: PASSIVE MICROWAVE HUMIDITY PROFILE RETRIEVALS USING NEURAL NETWORKS 940475: ANALYSIS OF SURFACEBASED PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS DURING LEADEX `92 940677: MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940736: THE POTENTIAL OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS IN MONITORING FOREST BIOMASS 940895: EFFECT OF THE OCEAN MEDIUM NON-UNIFORMITIES ON WAVE BREAKING AND MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS SEA TEMPERATURE 940929: MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM FOREST CANOPIES 940964: MICROWAVE STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF BRINE LAYERS ON HOMOGENEOUS SALINE ICE SHEETS 940967: IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION 941033: ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMS FOR SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE DATA PROCESSING 940017: A RAPID TRANSMITTANCE ALGORITHM FOR MICROWAVE SOUNDING FREQUENCIES 940035: DIURNAL OBSERVATIONS OF SOIL MOISTURE WITH PASSIVE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS 940076: APPLICATION OF A COMPACT RANGE ANTENNA FOR ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM SEA ICE 940119: MICROWAVE EFFECTIVE PERMITTIVITY MODEL OF MEDIA OF DIALECTRIC PARTICLES AND APPLICATIONS TO DRY AND WET SNOW 940158: ANGLE AND POLARIZATION DEPENDENT MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM OCEAN WAVES 940166: EVALUATION OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODELS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SOIL MOISTURE IN TROPICAL AGRICULTURAL SOILS 940221: OCEAN MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM THE LOGAN EXPERIMENT 940223: MICROWAVE SCATTERING DISTRIBUTIONS FROM A RAIN-ROUGHENED WATER SURFACE: MEASUREMENTS AND MODELING 940242: LATITUDINAL STRUCTURE OF MIDDLE ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR REVEALED BY SHIPBOARD MICROWAVE SPECTROSCOPY 940329: MICROWAVE SCATTERING MODEL FOR GRASSLAND AND SHORT VEGETATION CANOPIES 940375: CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE 940376: FIELD OF VIEW CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE 940398: UARS MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER OBSERVATIONS OF UPPER ATMOSPHERE OZONE AND CHLORINE MONOXIDE. 940399: MICROWAVE LJMB SOUNDING OF THE EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE: UARS RESULTS AND EOS PLANS 940419: SIMULATION STUDY OF A MICROWAVE RADIOMETRIC TEMPERATURE PROFILER FOR THE ANTARCTIC ATMOSPHERE 940476: MICROWAVE EMISSION FROM NEW AND YOUNG CONGELATION SALINE ICE 940520: PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS OF CHLORINE MONOXIDE MEASUREMENTS MADE BY THE GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RECEIVER OF THE PLATEAU DE BURE, FRANCE 940521: STRATOSPHERIC OZONE MEASUREMENTS MADE BY A GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETER AT THE BORDEAUX OBSERVATORY, FRANCE 940658: SHIPBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER AND SCATTEROMETER MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE PATTERNS DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940831: SENSITIVITY OF MICROWAVE BACKSCATTERING TO CROP BIOMASS 940837: A STUDY OF THE MICROWAVE SOUNDING UNIT ON THE NOAA-12 SATELLITE 940888: NONLINEAR STATISTICAL PRECIPITATION RETRIEVALS USING SIMULATED PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY 941032: DETECTION OF SHALLOWLY BURIED DIELECTRIC OBJECTS WITH MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS. 941084: COMPARISONS OF LIDAR AND MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR AND TEMPERATURE 940069: OPTIMUM FREQUENCY OF MICROWAVE RADIOMETRY FOR MEASUREMENTS OF ATTENUATION, PATH DELAY AND COLUMNAR CONTENT OF WATER VAPOR 940235: ESTIMATING FIRN TEMPERATURES IN GREENLAND AND ANTARCTICA FROM DUAL POLARIZATION C-BAND MICROWAVE EMISSION OBSERVATIONS 940241: OPERATIONAL PROCESSING OF DMSP SPECIAL SENSOR MICROWAVE,II~GER DATA AT ELEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER (FNMOC): ALGORITHM TRANSITIONS 940609: SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS'92 940676: MONITORING THE STRATOSPHERIC OZONE PROFILE WITH GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETER 940849: ACTIVE MICROWAVE MEASUREMENTS OF SNOWCOVER: PROGRESS IN POLARIMETRIC SAR 940965: STUDY OF THE TEMPORAL NATURE OF THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES OF LEADS DURING SPRING 940984: COLLECTIVE SCATTERING EFFECTS IN VEGETATION CANOPIES AT MICROWAVE FREQUENCIES BASED ON MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS 940199: MULTISPECTRAL MM-WAVE DIAGNOSTICS OF TWO COUPLED OCEANIC EDDIES (ROSSBY SOLITON) 940100: SOIL MOISTURE PROFILE RETRIEVAL BY ASSIMILATION OF MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING AND SURFACE OBSERVATIONS 940437: MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGRAPHY IN A MULTI-SENSOR APPROACH 940720: REMOTE SENSING OF HUMIDITY PROFILES WITH PASSIVE IR SOUNDERS: HIRS AND AIRS 940969: EARLY STAGES OF SEA ICE GROWTH OBSERVED WITH SATELLITE DATA 940094: INDOOR EXPERIMENT OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL SUPERSYNTHESIS RADIOMETER 940169: NO SIGNIFICANT TREND IN ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC ICE CONCENTRATIONS FROM 1973 TO 1991 940201: ON THE HIGH-CONTRAST SPECTRAL VARIATIONS OF SEA SURFACE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURE AT MM-WAVE 940234: FORWARD AND INVERSE SIGNATUUE MODELING FOR CONGELATION ICE 940450: STATUS OF ESTAR VALIDATION: RESULTS FROM WASHITA-92 940652: AN OVERVIEW OF THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940684: RETRIEVAL OF SEMI-ARID REGION PARAMETERS FROM PASSIVE MEASUREMENTS USING NEURAL NETWORKS WITHIN A BAYESIAN FRAMEWORK 940791: AIRBORNE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENTS OF MARINE MONITORING 940908: MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA 940922: THE SAN CLEMENTE OCEAN PROBING EXPERIMENT: A STUDY OF AIR/SEA INTERACTIONS WITH REMOTE AND IN-SITU SENSORS 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 940998: EFFECT OF LATENT HEAT TRANSFER ON DIURNAL AND ANNUAL PREDICTION OF TEMPERATURE AND RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF NORTHERN PRAIRIE 940021: ESTIMATION OF AREAL SOIL-WATER CONTENT DURING HAPEX-SAHEL AND EFEDA-SPAIN 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940106: TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN RADAR BACKSCATTER COEFFICIENTS OF VEGETATION AND SOIL MEDIA 940117: THE DETERMINATION OF ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOUR CONTENT USING DOUBLE-FREQUENCY RADIOMETER 940250: STATISTICS OF OCEANIC RAINFALL TO HELP INTERPRET TRMM DATA 940266: COMPARISON OF A POLARIMETRIC SCATTERING AND EMISSION MODEL WITH OCEAN BACKSCATTER AND BRIGHTNESS MEASUREMENTS 940322: THEORETICAL SENSITIVITY OF ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER OVER THE FOREST 940331: CANOPY PENETRATION STUDY FOR TROPICAL RAINFORESTS: MODELED RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM AMAZON FLOODPLAIN FORESTS AT C-, L-, AND P-BAND 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940472: CONSTRUCTION OF AN AIRBORNE 93 GHz IMAGING RADIOMETER 940493: COMBINED USE OF SPECTRAL MEASUREMENTS: A PROMISE FOR SURFACE PARAMETER RETRIEVAL 940526: A MILLIMETER-WAVE CLOUD PROFILING RADAR SYSTEM (CPRS) 940587: A FRACTAL-BASED APPROACH TO ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELLING 940621: ELECTROMAGNETIC SCATTERING MODEL FOR A TREE TRUNK ABOVE A GROUND PLANE 940656: INVESTIGATION OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND WIND FIELDS IN THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940741: FREQUENCY SELECTION AND MULTIPOLARIMETRY FOR HARD TARGET DETECTION 940801: TWO-DIMENSIONAL APERTURE SYNTHESIS RADIOMETERS IN A LOW EARTH ORBIT MISSION AND INSTRUMENT ANALYSIS 940916: CORRECTING INFRARED SATELLITE ESTIMATES OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE FOR ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR ATTENUATION 940927: ANALYSIS OF NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHZ DATA OVER VEGETATED LAND SURFACES: THEORY AND EXAMPLES 940982: ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE 940005: MARITIME PRECIPITATION DISTRIBUTIONS DETERMINED FROM AIRBORNE RADAR AND MULTI-FREQUENCY RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS 940045: INDUCED ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD ASSOCIATED WITH WAKES - SIGNAL PROCESSING ASPECTS 940089: MILLIMETER WAVE MEASUREMENTS AT THE ARCTIC NDSC STATION NY-ALESUND IN THE WINTERS 1992/93 AND 1993/94 940092: SELF-CONSISTENT MEASUREMENTS OF DIFFERENTIAL PHASE AND DIFFERENTIAL REFLECTIVlTY IN RAIN 940099: SOIL MOISTURE PROFILE REMOTE SENSING: STABILITY AND OBSERVABILITY OF THE INVERSE-PROBLEM 940102: DESIGN OF A Ka BAND POLARIMETRIC RADIOMETER 940126: SATELLITE OBSERVATION OF SURFACE FORCING OVER THE WARM POOL 940157: LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF STRATOSPHERIC OZONE AND TEMPERATURE AT TABLE MOUNTAIN, CA, AND MAUNA LOA, HI, AND COMPARISON WITH UARS RESULTS. 940168: MAPPING THE DIAGENETIC ZONE TRANSITIONS OF GREENLAND USING THE AAFE RADAR ALTIMETER 940182: SAR TERRAIN CORRECTION FOR IMPROVED SOIL MOISTURE ESTIMATION IN A MOUNTAIN WATERSHED 940189: OPERATIONAL USE OF SSM/I ICE CONCENTRATION IN THE INITIALIZATION OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL 940206: OPERATIONAL USE OF SATELLITE DATA FOR SEA ICE ANALYSIS AT THE US AND CANADIAN NATIONAL ICE CENTERS 940217: SEGMENTATION OF COMBINED HIGH RESOLUTION OPTICAL AND RADAR IMAGERY FOR THE DETERMINATION OF FIELD INHOMOGENITIES 940222: COMPARISON BETWEEN PREDICTED PERFORMANCES OF BISTATIC AND MONOSTATIC RADAR IN VEGETATION MONITORING 940263: POLARIMETRlC BACKSCATTERING SIGNATURES FROM THIN SALINE ICE UNDER CONTROLLED LABORATORY CONDITIONS 940276: SURFACE CHARACTERIZATION USING REGULARITY MODELS AND FREQUENCY DIVERSE MEASUREMENTS 940309: OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MULTIYEAR AND FIRST YEAR SEA ICE 940333: FREQUENCY AND AZIMUTHAL VARIATIONS OF RADAR CROSS-SECTION AND THEIR INFLUENCE UPON LOW FREQUENCY SAR-IMAGING. 940335: COMPARISON OF MEASURED AND PREDICTED SCATTERING COEFFICIENTS AT 94 GHZ. 940378: IMAGES OF CONVECTIVE CELL-TOP ALTITUDES USING 118-GHZ SPECTRAL DATA 940379: ATMOSPHERIC TRANSMITTANCE MEASUREMENTS NEAR 54 AND 118 GHZ 940397: MULTI-TEMPORAL COMPARISONS OF ERS-1 AND JERS-1 SAR DATA FOR LAND APPLICATIONS 940401: VEERING WIND EFFECTS ON SCATTEROMETRY FROM THE SEA-SURFACE 940402: PRESENTING THE NASA\\GSFC RAIN-SEA INTERACTION FACILITY 940462: FOREST AGE DISCRIMINATION FROM TEXTURE MEASURES OF SAR IMAGERY 940473: SSM/I CENTER-FIXES AND INTENSITIES OF TROPICAL STORMS 940483: CONTRIBUTION OF ERS-1 WIND SCATTEROMETER DATA TO THE STUDY OF TERRESTRIAL VEGETATION 940615: Ka-BAND OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION: A COMPARATIVE STUDY 940618: AN INVERSION ALGORITHM FOR RETRIEVING SOIL MOISTURE AND SURFACE ROUGHNESS FROM POLARIMETRIC RADAR OBSERVATIONS 940635: INGARA: THE AUSTRALIAN AIRBORNE IMAGING RADAR SYSTEM 940642: INVERSION ALGORITHMS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE 940657: COMPARISONS OF INTERNAL WAVES AS OBSERVED BY A TOWED CTD AND RADAR 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940680: RETRIEVAL OF SNOW AND SEA ICE PARAMETERS FROM SSM/I DATA 940719: PROGRESS IN POLAR OCEANS RESEARCH USING ERS-1 DATA 940758: RADAR CROSS SECTION OF THE OCEAN SURFACE WHEN SURFACE FILMS ARE PRESENT: A MODEL CALCULATION USING MARANGONI WAVE DAMPING THEORY 940765: EFFECT OF SNOW STEREOLOGY ON MILLIMETER WAVE EXTINCTION 940781: MULTI-DIMENSI0NAL RADIATIVE TRANSFER COMPUTATIONS USING A SCALABLE PARALLEL IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DISCRETE-ORDINATES METHOD 940823: VALIDATING SAR INTERFEROMETRY APPLICATIONS BY USING EMSL 940829: DESCRIPTION OF A RADAR/RADIOMETER METHOD AND ITS APPLICATION TO AIRBORNE MEASUREMENTS OVER- STRATIFORM RAIN IN THE WESTERN PACIFIC 940835: IDENTIFYING AND MAPPING WETLANDS USING COMBINED SAR AND LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER DATA 940843: INTERACTIVE INTEGRATION OF INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGERY, SATELLITE ALTIMETERY, AND IN SITU MEASUREMENTS INTO THE PRODUCTION OF AN OPERATIONAL OCEAN FEATURES ANALYSIS PRODUCT 940848: RETRIEVAL OF WATER VAPOR PROFILES USING MEASUREMENTS FROM A MILLIMETER-WAVE IMAGING RADIOMETER 940853: MESOSCALE MODELING OF REFRACTIVE CONDITIONS DURING THE VOCAR EXPERIMENT 940857: A DETAILED STUDY OF THE BACKSCATTER CHARACTERISTICS OF SNOWCOVER MEASURED AT 35, 95 AND 225 GHZ 940859: A 95 GHz AIRBORNE RADAR FOR HIGH RESOLUTION POLARIMETRIC CLOUD MEASUREMENTS 940860: BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN SURFACE UNDER LOW WIND CONDITIONS 940862: OCEAN SURFACE IMAGING WITH A FOCUSED PHASED ARRAY IMAGING RADAR (FOPAIR) 940865: MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL 940870: ESTIMATION OF WIND SPPED AND WIND DIRECTION FROM ERS-1 IMAGERY 940906: A HIGH PRECISION SUN PHOTOMETER FOR DETERMINATION OF AEROSOL OPTICAL DEPTH, COLUMNAR WATER VAPOR AND OZONE 940920: SEAWINDS: A SCANNING SCATTEROMETER FOR ADEOS II-- SCIENCE OVERVIEW 940923: STUDIES OF RADIATIVELY-IMPORTANT CLOUDS WITH 8-MILLIMETER WA~ENGTH DOPPLER RADAR 940924: POLARIMETRIC RADAR IMAGERY OF THE OCEAN AT LOW GRAZING ANGLES UNDER UNSTABLE ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS. 940925: AIRBORNE PASSIVE POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE ANISOTROPY AT 92 GHZ 940926: AIRBORNE IMAGING OF TROPOSPHERIC EMISSION AT MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS 940928: ESTIMATION OF LEAF AREA INDEX OVER AGRICULTURAL AREAS FROM POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGES 940937: AN APPROACH TO ESTIMATING SURFACE PARAMETERS AND FLUXES USING MODELING AND MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 940988: DERIVING ANTECEDENT MOISTURE CONDITIONS FROM AIRBORNE SAR FOR INPUT INTO A FLOOD FORECASTING MODEL 941000: SYNERGISTIC USE OF REMOTELY SENSED DATA FOR EVALUATION OF THE BOUNDARY LAYER IN SYNOPTIC STORMS AND FRONTS 941053: EVALUATION OF REMOTE SENSING TECHNIQUES FOR MEASURING CLOUD WATER AND DRIZZLE IN MARINE STRATOCUMULUS CLOUDS WT01-B02-239IA055-000916-B001-135http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/ocean.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200358 text/html 26191HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:02:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " ocean" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " ocean" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940777: ON THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF THE OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION FOR INVERTING ERS-1 SAR IMAGE SPECTRA INTO OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA 940410: DETERMINATION OF PARTICULATE RESUSPENSION AND MIXING NEAR AN OCEAN OUTFALL USING HYPERSPECTRAL OCEAN COLOR IMAGERY 940191: A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL FOR THE LABRADOR PACK ICE 940268: SPACEBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS DESIGNS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR OCEAN WIND REMOTE SENSING 940494: OBSERVATIONS AND MODELING OF OCEAN RADIANT HEATING DURING TOGA/COARE 940365: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED INVERSION TECHNIQUE FOR SAR IMAGES OF OCEAN SURFACE WAVES 940778: SIMULATION OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL OCEAN WAVE IMAGING BY AN INTERFEROMETRIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR 940862: OCEAN SURFACE IMAGING WITH A FOCUSED PHASED ARRAY IMAGING RADAR (FOPAIR) 940758: RADAR CROSS SECTION OF THE OCEAN SURFACE WHEN SURFACE FILMS ARE PRESENT: A MODEL CALCULATION USING MARANGONI WAVE DAMPING THEORY 940843: INTERACTIVE INTEGRATION OF INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGERY, SATELLITE ALTIMETERY, AND IN SITU MEASUREMENTS INTO THE PRODUCTION OF AN OPERATIONAL OCEAN FEATURES ANALYSIS PRODUCT 940924: POLARIMETRIC RADAR IMAGERY OF THE OCEAN AT LOW GRAZING ANGLES UNDER UNSTABLE ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS. 940078: NEW STATISTICS FORMULATION FOR INHOMOGENEOUS OCEAN SURFACE 940135: ON OPPORTUNITY OF ASSESSMENT OF UNDERWATER SOLAR RADIATION IN THE GLOBAL OCEAN ON SATELLITE DATA. 940221: OCEAN MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM THE LOGAN EXPERIMENT 940354: MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER, SURFACE FLUXES, AND INFRARED IMAGERY MEASURED FROM A BLIMP OVER THE OCEAN 940615: Ka-BAND OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION: A COMPARATIVE STUDY 940776: ERS-1 SAR VIEWS THE OCEAN: AN ASSESSMENT 940989: DETECTION, ESTIMATION OF DIRECTIONAL FEATURES ON OCEAN SURFACE IMAGES 941035: MICROWAVE SPATIAL SPECTRA OF OCEAN-ATMOSPHERE SYSTEM 940047: VAGSAT: A PROPOSAL FOR A SMALL SATELLITE MISSION FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA WITH A REAL-APERTURE RADAR 940148: THE INFLUENCE OF ALTITUDE AND LOOK ANGLE ON SAR OCEAN WAVE IMAGING: A PRACTICAL COMPROMISE 940158: ANGLE AND POLARIZATION DEPENDENT MICROWAVE BACKSCATTER FROM OCEAN WAVES 940189: OPERATIONAL USE OF SSM/I ICE CONCENTRATION IN THE INITIALIZATION OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL 940190: TESTING OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL IN A SEA ICE FORECASTING SYSTEM 940267: POLARIMETRIC PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF OCEAN WIND VECTORS 940396: THE EFFECT OF SAR BANDWIDTH RATIO AND CURRENT VARIATION ON OCEAN CURRENT MEASUREMENTS BY ALONG-TRACK SAR INTERFEROMETER 940592: ANTARCTIC POLYNYA AREAS DERIVED WITH SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY AND THEIR IMPACT ON OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE 940610: ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. 940633: GUIDANCE FOR AN EXPERT SYSTEM APPROACH TO ELEVATED DUCT ASSESSMENT OVER THE NORTHEASTERN PACIFIC OCEAN 940860: BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN SURFACE UNDER LOW WIND CONDITIONS 940871: SIMULATION OF SAR IMAGES OF SUBMESOSCALE OCEAN PHENOMENA 940922: THE SAN CLEMENTE OCEAN PROBING EXPERIMENT: A STUDY OF AIR/SEA INTERACTIONS WITH REMOTE AND IN-SITU SENSORS 940034: LIDAR MEASUREMENTS OF WAVE-HEIGHTS SPECTRA IN THE OCEAN 940198: MULTISCALE OBJECTS DETECTING IN THE MM - WAVE IMAGING OF OCEAN SURFACE. 940266: COMPARISON OF A POLARIMETRIC SCATTERING AND EMISSION MODEL WITH OCEAN BACKSCATTER AND BRIGHTNESS MEASUREMENTS 940355: TWO-DIMENSIONAL SIMULATIONS OF SAR IMAGERY OF OCEAN WAVES 940366: LOW GRAZING ANGLE BACKSCATTER FROM THE OCEAN - THE EFFECTS OF SHADOWING AND MULTIPLE SCATTERING 940374: ERS-1 SAR IMAGING OF OCEAN FEATURES iN THE VESTFJORDEN AREA 940382: THE REMOTE SENSING OF THE OCEAN SURFACE AT THE FRONTAL ZONE 940614: OCEAN WAVE PROPERTIES USING A Ka-BAND 3-BEAM RADAR AND THE LONGUET-HIGGTHS APPROACH 940890: NUMERICAL PREDICTION OF SHADOWING IN EM SCATTERING FROM A ROUGH OCEAN WAVE AT GRAZING INCIDENCE 941078: INVERSION OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA BY A DYNAMIC LEARNING NEURAL NETWORK 941098: ANALYSIS OF DOPPLER AND CORRELATION RADAR METHODS FOR OCEAN CURRENTS VELOCITY MESOSCALE FIELD RECONSTRUCTION 940178: MEASUREMENTS OF OCEAN CURRENTS WITH SAR INTERFEROMETRY AND HF RADAR 940466: AIRBORNE DUAL-CHANEL RADIOMETRIC OCEAN SURFACE OBSERVATIONS DURING SCOPE `93 940654: MULTI-FREQUENCY, POLARlMETRIC AND INTERFEROMETRIC SAR OBSERVATIONS OF OCEAN FEATURES DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940660: NONLOCAL EFFECTS OF INTERNAL WAVES ON THE OCEAN SURFACE 940895: EFFECT OF THE OCEAN MEDIUM NON-UNIFORMITIES ON WAVE BREAKING AND MICROWAVE BRIGHTNESS SEA TEMPERATURE 941097: RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SUB-MESOSCALE OCEAN CURRENTS FIELD BASED ON ALMAZ-1 SAR DATA 940719: PROGRESS IN POLAR OCEANS RESEARCH USING ERS-1 DATA 940925: AIRBORNE PASSIVE POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE ANISOTROPY AT 92 GHZ 940056: WAVE EVOLUTION IN THE MARGINAL ICE ZONE USING ERS-1 SAR 940150: RETRIEVAL OF RAINRATE OVER ROUGH SEA SURFACES AS MEASURED BY THE ADVANCED MICROWAVE PRECIPITATION RADIOMETER (AMPR) 940156: MARINE MODIFICATIONS TO LOWTRAN RADIANCE PREDICTIONS 940250: STATISTICS OF OCEANIC RAINFALL TO HELP INTERPRET TRMM DATA 940285: AIRBORNE RADIOMETER FOR SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS DURING TOGA COARE 940353: COMPREHENSIVE MODELING OF THE WIND WAVE SYSTEM WITH WIND-WAVE INTERACTION AND DISSIPATION 940070: COAST LINE DETECTION FROM SAR IMAGES 940126: SATELLITE OBSERVATION OF SURFACE FORCING OVER THE WARM POOL 940138: GLOBAL AND REGIONAL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANALYSES AT FLEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER 940318: PROGRESS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CCRS ALONG-TRACK INTERFEROMETER 940428: ACCOUNTING FOR REGIONAL FACTORS OF THE ALTIMETER SEA STATE BIAS 940542: AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM AIRBORNE POLDER DATA BY MULTIPLE SCATTERING MODEL 940745: SHIPWAKE DETECTION AND CHARACTERIZATION IN SAR IMAGES USING WAVELET TRANSFORM 940759: AN EARLY EOS PROGRESS REPORT 940980: WIND MEASUREMENT RESOLUTION FOR SPACEBORNE SCATTEROMETERS 941082: LIDAR MEASURED REFRACTIVE EFFECTS IN A COASTAL ENVIRONMENT 940063: ERS-1 SAR IMAGES OF ATMOSPHERIC GRAVITY WAVES 940192: A NEW METHOD FOR INHERENT HYDRO-OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS EVALUATION 940218: COASTWATCH OPERATIONAL MAPPED AVHRR IMAGERY 940231: SMALL SLOPE APPROXIMATION FOR MICROWAVE POLARIMETRIC OBSERVATION OF THE SEA SURFACE 940254: GLOBAL PRODUCTION OF MULTI-CHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURES USING THE NAVAL OCEANOGRAPHIC OFFICE'S SATELLITE PROCESSING SYSTEM 940255: ALTIMETRICALLY DERIVED FRONT AND EDDY POSITIONS FOR OPERATIONAL NOWCASTS 940303: DETECTION OF OCEANIC STERIC HEIGHT CHANGE USING TOPEX/POSEIDON SATELLITE ALTIMETERY 940422: MAPPING COASTAL CURRENTS WITH SAR, USING NATURALLY- OCCURRING SURFACE SLICK PATTERNS 940653: A COMPARISON ANALYSIS OF Ku-BAND SLAR SEA SURFACE IMAGES, AT VV AND HH POLARIZATIONS OBTAINED DURING, THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940794: ANALYSIS OF MULTI-INCIDENCE ANGLE SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER DATA FROM THE DMSP SSM/I 940808: EVALUATION OF THE MULTICHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ALGORITHM ALONG THE BRAZILIAN COAST 940820: INVESTIGATING THE TROPICAL ATLANTIC VARIABILITY FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER 940848: RETRIEVAL OF WATER VAPOR PROFILES USING MEASUREMENTS FROM A MILLIMETER-WAVE IMAGING RADIOMETER 940920: SEAWINDS: A SCANNING SCATTEROMETER FOR ADEOS II-- SCIENCE OVERVIEW 940979: MODELING THE NEAR-SURFACE OCEANIC WIND VORTICITY 941012: DETECTION OF SURFACE CURRENT FEATURES WITH ERS-1 SAR IMAGING RADAR 941114: AN ASSESSMENT OF SST ESTIMATION ACCURACY WITH ADEOS/OCTS DATA 940018: OIL LEAKAGE EXPANSION AND SIMULATION MODEL BASED ON FRACTAL TECHNIQUES 940020: CONTRASTING TARGET, STRAY-LIGHT, AND OTHER PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR MISR 940029: SOLUTION OF THE RADIO REFRACTION INVERSE PROBLEM AND DETERMINATION OF THE PATH DELAY 940062: SUNGLITTER RADIANCE MODULATION OF SUBMARINE SAND WAVES AND INTERNAL WAVES 940102: DESIGN OF A Ka BAND POLARIMETRIC RADIOMETER 940153: MODELING SURFACE EFFECTS WITH THE PARABOLIC EQUATION METHOD 940154: VARIABILITY OF COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTIVITY 940155: STATISTICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE VARIABILITY OF ATMOSPHERIC PROPAGATION EFFECTS IN THE SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA COASTAL AREA 940164: COMPARING NUMERICAL AND ANALYTICAL SCHEMES FOR AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM THE ADVANCED VERY HIGH RESOLUTION RADIOMETER 940172: SOLAR ACTIVITY, TROPICAL CYCLONES AND EARTHQUAKES 940201: ON THE HIGH-CONTRAST SPECTRAL VARIATIONS OF SEA SURFACE BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURE AT MM-WAVE 940219: SEAWIFS INTERCALIBRATION ROUND ROBIN EXPERIMENTS 940289: ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OF SOIL CONTAMINATED WITH HEAVY METALS USING LASER-INDUCED-BREAKDOWN SPECTROSCOPY 940296: AVHRR OBSERVATIONS OF PERSIAN GULF OIL SPILLS 940323: INTERFEROMETRIC SIGNATURES OF TEMPERATE FOREST FROM ERS-1 SAR DATA 940369: APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS FOR DETECTION OF SEA ICE COVERAGE AND MOVEMENTS FROM SATELLITE IMAGERY 940373: PRACTICAL USE OF ERS-1 SAR IMAGES IN POLLUTION MONITORING 940381: PASSIVE MICROWAVE HUMIDITY PROFILE RETRIEVALS USING NEURAL NETWORKS 940411: WAVE-CURRENT INTERACTION MODELING INCORPORATING WAVE BLOCKING 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940437: MAPPING OF SEA BOTTOM TOPOGRAPHY IN A MULTI-SENSOR APPROACH 940461: LINEAR RESPONSE OF SEA LEVEL TO WIND FORCING DETERMINED FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER DATA 940497: LASERS FOR LIDAR BATHIMETRY AND OCEANOLOGICAL RESEARCH: CHOICE CRITERIA 940522: MULTISCALE ANALYSIS OF SHAPES APPLIED TO THERMAL INFRARED SEA SURFACE IMAGES 940556: MEASUREMENTS OF LAND SUBSIDENCE WITH SAR INTERFEROMETY 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940581: EVALUATION OF THE SSALT POSEIDON ALTIMETER 940593: EXTRACTION OF HULL CHARACTERISTICS FROM SAR IMAGES OF SHIP WAKES 940607: ARMAR OBSERVATIONS DURING TOGA/COARE 940609: SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS'92 940656: INVESTIGATION OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND WIND FIELDS IN THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940682: STUDIES ON PASSIVE REMOTE SENSING OF ICE AND LIQUID WATER PATHS 940743: K-DISTRIBUTION FOR MULTI-LOOK PROCESSED POLARIMETRIC SAR IMAGERY 940744: ALGORITHMS FOR THE DETECTION OF SHIPS AND SHIP WAKES IN SAR IMAGES 940774: DOPPLER SPECTRA OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER FROM THE SEA SURFACE OBTAINED FROM A THREE-SCALE COMPOSITE SURFACE MODEL 940788: APPLICATION OF A STOCHASTIC VARIATIONAL PRINCIPLE TO RANDOM ROUGH SURFACE SCATTERING 940791: AIRBORNE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENTS OF MARINE MONITORING 940793: MICROWAVE RADIATION PULSE SCATTERING BY A WATER DROP IN THE ATMOSPHERE 940809: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SKIPJACK TUNA FISHERY AND OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES OBSERVED BY INFRARED IMAGERY IN THE SOUTHERN BRAZILIAN COAST 940816: AEROSOL RETRIEVAL BASED ON PHOTOPOLARIMETRY 940865: MAPPING FLOOD PLAIN INUNDATION WITH MULTI-FREQUENCY POLARIMETRIC SAR: USE OF A TREE-BASED MODEL 940894: PECULIARITIES OF THE X-BAND RADAR SIGNAL SCATTERED BY THE SEA SURFACE AT SMALL GRAZING ANGLES 940914: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY ON LASER DISC: A WINNING COMBINATION FOR THE CLASSROOM 940936: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST. HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL 940949: POLARIMETRIC RADAR SIGNATURES OF OIL SLICKS FOR MEASURING SLICK THICKNESS 940975: EXTRACTING SEASONAL PARAMETERS OF SEA ICE MORPHOLOGY FROM SAR IMAGERY: SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF FIRST-YEAR ICE 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 940982: ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE 941007: USING THE MOSART CODE FOR ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION 941021: DISCRETE FEATURE ANALYSIS OF SIDESCAN-SONAR UNDER-ICE IMAGERY 941048: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST-HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL 941081: REMOTE MEASUREMENTS AND COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION 941115: AUTOMATIC CLOUD CLASSIFICATION WITH VISIBLE AND THERMAL INFRARED RADIOMETER DATA WT01-B02-240IA055-000916-B001-177http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/polar.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200417 text/html 2018HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:03:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " polarimetry" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " polarimetry" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940695: OPTIMUM POLARIZATIONS FOR RADAR METEOROLOGY 940351: THE USE OF POLARIMETRY IN SUBSURFACE RADAR 940623: AN APPLICATION EXAMPLE OF CLOUDE APPROACH IN RADAR POLARIMETRY 940093: ESTIMATION OF ICE WATER CONTENT USING MULTI-PARAMETER RADAR MEASUREMENTS 940132: ADVANCES IN RADAR METEOROLOGY: AN OVERVIEW 940536: THE DANISH POLARIMETRIC SAR FOR REMOTE SENSING APPLICATIONS 940656: INVESTIGATION OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE AND WIND FIELDS IN THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940741: FREQUENCY SELECTION AND MULTIPOLARIMETRY FOR HARD TARGET DETECTION 941074: MONOSTATIC POLARIMETRIC CALIBRATION VIA TARGET SPINOR X. Fbregas, A. Broquetas. J. Romeu, L. Jofre E.T.S. Ing. Telecomunicacion Barcelona P.O.Box 30002, 08080 Barcelona, Spain WT01-B02-241IA055-000916-B001-215http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/radio.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200441 text/html 8598HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:03:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " radio" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " radio" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940029: SOLUTION OF THE RADIO REFRACTION INVERSE PROBLEM AND DETERMINATION OF THE PATH DELAY 940111: SENSING OF RADIO REFLECTIVITY AND AEROSOL EXTINCTION 940506: APPLICATION OF PARAMETRIC METHODS SPECTRUM ESTIMATION FOR RADIO ACOUSTIC SOUNDING 940213: ABSOLUTE-RADIO CALIBRATION OF LANDSAT-5 THEMATIC MAPPER AND THE PROPOSED CALIBRATION OF THE ADVANCED SPACEBORNE THERMAL EMISSION AND REFLECTION RADIOMETER 940658: SHIPBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER AND SCATTEROMETER MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE PATTERNS DURING THE JOINT US/RUSSIA INTERNAL WAVE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENT 940574: DEVELOPMENT OF A HIGH RESOLUTION ICE ECHO SOUNDER FOR ARCTIC ICE SHEET 940768: INFLUENCE OF AN INHOMOGENEOUS IONOSPHERE ON MOBILE SATELLITE COMMUNICATION 940154: VARIABILITY OF COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTIVITY 940675: SIMULATION OF THE RADAR PROBING OF THE MARTIAN SUBSURFACE STRUCTURE 940851: VISUALIZATION AND ASSESSMENT OF VOCAR PROPAGATION CONDITIONS 941075: OPERATING DECAMETER RASS NEAR N.NOVGOROD AND ITS PERSPECTIVES CONNECTED WITH POWERFUL HF-RADAR "SURA" 941082: LIDAR MEASURED REFRACTIVE EFFECTS IN A COASTAL ENVIRONMENT 940094: INDOOR EXPERIMENT OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL SUPERSYNTHESIS RADIOMETER 940112: IMPROVEMENTS IN ATMOSPHERIC WIND PROFILING USING IMAGING DOPPLER INTERFEROMETRY 940113: HIGH-RESOLUTION MEASUREMENTS OF ATMOSPHERIC TURBULENT LAYERS USING FREQUENCY DOMAIN INTERFEROMETRY 940153: MODELING SURFACE EFFECTS WITH THE PARABOLIC EQUATION METHOD 940246: COMPARISON OF WATER VAPOR MEASUREMENTS BY GROUND-BASED MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS AND RAMAN LIDAR 940335: COMPARISON OF MEASURED AND PREDICTED SCATTERING COEFFICIENTS AT 94 GHZ. 940336: MOTION COMPENSATION FOR AIRBORNE SAR BASED ON INERTIAL DATA, RDM AND GPS 940337: FIRST RESULTS OF ONE PASS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRY WITH THE DORNIER SAR SYSTEM 940338: A NEW METHOD FOR WIDE FIELD SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR PROCESSING 940381: PASSIVE MICROWAVE HUMIDITY PROFILE RETRIEVALS USING NEURAL NETWORKS 940427: GROUND BASED MILLIMETER WAVE SYSTEM FOR CLO AND OTHER MINOR CONSTITUENTS OBSERVATION DEVELOPED IN CRL 940467: A COMPUTER-AIDED GEOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION SYSTEM FOR SUBSURFACE IMAGING 940491: ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER MODELLING AND INTERPRETATION OF SEA ICE SIGNATURES 940508: PREDICTION OF IMAGE PERFORMANCE AND REAL-TIME QUALITY IMPROVEMENT FOR THE SIR-C/X-SAR SRL-1 MISSION 940587: A FRACTAL-BASED APPROACH TO ELECTROMAGNETIC MODELLING 940632: VOCAR REFRACTIVE VARIABILITY USING ISENTROPIC CROSS-SECTION ANALYSIS 940637: CALIBRATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE X-SAR SYSTEM 940643: CONCEPTUAL DESIGN, PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND RESULTS OF THE HIGH RESOLUTION REAL-TIME PROCESSOR OF THE DLR AIRBORNE SAR SYSTEM 940644: DOPPLER PARAMETER ESTIMATION ALGORITHMS FOR SAR PROCESSING WITH THE CHIRP SCALING APPROACH 940645: A COMPARISON OF SEVERAL ALGORITHMS FOR ON-BOARD SAR RAW DATA REDUCTION 940646: HIGH PRECISION MOTION COMPENSATION FOR MULTIPLE PASS AIRBORNE INTERFEROMETRY 940672: DEVELOPMENT STATUS OF CASSINI RADAR FOR REMOTE SENSING OF TITAN 940706: ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS IMAGES WITH A PROCEDURE BASED ON THE INVERSION OF 5S MODEL 940710: CALIBRATION OF THE CARABAS VHF SAR SYSTEM 940711: MODEL FOR ESTIMATING SURFACE ROUGHNESS OF LEVEL AND RIDGED SEA ICE USINg ERS-1 SAR 940723: K-STATISTICS OF TERRAIN CLUTTER IN HIGH RESOLUTION SAR IMAGES 940769: MODELLING OF RADIOWAVE PROPAGATION IN A DISTURBED IONOSPHERE DURING SEISMIC ACTIVITY 940770: NUMERICAL ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTIVE PROPAGATION CONSTANT OF A SPACE WHERE SMALL SPHERES WITH HIGH PERMITTIVITY ARE RANDOMLY DISTRIBUTED 940797: HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF ICE PARTICLES IN WINTERTIME THUNDERCLOUDS OBSERVED BY A DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 940906: A HIGH PRECISION SUN PHOTOMETER FOR DETERMINATION OF AEROSOL OPTICAL DEPTH, COLUMNAR WATER VAPOR AND OZONE 941109: SOME FEATURES OF THE BACKSCATTERED FROM THE SEA SURFACE RADAR SIGNAL FREQUENCY DOPPLER-SHIFT DISTRIBUTION STATISTICAL CHARACTERISTICS WT01-B02-242IA055-000916-B002-13http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/rain.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200451 text/html 1283HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:03:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " rainforest" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " rainforest" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940071: A REMOTE SENSING MONITORING SYSTEM FOR A COLONIZATION AREA IN TROPICAL RAIN FOREST 940272: CLASSIFICATION OF THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST USING JERS-1 SAR DATA 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren 940274: RESULTS OF 1993 REPEAT-PASS SAR INTERFEROMETRY EXPERIMENTS 940732: SEGMENTATION BASED CHANGE DETECTION IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES WT01-B02-243IA055-000916-B002-58http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/rcs.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200514 text/html 1316HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:03:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " RCS" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " RCS" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940758: RADAR CROSS SECTION OF THE OCEAN SURFACE WHEN SURFACE FILMS ARE PRESENT: A MODEL CALCULATION USING MARANGONI WAVE DAMPING THEORY 940091: SEA SPIKES: THE EMPIRICAL DEPENDENCE OF K-DISTRIBUTION PARAMETERS ON SYSTEM AND ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS 940133: FOOTPRINTS OF STORMS ON THE SEA: A VIEW FROM SPACEBORNE SAR 940210: NEURAL NETWORK ADAPTIVE WAVELET CLASSIFICATION OF RADAR TARGETS 940615: Ka-BAND OCEAN WAVE-RADAR MODULATION TRANSFER FUNCTION: A COMPARATIVE STUDY WT01-B02-244IA055-000916-B002-105http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/sat.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200548 text/html 39377HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:04:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " satellite" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " satellite" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940843: INTERACTIVE INTEGRATION OF INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGERY, SATELLITE ALTIMETERY, AND IN SITU MEASUREMENTS INTO THE PRODUCTION OF AN OPERATIONAL OCEAN FEATURES ANALYSIS PRODUCT 940670: AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE TM DATA INTEGRATION FOR WATER MONITORING ALONG THE LIGURIAN COAST 940579: IN-FIELD CHARACTERIZATION OF SAHARAN SITES FOR SATELLITE CALIBRATION 940047: VAGSAT: A PROPOSAL FOR A SMALL SATELLITE MISSION FOR THE MEASUREMENT OF OCEAN WAVE SPECTRA WITH A REAL-APERTURE RADAR 940206: OPERATIONAL USE OF SATELLITE DATA FOR SEA ICE ANALYSIS AT THE US AND CANADIAN NATIONAL ICE CENTERS 940279: NEW PERSPECTIVES ON ACTIVE TECTONICS: OBSERVING FAULT MOTION, MAPPING EARTHQUAKE STRAIN FIELDS, AND VISUALIZING SEISMIC EVENTS IN MULTIPLE DIMENSIONS USING SATELLITE IMAGERY AND GEOP" 940303: DETECTION OF OCEANIC STERIC HEIGHT CHANGE USING TOPEX/POSEIDON SATELLITE ALTIMETERY 940368: ADAPTIVE MAXIMIZATION OF LOSSLESS IMAGE COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE IMAGES 940388: MODELING SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN SATELLITE-BASED ESTIMATES OF LEAF AREA INDEX USING A SCENE SIMULATION MODEL 940571: SAT-GIS: A CUSTOMIZED SYSTEM FOR SATELLITE IMAGE PROCESSING, DIGITAL CARTOGRAPHY AND TOPOGRAPHIC ANALYSES IN A GIS ENVIRONMENT, BASED UPON A WORLDWIDE SEAMLESS DATABASE 940582: EMISSIONS FROM ORBITING TETHERED SATELLITE SYSTEMS TO THE EARTH'S SURFACE: DATA ANALYSIS. 940897: ESTIMATION OF NET CARBON FLUX OVER THE FIFE SITE BY COMBINING SATELLITE AND IN-SITU OBSERVATIONS WITH MODELS USING GIS 940969: EARLY STAGES OF SEA ICE GROWTH OBSERVED WITH SATELLITE DATA 940999: SPACE AND TIME ALIASING STRUCTURE IN MEAN POLAR-ORBITING SATELLITE DATA 941033: ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMS FOR SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE DATA PROCESSING 940197: USING AIRBORNE AND SATELLITE DATA FOR MULTITEMPORAL STUDIES OF LAND DEGRADATION 940423: A SHORTWAVE RADIATION MODEL FOR RADIOMETRIC CORRECTION OF OPTICAL SATELLITE DATA IN RUGGED TERRAIN 940544: ATMOSPHERIC AND TOPOGRAPHIC CORRECTION OF SATELLITE DATA OVER MOUNTANIOUS TERRAIN 940696: KA-BAND PROPAGATION MEASUREMENTS FROM THE ADVANCED COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY SATELLITE (ACTS) 940768: INFLUENCE OF AN INHOMOGENEOUS IONOSPHERE ON MOBILE SATELLITE COMMUNICATION 940792: MEASUREMENT OF OCEANIC WIND VECTOR USING SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETERS 940837: A STUDY OF THE MICROWAVE SOUNDING UNIT ON THE NOAA-12 SATELLITE 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 940030: NONSTATISTICAL METHOD OF TEMPERATURE PROFILE RETRIEVAL BY SATELLITE RADIOMETRIC MEASUREMENTS IN OXYGEN SPECTRA 940115: A PRECISE- NAVIGATION PROCEDURE FOR AUTOMATIC PICTURE TRANSMISSION APT IMAGERY OF METEOROLOGICAL SATELLITE NOAA 940126: SATELLITE OBSERVATION OF SURFACE FORCING OVER THE WARM POOL 940135: ON OPPORTUNITY OF ASSESSMENT OF UNDERWATER SOLAR RADIATION IN THE GLOBAL OCEAN ON SATELLITE DATA. 940203: COMPARISON AND VISUALIZATION OF FEATURE SPACE BEHAVIOUR OF STATISTICAL AND NEURAL CLASSIFIERS OF SATELLITE IMAGERY 940254: GLOBAL PRODUCTION OF MULTI-CHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURES USING THE NAVAL OCEANOGRAPHIC OFFICE'S SATELLITE PROCESSING SYSTEM 940375: CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE 940376: FIELD OF VIEW CALIBRATION OF THE MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER ON THE UPPER ATMOSPHERE RESEARCH SATELLITE 940445: SPATIAL VARIATION OF EVAPORATION OVER THE HAPEX-SAHEL SOUTHERN SUPER SITE DERIVED FROM SATELLITE DATA 940592: ANTARCTIC POLYNYA AREAS DERIVED WITH SATELLITE PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY AND THEIR IMPACT ON OCEAN AND ATMOSPHERE 940609: SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS'92 940674: TEACHING WITH SATELLITE DIRECT READOUT 940794: ANALYSIS OF MULTI-INCIDENCE ANGLE SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER DATA FROM THE DMSP SSM/I 940815: ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING OVER THE OSAKA BAY AREA BY SATELLITE 940819: RADAR SATELLITE SNOWMELT DETECTION IN THE CANADIAN ROCKY MOUNTAINS ANTHONY WANKIEWICZ MAXFIELD 940834: DETERMINATION OF PROPORTIONS OF LAND USE BLEND IN PIXELS OF A SATELLITE IMAGE 940916: CORRECTING INFRARED SATELLITE ESTIMATES OF SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE FOR ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR ATTENUATION 941094: ANALYSIS OF ERROR SOURCES IN THERMAL INFRARED CALIBRATION OF AERIAL AND SATELLITE IMAGES 941096: A STUDY ON GLACIER MOVEMENT USING SATELLITE SAR AND VISIBLE/NEAR-IR IMAGERY 940369: APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS FOR DETECTION OF SEA ICE COVERAGE AND MOVEMENTS FROM SATELLITE IMAGERY 940415: VARIABILITY OF GLOBAL UPPER-TROPOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR DERIVED FOR SATELLITE INFRARED OBSERVATIONS 940715: SATELLITE IMAGE CLASSIFICATION BASED ON MULTI-SOURCE INFORMATION-FUSION WITH POSSIBILITY THEORY 940756: COMPRESSION OF SATELLITE MULTISPECTRAL IMAGERY FOR APPLICATIONS REQUIRING HIGH-QUALITY RADIOMETRY 940252: GROUND TRUTH STUDIES: USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA IN K-12 EDUCATION 940073: A CONTINENTAL INSTRUMENTED GROUND SITE NETWORK (CIGSN, AUSTRALIA): A PREREQUISITE FOR THE DETECTION, INTERPRETATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF GLOBAL CHANGE. 940098: TOWARDS OPERATIONAL USE OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RAOAR CAGES IN SEA ICE MONITORING 940186: USING REMOTELY SENSED DATA TO ESTIMATE SURFACE HEMISPHERICAL REFLECTANCE, ALBEDO AND ABSORBED PHOTOSYNTHETIC ACTIVE RADIATION 940440: MONITORING ARID LAND SURFACES CHANGES: OPTICAL REMOTE SENSING OF THE NON-VEGETATED COMPONENT 940625: ORBIT REFINEMENT WITH APPLICATIONS TO REMOTE SENSING 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940885: MONITORING THE TOTAL SOLAR IRAADIANCE OF THE GEOSPHERE 940164: COMPARING NUMERICAL AND ANALYTICAL SCHEMES FOR AEROSOL RETRIEVAL FROM THE ADVANCED VERY HIGH RESOLUTION RADIOMETER 940218: COASTWATCH OPERATIONAL MAPPED AVHRR IMAGERY 940241: OPERATIONAL PROCESSING OF DMSP SPECIAL SENSOR MICROWAVE,II~GER DATA AT ELEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER (FNMOC): ALGORITHM TRANSITIONS 940255: ALTIMETRICALLY DERIVED FRONT AND EDDY POSITIONS FOR OPERATIONAL NOWCASTS 940283: ASF DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR RADARSAT/ERS-2 940460: IMPROVEMENT IN 1985-1993 NDVI TIME-SERIES FOR WORLD DESERT TARGETS USING POST-LAUNCH CALIBRATION 940525: ESTIMATING FRACTIONAL VEGETATION COVER AT THE SUB PIXEL SCALE IN A SEMIARID REGION USING A STATISTICAL MIXTURE MODEL AND REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940585: THE GERMAN PROCESSING AND ARCHIVING CENTER FOR ENVISAT 940606: MONITORING OF CARBON RELEASE IN ALAS- BOREAL FORESTS 940677: MAPPING OF SNOW WITH ERS-1 SAR AND AIRBORNE MICROWAVE SENSORS 940680: RETRIEVAL OF SNOW AND SEA ICE PARAMETERS FROM SSM/I DATA 940833: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOME DATA PROCESSOR 940128: A GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FINALISED TO THE GOME INSTRUMENTS (ERS-2 MISSION) 940346: SURFACE ELEVATION CHANGES OF THE GREENLAND ICE SHEET FROM AN ANALYSIS OF SEASAT & GEOSAT ALTIMETER DATA 940367: DETECTION OF SHIP TRACKS IN AVHRR CLOUD IMAGERY WITH NEURAL NETWORKS 940373: PRACTICAL USE OF ERS-1 SAR IMAGES IN POLLUTION MONITORING 940399: MICROWAVE LJMB SOUNDING OF THE EARTH'S ATMOSPHERE: UARS RESULTS AND EOS PLANS 940417: EXTRACT OF POLLUTED AREA IN INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX BY MOS-1(MESSR) IMAGE DATA 940436: AN AUTOMATED CHANGE DETECTION SYSTEM 940449: TEXTURE ANALYSIS FOR LANDSCAPE RECOGNITION: THE PAPRI METHOD 940473: SSM/I CENTER-FIXES AND INTENSITIES OF TROPICAL STORMS 940524: A STUDY ON WHOLE THREE YEARS DATA ANALYSIS OF NOAA AVHRR IMAGES 940599: MONITORING ALPINE SNOW COVER VARIATIONS USING NOAA-AVHRR DATA 940683: SOLVING REMOTE SENSING INVERSE PROBLEMS USING BAYESIAN MODELING TO INCORPORATE INFORMATION SOURCES 940791: AIRBORNE REMOTE SENSING EXPERIMENTS OF MARINE MONITORING 940808: EVALUATION OF THE MULTICHANNEL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ALGORITHM ALONG THE BRAZILIAN COAST 940821: APPLICATION OF THE HOUGH TRANSFORM FOR AUTOMATED INTERPRETATION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN IMAGERIES 940825: HOW TO DOUBLE THE SPATIAL RESOLUTION OF A PUSH-BROOM INSTRUMENT 940826: SPOT3: FIRST IN FLIGHT RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION RESULTS 940830: PASSIVE MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION BIOMASS 940836: NEW FEATURES IN THE TRANSMISSION OF LIGHT THROUGH THIN METAL FILMS WITH RANDOMLY ROUGH SURFACES 940870: ESTIMATION OF WIND SPPED AND WIND DIRECTION FROM ERS-1 IMAGERY 940981: COMPARISON OF ENHANCED RESOLUTION IMAGES OF GREENLAND FROM THE ERS-1 AND SEASAT SCATTEROMETERS 941026: SIMULATION OF THE EMERGENT RADIATION FROM THE TOP OF ATMOSPHERE, WERE THE BROKEN CIRRUS LAYER IS CONSIDERED 941081: REMOTE MEASUREMENTS AND COASTAL ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION 941105: SENSOR REQUIREMENTS FOR TREATY VERIFICATION AND CRISIS MONITORING 940012: THE VIERS RADAR BACKSCATTER MODEL DEVELOPMENT FOR WIND FIELD RETRIEVAL 940002: THE AIRSAR-93 AND SAREX-92 CAMPAIGNS IN GUYANA AND COLUMBIA 940051: EFFECTS OF VARIATION IN SOIL MOISTURE ON ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER FROM LOBLOLLY PINE FORESTS 940057: THE ESTIMATION ON WATERSIlED DESIGN PEAK FLOW RATES BASED ON GIS AND REMOTE SENSING TECIINOLOGIES 940070: COAST LINE DETECTION FROM SAR IMAGES 940071: A REMOTE SENSING MONITORING SYSTEM FOR A COLONIZATION AREA IN TROPICAL RAIN FOREST 940092: SELF-CONSISTENT MEASUREMENTS OF DIFFERENTIAL PHASE AND DIFFERENTIAL REFLECTIVlTY IN RAIN 940094: INDOOR EXPERIMENT OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL SUPERSYNTHESIS RADIOMETER 940101: CALIBRATION EXPERIMENTS OF ERS-1 SAR WITH ACTIVE RADAR CALIBRATOR IN JAPAN 940111: SENSING OF RADIO REFLECTIVITY AND AEROSOL EXTINCTION 940124: CALIBRATION FOR RADARSAT 940138: GLOBAL AND REGIONAL SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE ANALYSES AT FLEET NUMERICAL METEOROLOGY AND OCEANOGRAPHY CENTER 940142: ICE LEAD ORIENTATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE WINTER BEAUFORT SEA 940147: A MULTIBAND ROAD EXTRACTION SCHEME FOR LANDSAT-TM IMAGERY 940148: THE INFLUENCE OF ALTITUDE AND LOOK ANGLE ON SAR OCEAN WAVE IMAGING: A PRACTICAL COMPROMISE 940162: AEROSOL OPTICAL THICKNESS RETRIEVAL FROM SUN PHOTOMETER MEASUREMENTS 940175: THE DOPPLER PROPERTIES OF THE ELLIPTICAL ORBITING RADAR 940177: A DESCRIPTION SUSCEPTIBILITY INDEX: USE OF GIS TO ASSESS POTENTIAL DESERTIFICATION 940195: REMOTE MONITORING OF SHIFTING SANDS AND VEGETATION COVER IN ARID REGIONS 940204: APPLICATIONS OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADIOMETRY 940211: SOLAR-RADIATION-BASED ABSOLUTE CALIBRATION OF OPTICAL SENSORS: SeaWiFS AND A DAEDALUS 1268 940219: SEAWIFS INTERCALIBRATION ROUND ROBIN EXPERIMENTS 940229: FIELD PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS OF SNOWPACK AT 37 GHz 940230: DETECTION OF VOLUME SCATTERING EFFECTS IN BEAMWIDTH LIMITED ALTIMETRY DATA 940238: RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA 940250: STATISTICS OF OCEANIC RAINFALL TO HELP INTERPRET TRMM DATA 940272: CLASSIFICATION OF THE AMAZON RAIN FOREST USING JERS-1 SAR DATA 940273: VALIDATION AND CALIBRATION OF SAR IMAGERY OF MANU NATIONAL PARK, PERU Bruce Chapman, A. Freeman, A. Zimmermann, and Ram Oren 940288: ON THE DERIVATION OF COSEISMIC DISPLACEMENT FIELDS USING DIFFERENTIAL RADAR INTERFEROMETRY: THE LANDERS EARTHQUAKE 940330: A SNOW INDEX FOR THE LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER AND MODERATE RESOLUTION IMAGING SPECTRORADIOMETER 940356: ASTER ROUDN-ROBIN RADIOMETERS FOR THE PREFLIGHT CROSS-CALIBRATION OF EOS AM1 INSTRUMENTS 940357: BEYOND THE OBVIOUS: SOME REFLECTIONS 940393: AN INTEGRATED GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM'S APPROACH TO LAND COVER CHANGE ASSESSMENT 940398: UARS MICROWAVE LIMB SOUNDER OBSERVATIONS OF UPPER ATMOSPHERE OZONE AND CHLORINE MONOXIDE. 940413: DEVELOPMENT OF A GENERIC SAR PROCESSOR IN THE NETHERLANDS 940419: SIMULATION STUDY OF A MICROWAVE RADIOMETRIC TEMPERATURE PROFILER FOR THE ANTARCTIC ATMOSPHERE 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940451: INFORMATION CONTENT OF COMPRESSED REMOTELY SENSED DATA 940453: EVALUATION OF A MULTITEMPORAL ERS-1 DATASET FOR HYDROLOGIC APPLICATIONS 940455: CANADA'S GLOBESAR PROGRAM 940461: LINEAR RESPONSE OF SEA LEVEL TO WIND FORCING DETERMINED FROM TOPEX/POSEIDON ALTIMETER DATA 940466: AIRBORNE DUAL-CHANEL RADIOMETRIC OCEAN SURFACE OBSERVATIONS DURING SCOPE `93 940469: TRMM PRECIPITATION RADAR: CALIBRATION AND DATA COLLECTION STRATEGIES 940470: DETECTION OF LINEAR FEATURES IN ERS-1 SAR IMAGES USING NEURAL NETWORK TECHNOLOGY 940474: PROFILING THE THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF THE ATMOSPHERE WITH HIGH SPECTRUM RESOLUTION INFRARED RADIANCE MEASUREMENTS 940482: USE OF VEGETATION INDICES FOR THE RETRIEVAL OF INFORMATION ON SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF SEMI-ARID REGIONS 940485: AN EFFICIENT WATER CONCEPT FOR MONITORING VEGETATION IN WEST AFRICA 940486: LINEAR MIXTURE MODELLING APPLIED TO AVHRR DATA FOR MONITORING VEGETATION 940488: CALIBRATION OF MAS ANTENNA USING RADIATION OF THE LUNAR SURFACE 940494: OBSERVATIONS AND MODELING OF OCEAN RADIANT HEATING DURING TOGA/COARE 940495: AIRBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF BALTIC SEA ICE 940513: BALLOON-BORNE MEASUREMENTS OF STRATOSPHERIC TRACE GASES BY FTIR SOLAR ABSORPT[ON SPECTROMETRY 940528: THE ALASKA SAR FACILITY: AN INTRODUCTION 940531: VEGETATION MAPPING OF FORESTED ECOSYSTEMS IN INTERIOR CENTRAL ALASKA 940533: SOIL ROUGHNESS INDEXES USE OF GEOSTATISTIC AND LASER REMOTE SENSING MEASURE 940543: AN EVALUATION OF ERS-1 PRI DATA IN THE CONTEXT OF THE RAPID ESTIMATION OF CROP ACREAGES IN EUROPE. 940545: A NEW APPROACH FOR FEATURE TRANSFORMATION TO EUCLIDEAN SPACE USEFUL IN THE ANALYSIS OF MULTISPECTRAL DATA. Kulkarni Linganagouda, P.Nagabhushan & K.Chidananda Gowda * S.J.College" 940546: SEGMENTATION AND INTERPRETATION OF NOAA-AVHRR MULTI-TEMPORAL NDVI BASED DATA SETS IN TEMPERATE REGIONS 940570: GLOBAL LAND SURFACE MONITORING USING THE ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER 940575: ADAPTIVE RECONSTRUCTION OF SEQUENTIAL AVHRR IMAGERY OF TEXAS VIA DYNAMIC COMPOSITING USING EXPONENTIALLY WEIGHTED POLYNOMIAL FUNCTION 940581: EVALUATION OF THE SSALT POSEIDON ALTIMETER 940589: ELABORATION OF A WILD FIRE HAZARD MODEL FOR THE EPARCHY OF PYLIAS (SW-MESSINIA, GREECE) BASED UPON REMOTE SENSING AND GIS 940627: ACQUISITION OF IN SITU SURFACE AND ATMOSPHERIC MEASUREMENTS FOR AVIRIS DATA VALIDATION AND ANALYSIS 940629: A QUICK ACCESS DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEM FOR IN-SITU DATA FOR EOS AIRS PRODUCT VALIDATION 940633: GUIDANCE FOR AN EXPERT SYSTEM APPROACH TO ELEVATED DUCT ASSESSMENT OVER THE NORTHEASTERN PACIFIC OCEAN 940679: APPLICATION OF ERS-1 SAR-DATA IN LARGE AREA FOREST INVENTORY 940706: ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTIONS OF AVIRIS IMAGES WITH A PROCEDURE BASED ON THE INVERSION OF 5S MODEL 940713: AN APPROACH TO GEOGRAPHIC PATTERN RECOGNITION USING A MATHEMATICAL MORPHOLOGY 940725: BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE DISTRIBUTION FUNCTION MEASUREMENTS IN THE NASA/GSFC DIFFUSER CALIBRATION FACILITY 940735: OPTIMIZATION METHOD FOR B/H RATIO DETERMINATION TAKING OCCLUSION EFFECT AND MTF DEGRADATION DUE TO ATMOSPHERE INTO ACCOUNT 940759: AN EARLY EOS PROGRESS REPORT 940802: EFFECTS OF A REFRACTlVE ATMOSPHERE ON INTERFEROMETRIC PROCESSING 940803: INVENTORY BY COMPARTMENTS USING RADAR-DERIVED STAND PROFILES 940806: OPTICAL-MICROWAVE DATA SYNERGISM TO PROVIDE PARAMETERS REQUIRED AS INPUTS BY SURFACE ENERGY BALANCE MODELS 940807: NOAA AVHRR DATA PROCESSING: REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS IN OPERATIONAL ALGORITHMS 940809: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SKIPJACK TUNA FISHERY AND OCEANOGRAPHIC FEATURES OBSERVED BY INFRARED IMAGERY IN THE SOUTHERN BRAZILIAN COAST 940812: A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE UARS MISSION AND CORELLATIVE MEASUREMENTS CAMPAIGN 940816: AEROSOL RETRIEVAL BASED ON PHOTOPOLARIMETRY 940817: RETRIEVAL OF TROPOSPHERIC OZONE FROM SIMULATIONS OF SPECTRAL RADIANCES AS OBSERVED FROM SPACE 940823: VALIDATING SAR INTERFEROMETRY APPLICATIONS BY USING EMSL 940824: ESTIMATION AND IMPROVEMENT OF COHERENCE IN SAR INTERFEROGRAMS. 940835: IDENTIFYING AND MAPPING WETLANDS USING COMBINED SAR AND LANDSAT THEMATIC MAPPER DATA 940863: ESTIMATING SNOW PARTICLE SIZE USING TM BAND-4 940866: THE BRDF EFFECT ON DETERMINATION OF SPECTRAL EMISSIVITIES OF LAND-SURFACE MATERIALS FROM SPECTROMETRRIC MEASUREMENTS 940879: ON MINIMIZING IMAGING LATENCY TIME FOR RADARSAT III 940888: NONLINEAR STATISTICAL PRECIPITATION RETRIEVALS USING SIMULATED PASSIVE MICROWAVE IMAGERY 940901: A SYSTEMS BASED MODIFICATION OF THE NDVI TO MINIMIZE SOIL AND ATMOSPHERIC NOISE 940908: MONITORING LAND SURFACES WITH COMBINED DMSP-SSM/I AND ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER DATA 940915: OBSERVED AND SIMULATED ICE MOTION FOR AN ANNUAL CYCLE IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940919: MODELLING CANOPY RADIATIVE TEMPERATURE SURFACE AND FLUX ESTIMATION 940920: SEAWINDS: A SCANNING SCATTEROMETER FOR ADEOS II-- SCIENCE OVERVIEW 940925: AIRBORNE PASSIVE POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF SEA SURFACE ANISOTROPY AT 92 GHZ 940926: AIRBORNE IMAGING OF TROPOSPHERIC EMISSION AT MILLIMETER AND SUBMILLIMETER WAVELENGTHS 940927: ANALYSIS OF NIMBUS-7 SMMR 6.6 GHZ DATA OVER VEGETATED LAND SURFACES: THEORY AND EXAMPLES 940931: A COMPACT DUAL-FREQUENCY ALTIMETER FOR TOPEX-POSEIDON FOLLOW ON MISSION 940936: RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST. HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL 940937: AN APPROACH TO ESTIMATING SURFACE PARAMETERS AND FLUXES USING MODELING AND MULTISPECTRAL REMOTE SENSING 940952: HIGH WIND STUDY: A VALIDATION WIND DATA BASE FOR AMI ON ERS-1 940973: RADIOMETRIC CALIBRATION OF THE LANDSAT-7 ENHANCED THEMATIC MAPPER + 940992: A SCATTERING MODEL FOR THE RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF PRAIRIE GRASS 940995: AN EVALUATION OF BATS AS A BASIS FOR A RADIOBRIGHTNESS MODEL FOR NORTHERN PRAIRIE 940998: EFFECT OF LATENT HEAT TRANSFER ON DIURNAL AND ANNUAL PREDICTION OF TEMPERATURE AND RADIOBRIGHTNESS OF NORTHERN PRAIRIE 941000: SYNERGISTIC USE OF REMOTELY SENSED DATA FOR EVALUATION OF THE BOUNDARY LAYER IN SYNOPTIC STORMS AND FRONTS 941003: UNIFIED APPROACH FOR OBTAINING BEST ESTIMATES OF SPECTRAL OPTICAL DEPTHS AND CALIBRATION INTERCEPTS FROM SUNPHOTOMETER DATA SETS CORRUPTED BY TEMPORAL VARIATIONS 941004: PREDICTING LASFR BACKSCATTER WITH PASSIVE MULTIANGLE MEASUREMENTS OF A PLAYA FOR LITE CALIBRATION 941007: USING THE MOSART CODE FOR ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION 941028: METHODOLOGIES FOR ESTIMATING THE VERTICAL PROFILE OF REELECTIVITY THROUGH C-BAND DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 941048: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN WESTERN AFRICA ITCZ AND ST-HELENA ANTICYCLONE SUGGESTED BY A WATCH OF METEOSAT-WV CHANNEL 941060: AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 941063: AUTOMATIC MAPPING OF THE VARIOUS TYPES OF LIGNEOUS VEGETATION COVERS ACCORDING TO THEIR DENSITY 941065: DEM CORRECTED ERS-1 SAR DATA FOR SNOW MONITORING IN ALPINE REGIONS 941092: THE ATTRIBUTE "VEGETATION INDEX" IN THE EVALUATION OF PLANT COVER IN THE SOUTH OF THE BRASILIAN PANTANAL 941114: AN ASSESSMENT OF SST ESTIMATION ACCURACY WITH ADEOS/OCTS DATA WT01-B02-245IA055-000916-B002-144http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/sea_ice.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200608 text/html 11143HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:04:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " sea and ice" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " sea and ice" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 941086: RADIATIVE TRANSFER IN SEA ICE AND THE MEASUREMENT OF IN-ICE OFTICAL PROFILES 940431: CHARACTERISTICS OF WINTER SEA ICE CONDITIONS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN WEDDELL SEA IN 1992 AS DERIVED FROM MULTI-SENSOR OBSERVATIONS 940975: EXTRACTING SEASONAL PARAMETERS OF SEA ICE MORPHOLOGY FROM SAR IMAGERY: SIZE DISTRIBUTIONS OF FIRST-YEAR ICE 940236: UTILIZING THE DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF SEA ICE FOR DETERMINING ICE THICKNESS DISTRIBUTIONS IN SAR IMAGERY 940038: DETERMINATION OF ICE AGE: A PROPOSED SCHEME FOR A RADARSAT SEA ICE GEOPHYSICAL PROCESSOR SYSTEM 940206: OPERATIONAL USE OF SATELLITE DATA FOR SEA ICE ANALYSIS AT THE US AND CANADIAN NATIONAL ICE CENTERS 940190: TESTING OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL IN A SEA ICE FORECASTING SYSTEM 940400: THE DISTRIBUTION OF BIOGENIC MATERIAL IN ARCTIC SEA ICE 940495: AIRBORNE MICROWAVE RADIOMETER MEASUREMENTS OF BALTIC SEA ICE 940610: ERS-1 INVESTIGATIONS OF SOUTHERN OCEAN SEA ICE GEOPHYSICS USING COMBINED SCATTEROMETER AND SAR IMAGES. 940191: A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL FOR THE LABRADOR PACK ICE 940151: THE UTILIZATION OF MODELED SALINITY AND TEMPERATURE PROFILES IN THE ESTIMATION OF SAR BACKSCATTER FROM FIRST YEAR ARCTIC SEA ICE 940694: BACKSCATTERING FROM SEA ICE WITH VERTICAL STRUCTURAL VALUATION: A MODEL ANALYSIS 941060: AUTOMATIC SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INFORMATION EXTRACTION ALGORITHMS FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 940711: MODEL FOR ESTIMATING SURFACE ROUGHNESS OF LEVEL AND RIDGED SEA ICE USINg ERS-1 SAR 940915: OBSERVED AND SIMULATED ICE MOTION FOR AN ANNUAL CYCLE IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940098: TOWARDS OPERATIONAL USE OF SYNTHETIC APERTURE RAOAR CAGES IN SEA ICE MONITORING 940256: AN EXAMINATION OF THE RADAR BACKSCATTER OF SEA ICE IN THE EAST SIBERIAN AND CHUKCHI SEAS 940309: OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF MULTIYEAR AND FIRST YEAR SEA ICE 940319: HEIGHT AND LARGE-SCALE HEIGHT ROUGHNESS INFORMATION FROM CCRS INTERFEROMETRIC SAR DATA OF ARCTIC SEA ICE. 940609: SATELLITE MICROWAVE RADAR- AND BOUT-TRACKED ICE MOTION IN THE WEDDELL SEA DURING WWGS'92 940642: INVERSION ALGORITHMS FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE 940596: DOES SNOW COVER MASK THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURE OF SEA ICE? 940969: EARLY STAGES OF SEA ICE GROWTH OBSERVED WITH SATELLITE DATA 940680: RETRIEVAL OF SNOW AND SEA ICE PARAMETERS FROM SSM/I DATA 940549: DISCRIMINATION BETWEEN YOUNG SEA ICE TYPES FROM SINGLE LOOK SAR IMAGE DATA. 940189: OPERATIONAL USE OF SSM/I ICE CONCENTRATION IN THE INITIALIZATION OF A COUPLED ICE-OCEAN MODEL 940491: ERS-1 SAR BACKSCATTER MODELLING AND INTERPRETATION OF SEA ICE SIGNATURES 940964: MICROWAVE STUDY OF THE FORMATION OF BRINE LAYERS ON HOMOGENEOUS SALINE ICE SHEETS 940641: RADIATIVE TRANSFER THEORY FOR REMOTE SENSING OF SEA ICE 940233: OBSERVING SEASONAL TRANSITIONS ON SEA ICE IN THE ARCTIC USING THE ERS-1 SAR 940597: LASER PROPAGATION IN SALT WATER ICE 940369: APPLICATION OF ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS FOR DETECTION OF SEA ICE COVERAGE AND MOVEMENTS FROM SATELLITE IMAGERY 940452: SIMULATION OF RADARSAT SCANSAR FOR SEA ICE APPLICATIONS 940840: EXPERIMENTAL MEASUREMENTS AND THEORETICAL BOUNDS ON THE COMPLEX PERMITTIVITY OF SEA ICE AT Ka BAND (26.5-40 GHz) 940690: MODELING INTERPRETATION OF SCATTERING FROM SNOW-COVERED SEA ICE 940056: WAVE EVOLUTION IN THE MARGINAL ICE ZONE USING ERS-1 SAR 940142: ICE LEAD ORIENTATION CHARACTERISTICS IN THE WINTER BEAUFORT SEA 940719: PROGRESS IN POLAR OCEANS RESEARCH USING ERS-1 DATA 940076: APPLICATION OF A COMPACT RANGE ANTENNA FOR ACCURATE MEASUREMENT OF MICROWAVE SCATTERING FROM SEA ICE 940982: ENIIANCED RESOLUTION ERS-1 SCATTEROMETER IMAGING OF SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE POLAR ICE 940037: USE OF TIME-SERIES SAR DATA TO RESOLVE ICE TYPE AMBIGUITIES IN NEWLY-OPENED LEADS 940239: ASSIMILATING REMOTELY-SENSED DATA INTO A DYNAMIC-THERMODYNAMIC ICE MODEL 940968: SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING OF THE BEAUFORT SEA DURING LEADEX'92 940180: ANTARCTIC PASSIVE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES DURING SUMMAR AND AUTUMN 940797: HEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF ICE PARTICLES IN WINTERTIME THUNDERCLOUDS OBSERVED BY A DUAL POLARIZATION RADAR 940967: IN-SITU OBSERVATION OF THE MICROWAVE RESPONSE OF LEAD EVOLUTION 940965: STUDY OF THE TEMPORAL NATURE OF THE MICROWAVE SIGNATURES OF LEADS DURING SPRING 940169: NO SIGNIFICANT TREND IN ARCTIC AND ANTARCTIC ICE CONCENTRATIONS FROM 1973 TO 1991 940234: FORWARD AND INVERSE SIGNATUUE MODELING FOR CONGELATION ICE 940082: ACTIVE/PASSIVE OBSERVATIONS OF A P0LYNYA AREA IN THE BEAUFORT SEA 940475: ANALYSIS OF SURFACEBASED PASSIVE MICROWAVE OBSERVATIONS DURING LEADEX `92 941096: A STUDY ON GLACIER MOVEMENT USING SATELLITE SAR AND VISIBLE/NEAR-IR IMAGERY 940238: RETRIEVAL OF LEAD CHARACTERISTICS USING VISIBLE AND AVHRR IMAGERY: VALIDATION OF THEORY WITH LEADEX DATA 940472: CONSTRUCTION OF AN AIRBORNE 93 GHz IMAGING RADIOMETER 940663: THE EARSEC INFORMATION AND DATA FUSION ENVIRONMENT 940687: FULLY POLARIMETRIC MEASUREMENTS OF ROBOTICALLY FABRICATED DENSE MEDIA TARGETS 941007: USING THE MOSART CODE FOR ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION WT01-B02-246IA055-000916-B002-167http://stargate.jpl.nasa.gov:1083/html/shuttle.htm 137.79.108.182 19970210200623 text/html 4191HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 20:05:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.5Content-type: text/html Search for " shuttle" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts Search for " shuttle" in IGARSS '94 Abstracts 940913: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY-A CLASSROOM RESOURCE 940914: SPACE SHUTTLE PHOTOGRAPHY ON LASER DISC: A WINNING COMBINATION FOR THE CLASSROOM 940911: SPACE SHUTTLE EARTH OBSERVATIONS DIGITAL DATA BASE 940489: TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE PROFILES OF THE MIDDLE ATMOSPHERE RETRIEVED FROM MILLIMETER WAVE ATMOSPHERIC SOUNDER (MAS) ONBOARD THE SPACE SHUTTLE MISSION ATLAS-1 940559: X-SAR PRECISION DATA PRODUCTS FROM THE SHUTTLE RADAR LAB 940760: MIDDLE ATMOSPHERIC WATER VAPOR and OZONE RETRIEVALS FROM THE MM-WAVE ATMOSPHERIC SOUNDER (MAS) SHUTTLE EXPERIMENT 940370: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE SIR-C GROUND DATA PROCESSOR SYSTEM 940912: NASA-SPONSORED EDUCATIONAL OUTREACH INITIATIVE 940064: THE ATMOSPHERIC TRACE MOLECULE SPECTROSCOPY INVESTIGATION 940148: THE INFLUENCE OF ALTITUDE AND LOOK ANGLE ON SAR OCEAN WAVE IMAGING: A PRACTICAL COMPROMISE 940271: THE SIR-C EDUCATION PROGRAM (SIR-CED) 940508: PREDICTION OF IMAGE PERFORMANCE AND REAL-TIME QUALITY IMPROVEMENT FOR THE SIR-C/X-SAR SRL-1 MISSION 940885: MONITORING THE TOTAL SOLAR IRAADIANCE OF THE GEOSPHERE 940910: AN ITERATIVE FREQUENCY-DOMAIN TECHNIQUE TO REDUCE IMAGE DEGRADATION DUE TO LENS DEFOCUS AND MOTION BLUR 940490: ZEEMAN SPLITTING OF THE 61 GHZ (9+) 02 LINE IN THE MESOSPHERE 940499: PERFORMANCE VERIFICATION OF SPECTRAL AND PANCHROMATIC MODULES OF THE MOMS-02 SENSOR FLOWN ABOARD STS-55 / D2-MISSION 940637: CALIBRATION AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE X-SAR SYSTEM 940696: KA-BAND PROPAGATION MEASUREMENTS FROM THE ADVANCED COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY SATELLITE (ACTS) 940812: A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE UARS MISSION AND CORELLATIVE MEASUREMENTS CAMPAIGN 941054: A SW PRODUCT FOR SAR RAW-DATA SIMULATION 941129: A SW PRODUCT FOR SAR RAW-DATA SIMULATION