WT01-B09-1IA096-001028-B017-238http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/Warspech.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215010905 text/html 25017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:10:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 24845Last-modified: Wed, 25 Dec 1996 03:21:50 GMT December 9, 1996, Speech by William A. Reinsch Practising Law Institute Coping with U.S. Export Controls Keynote Remarks by William A. Reinsch Under Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration December 9, 1996 Go to: Accomplishments | Next Steps | Encryption Process Reform | EPCI | EAA | Closing Introduction: I am pleased to be back with PLI to discuss the direction of the Administration's export control program. We have a lot to discuss, so I'll get right into it. When I spoke to you last year, I mentioned the turning point for our nation's future -- the shift with the end of the Cold War to identifying national security with global economic competitiveness. In that regard, nothing I said last year has changed. That shift continues, and the Clinton Administration remains sensitive to it. But we also have to move beyond it and look ahead at the kind of world we face in the future. First, however, I would like to recap the last several years of accomplishments, give you an idea of what we are currently working on, and then lay out a couple of issues I believe will be important as we walk over the bridge into the 21st Century. Accomplishments: These last few years have been very busy ones for BXA. The Administration realized early on that rapid technological change and economic globalization compelled comprehensive reform of our export control system, reform which balances the need to keep sensitive goods and technologies out of the hands of countries of concern without imposing unnecessary or ineffective constraints on U.S. business. That is precisely why we reformed outdated controls, streamlined our existing export control system and worked to enhance multilateral regimes. In the last three years, we have: substantially liberalized controls on high performance computers, semiconductors and semiconductor manufacturing equipment, Beta-test software, telecommunications equipment, and chemical mixtures, among others; clarified and simplified the Export Administration Regulations through a comprehensive revision and reorganization, making them more user-friendly, in accordance with the goal set by the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee (TPCC) in 1993; improved the export license process through a Presidential Executive Order broadening agency review opportunities while limiting the time for those reviews, providing an orderly procedure to resolve interagency disputes, and establishing real accountability throughout the interagency review process. completed the transfer of jurisdiction of commercial communication satellites and commercial jet engine hot section technology from the State Department's Munitions List to the Commerce Control List; amended our national control list of nuclear items to conform more closely with that of our allies, and expanded the number of countries to which exporters can ship nuclear-controlled items via license exception. This will simplify the license process for U.S. industry; liberalized our chemical export regulations, consistent with multilateral agreements, so that U.S. exporters in this high volume industry can now ship chemical mixtures containing controlled chemicals under a license exception to most destinations. We further streamlined controls and reporting requirements on sample chemical shipments; developed the Special Comprehensive License, which allows experienced, high volume exporters to export a broad range of items under this procedure; helped establish last July the Wassenaar Arrangement of Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, which established multilateral controls on exports of conventional arms and sensitive dual use equipment; worked to strengthen other multilateral nonproliferation regimes which, in turn, will enhance U.S. exporters' ability to engage in legitimate trade and compete worldwide on a level playing field. Defense Diversification: As you know, BXA also does more than administer U.S. export controls. During these last few years, through our Needs Assessment and Defense Diversification programs, we have made significant strides in reinforcing the U.S. defense industrial base which has had to deal with shrinking defense budgets. In addition, we continue to work with the Newly Independent States to help them develop effective export control programs and to assist their defense industries in diversifying into civilian lines of production. We are working with these countries to create new civilian jobs in their own country, while at the same time, matching U.S. firms with potential business opportunities there. Export Enforcement: I would also be remiss if I didn't mention the important role that our enforcement programs play in protecting our national security and foreign policy interests, particularly as we focus more on specific end-users and end-uses. Through our nonproliferation, counter terrorism, and national security export enforcement programs, we have conducted hundreds of investigations over the last four years. These have led to the criminal prosecution of persons who illegally exported zirconium for Iraqi munitions, unlicensed equipment for India's missile program, brokerage services for Iraqi rocket fuel, and gas masks to suspected Aum Shinrikyo terrorists in Japan, just to name a few. These investigations also included the first civil charges and penalties for alleged unlicensed exports of biotoxins which are controlled to prevent proliferation. Other cases involved illegal exports of police shields to Romania and polygraph equipment to South Africa during the periods when those countries' human rights policies did not meet international norms. While the issue of enforcement is not always a pleasant topic for many exporters, I cannot stress to you enough the importance of companies to ; &quotknow their customers;" and as always to exercise due diligence in transactions to destinations of proliferation concern, which we continue our efforts to identify. And in reality, these I have just mentioned are just some of the goals I am proud to say we have achieved. There is much more work to do and some issues for us just never seem to go away. Next Steps Further Liberalizations: In looking at this question we are trying to focus on areas where we can get the biggest bang for the buck, as it were, consistent with our national security priorities (poor choice of cliche!). That is, are there products, like computers several years ago, where we are controlling in excess of what is necessary for national security and where liberalization would make a significant difference to exporters? The two areas that come to mind in that regard are oscilloscopes and machine tools, and we continue to try to come to closure internally on what to do in both areas. The former is moving more rapidly than the latter. In addition, we are further analyzing our current licensing profile to identify other sectors that might be in a similar situation. To be candid, I don't expect a great deal more. We are down now to less than 9,000 licenses annually, and, increasingly, they are limited to items that are multilaterally controlled or items that are controlled to terrorist or other rogue states where our policy is unlikely to change in the short run. At the same time, there is the ongoing need to keep our controls up to date with advances in technology and spreading foreign availability. One reason our computer liberalization was so significant was because our predecessors delayed action, leaving a large number of items on the list that did not need to be there. In sectors like electronics, where product life cycles are short, we need to review our policies regularly to make sure we are not continuing to control old generation items that are now widely available from other sources. Not unrelated to this problem is the question of Wassenaar implementation. We are now in the process of preparing our control list to conform to that agreed upon by our Wassenaar colleagues. Encryption: One of the more important and difficult issues BXA has been involved with extensively is encryption. The Vice President announced on October 1 the Administration's policy, which is intended to balance a number of important equities -- business' need for strong encryption to secure commercial transactions, the individual's need for privacy, and the law enforcement and national security needs of the government. As we move forward in developing the regulations, it has become clear that this is an extraordinarily complex subject with many fast-evolving technologies, each posing its own special problems and questions. We are committed to implementing our policy on January 1, and I would urge our business colleagues to be patient. There has so far been something of a tendency in the business community to assume that when we do not answer a question, the answer must be no. In fact, we have not answered because there is no answer -- yet. Grappling with the many issues involved takes time. I am confident that ultimately we will produce a work product that is grounded in a market-driven approach to the problem and which balances the equities I've mentioned. Process Reform: As I indicated, we have also made a lot of progress reforming our process. Yet more work remains. We need to make sure the Executive Order is functioning properly, and in that regard I hope exporters will come forward and report on any problems they are encountering. We are also working with our sister agencies to have them delegate back to us those items they have no interest in reviewing. The Defense Department has done that to a modest degree, but as they become more familiar with the various kinds of applications we face, I expect additional delegations. We have been working particularly hard on delegating back to us applications for temporary exports -- for trade shows and the like -- but I regret I cannot yet report success. We also plan a thorough review of the conditions we impose on licenses. We will look at whether they are realistic and clear, and we will examine how we monitor and enforce them. Obviously, conditions are not meaningful if there is no follow up to make sure they are being adhered to. EPCI We continue to grapple with revising the enhanced proliferation control initiative (EPCI). We understand that exporters view EPCI as insufficiently focused, unclear, and too broad in scope to enable them to comply, with or for the government to enforce, its provisions. And we are working on it. The Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee Deport to Congress of September 30, 1993, stated that the regulations implementing EPCI should be clarified by "narrowing its scope to specific categories of commodities." While there is interagency agreement on the need to re-focus EPCI, there is some disagreement on the method to be employed. Some agencies favor applying EPCI to a "positive" list of items created from the current U.S. dual use export control list, while some favor a "negative" list of items that exporters would be permitted to export without EPCI restrictions. There is also some discussion on how to revise the lengthy "informed" process. When a company has been "informed" that a particular transaction presents a risk of diversion, no one else is so informed, and thus, this may leave others free to make the sale. We are currently awaiting consideration by the National Security Council (NSC) of our proposal to resolve this informal issue, and we expect to discuss the other issues into next year. CWC We are awaiting ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is an Administration priority which will be resubmitted to the Congress early in next year. I am confident that in a less political environment, we will be able to get it approved. Even so, it will be a significant burden on BXA, which is responsible for receiving industry data declarations and assisting business in preparing them, because we will need to do in two or three months what we had planned on doing in seven -- in all likelihood without any extra money. So once again, I urge patience. Export Administration Act: One issue that never seems to go away is the Export Administration Act. We think that we won a little battle when the Export Administration Act passed in the House of Representatives in the last Congress, but we lost the war when the Senate killed it. Their action was the product of several factors -- some turf issues, resistance to Administration policies for both substantive and political reasons, and lack of business community support for legislation. While the latter is in some respects a compliment -- our liberalizations and reforms have made the Act less important to substantial portions of the business community -- it is also a sign that they see the glass as half empty rather than half full. They are worried that the bill does not give them everything they want. My response has been that the bill gives them important procedural and substantive protections that they will need in the face of future Administrations that might be less helpful than this one. Unfortunately, I have failed to convince them. The result, I fear, will be that they risk playing defense over the next two years -- fending off legislation that will constrain them instead of supporting our legislation which will provide a firm statutory foundation for moving forward. That's an update on specifics. Let me close with a few comments on larger issues. As I said in the beginning, I have spent a good bit of time the past several years talking about the end of the Cold War and the changes it has brought to our licensing policies. I think everyone has gotten that message. Now I see attention turning to what may be the prolonged uncertainty of the future. From BXA's perspective there are two parts to that -- how we handle rogue, or pariah states, and how we deal with gray-area states, those that are neither friend nor foe; particularly those whose markets are large but whose behavior is often troubling. An increasing portion of my time is taken up with the latter category, and the most obvious case is China. Here, we are caught up in a very public debate. The business community by and large sees and understands the significance of the Chinese market and wants as big a piece of it as they can get. They also believe, as do I, that more Western business activity in China leads to more Westernization and more acceptance of Western economic rules and norms; and that the economic internationalization of China will spill over into the political sphere as well, ultimately affecting the nature of the Chinese government and the policies it pursues. At the same time, however, there is an active and growing group of people, in the Congress, in the media, and in academia, who to various degrees believe that China is heading down a road that leads to them becoming a committed adversary, and believe we should abandon the policy I have described and take a much harder line, including denying them a wide variety of items on national security grounds. The chairman of the House National Security Committee, for example, in a recent press release, discussed the need to "prevent countries such as China from receiving technologies that they will exploit to increase the strength and effectiveness of their militaries..." In the next breath, he went on to say, "we must assume that any sale to China is also a sale to the China's People's Liberation Army." Putting those two statements together, of course, suggests we should sell nothing to China because we must always assume it will end up in the hands of the PLA, which is presumed to be malevolent. This, by the way, is not a unique view in the Congress. With some occasional bumps in the road, the first course I described is largely the policy we have followed the past two and one-half years, but it is also fair to say the Chinese don't make it easy, which has given the other side plenty of ammunition. The Administration has spoken out clearly about China's human rights record and its troubling record of support for weapons proliferation in some unstable parts of the world. We have imposed sanctions against China for the latter behavior twice, and we have legislation on the books imposing Tienanmen Square sanctions. The Chinese reaction to these steps has usually been less than conciliatory often as much related to internal maneuvering in their hierarchy as to genuine policy differences. The result is that while our policy has been consistent, its application has led to peaks and valleys in the relationship that have also spilled over into commercial activities. It has also led to ongoing criticism from those who would treat China as the enemy, that we are not tough enough. In my judgment, doing that would be a self-fulfilling prophecy that would not only harm our commercial interests in the region but would also complicate the achievement of our foreign policy goals. At the same time, it is critical that we maintain consistency in our encounters with China. Nothing would serve us worse than leaving ourselves and the Chinese confused about our goals. Achieving some consensus between the Administration and the Congress is a key element of that consistency. SANCTIONS The question of how to deal with pariah states is no easier, though we have been trying to answer it longer. The United States has a long history of employing a variety of sanctions in such cases, and there is a considerable body of literature devoted to analyzing those actions. Most of the time scholars have concluded sanctions have little effect, and they frequently hurt the imposer more than the recipient as other countries' exporters rush to fill the trade gap. Sanctions work best when they are broadly multilateral, when the target country is small and relatively defenseless, and, I would argue, when sanction-breaking activity is most likely to lead to media criticism and international embarrassment. Sanctions probably work least well when they are unilateral and are driven by home country politics rather than as part of a well thought-through multilateral strategy. What is new is the increasingly, successfully assertive role of Congress in the country-of-the month syndrome. These amendments have been offered for years, but until recently the moderate center used to prevail, and they were defeated. What is also new is the role of provisions with extra-territorial application, which is a major expansion of America's efforts to assert its moral and political will. I understand there will be a major business anti-sanction lobbying effort. The problem is growing evidence that extra-territoriality works. Foreign companies do alter their behavior. Lobbyists will need not only to show the principle of extra-territoriality is bad, but that it is also counterproductive. Closing: The last time I spoke with you, I touched on the efforts to dismantle the Commerce Department, and the incredible job that Ron Brown was doing to stave off those efforts. The Department is still here, but he isn't. What a difference a year makes. Secretary Brown is no longer with us and I miss him dearly. He knew so well the complexities of our export control and trade policy and how important it is to the business community that we respond to their concerns, but we were lucky to inherit a Secretary Mickey Kantor who could understand these same complexities and provides the same leadership. While Secretary Kantor has decided to leave the Department, our policy will remain the same. You should be confident that we will continue to push for an export control agenda and policy which balances national security and foreign policy interests with our economic interests. The entire Clinton Administration will continue to provide best quality service into this next Century and to do it in close consultation with the private sector. Return to top of page WT01-B09-2IA096-001028-B017-282http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/warcong1.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215010925 text/html 18216HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:10:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 18044Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:53:05 GMT Congressional Testimony - Bill Reinsch Testimony Honorable William A. Reinsch Under Secretary of Commerce New Directions in Commercial Encryption Policy Senate Commerce Committee July 25, 1996 GO TO: The Administration's Approach Background and Purpose of the Encryption Study Methodology and Industry Involvement Major Findings Next Steps Dealing in a balanced fashion with the spread of encryption is one of the most difficult public policy issues we face today. Our response must address three important interests: law enforcement, national security and our commercial and privacy interests. I would like to provide some comments on how the Administration's policy balances those interests, the results of our study of the global encryption market, and our view of S. 1726, which is pending before the Committee. Making strong commercial encryption widely available is in the best interest of the United States. Indeed, it is inevitable, as we learn to exploit the advantages of powerful computers and advanced telecommunications. These technologies are rapidly leading to the creation of broad electronic networks which will form the basis for communication and commerce in the future. The ability to encrypt electronic messages and data will be essential for electronic commerce and for the full development of information technology. Businesses and individuals need encrypted products to protect sensitive commercial information and to preserve privacy, and their demand for those products will further facilitate the spread of encryption. This trend is also economically desirable. Protecting the confidentiality of business information will reduce losses from industrial espionage. Perhaps more important, we are the world's leading producer of information technology with almost half of the world's producers, and roughly half their revenues come from exports. To retain this leading position and the substantial benefits to our economic health it produces, we must ensure our producers' continued ability to capture foreign market share. Our companies must be able to meet the growing demand for products with strong encryption. If they do not, foreign firms will ultimately step in to fill the void. The United States' policy on encryption must advance the interests of this vital industrial sector. We must shape our export control policies to allow American companies to take advantage of their strengths in information technology in their pursuit of global markets. Our problem arises from the fact that the increased use of encryption carries with it serious risks. The spread of powerful encryption products poses very real problems for law enforcement and for our national security -- as my colleagues have testified. Any policy on encryption must address these risks if it is to be in the national interest. The Clinton Administration is making a very serious effort to develop a policy that balances the expanded availability of the strong encryption needed for economic growth and individual privacy with our national security and law enforcement needs. Most important, we are attempting to do that in close consultation with our allies and the private sector and by working with the market, not against it. The Administration's Approach We have been working with industry to develop a framework, based on a key managementinfrastructure which would allow government to recover the key where necessary. This will encourage the use of strong encryption while protecting law enforcement and national security interests. This framework will be developed and implemented by industry, not the government, and would be available for both domestic and international use. Participation in it will be voluntary, and Americans will continue to be free to use any encryption they choose in the United States. This approach clearly differs from previous efforts, such as "Clipper Chip," which contemplated a dominant role for government. Our approach takes the opposite tack -- a limited government role working with industry to develop supply and demand for products thatwill operate in a key management environment. The federal government will work with industry to set standards for federal use of these products, establish criminal and civil liability for improper certification or release of keys, provide a market through purchases for government agencies, encourage the development of pilot projects, and negotiate with our trading partners on a common approach to encryption. We will not dictate the scope or style of the infrastructure, nor the encryption used within it. This infrastructure will be based upon trusted parties who will hold keys to confidential data. In some cases, corporations would hold their own keys if they are willing to meet law enforcement requirements; in other cases, users might choose to use key recovery services provided by trusted third parties. These trusted third parties will be private entities. Access to the keys would be provided only to the owners where they have lost or damaged their own key or to law enforcement officials acting under the authority of the courts. This approach balances economic needs with law enforcement concerns and is one that many of our major trading partners, mostnotably the United Kingdom, are also adopting. The United States is working bilaterally and in the OECD to develop an international framework for a key management infrastructure that will ensure equal protection for consumers and equal access to markets for producers. Our view is that a global key management infrastructure provides the best means of using strong encryption in a responsible manner. We have come to this view after a great deal of work, one element of which I would like to mention -- a study done jointly by the Bureau of Export Administration and the National Security Agency. Background and Purpose of the Encryption Study Computer software and hardware companies believe that current encryption export controls are outdated and ineffective and are causing them to lose their global competitiveness. They assert there are a multitude of strong foreign encryption products available. In late 1994, in fulfillment of Vice President Gore's earlier commitment, National Security Advisor Anthony Lake directed that a report be prepared assessing the current and future international market for software products containing encryption and the impact of export controls on the U.S. software industry. The Department of Commerce and the National Security Agency jointly prepared the report, which was completed in July, 1995. The Bureau of Export Administration took the lead in assessing domestic and international markets for encryption and the impact of export controls on U.S. industry, while NSA was responsible for identifying and evaluating foreign encryption software products and international laws and controls governing use, export and import of encryption. A declassified version of the final report was made available to the public in January 1996. Methodology and Industry Involvement A wide variety of government agencies, academic experts, commercial information sources, trade associations, and industry representatives were contacted. No definitive statistics exist regarding the size and composition of the U.S. market for encryption software. BXA consulted with computer security specialists, market researchers, and academics to create a picture of the current and future domestic market for these products. We supplemented this information with an informal poll of information security specialists from ten diverse Fortune 500 companies to determine how these firms are currently using encryption software. To assess the international market, BXA utilized the Foreign Commercial Service in 31 U.S. embassies. They provided input on demand for encryption in their host countries as well as the estimated U.S. share of the market. U.S. officials overseas and foreign government officials provided information on foreign laws, regulations, and policies affecting encryption. We used this information to determine the extent to which regulatory controls influence the international marketability of encryption software products. Foreign encryption software products were identified and purchased for review. NSAcryptanalysts studied the 28 foreign products ultimately obtained to evaluate their strengths and weaknesses. Finally, in order to determine the impact of existing export controls on U.S. software vendors, BXA worked closely with the Software Publishers Association, Business Software Alliance and other industry groups to develop an industry questionnaire. The voluntary questionnaire was mailed to about 200 firms believed to be involved in the encryption software market. It was also posted on the Internet. Thirty six encryption software producers elected to respond to the questionnaire, which gave them an opportunity to explain and quantify the impactof export controls on sales, employment, profitability, and product development. Frankly, this was a disappointing response, despite repeated appeals to the industry, and it has led us to the conclusion that many companies are unwilling or unable to quantify the effects of controls on their operations. Major Findings Let me summarize some of our major findings: All countries that are major producers of commercial encryption products control exports to some extent, but licensing practices and policies vary significantly. A few countries, notably France, Russia, and Israel, also control imports and/or domestic use of encryption. Some countries in Europe and elsewhere apparently treat exports to the United States of DES-based software more liberally than the United States treats DES exports to those countries, as evidenced by our ability to procure products purportedly using DES. The U.S. generally allows export of DES-based products only for financial institutions. While encryption software currently accounts for only a small percentage of the total software market (1-3%), we expect the future growth trend to be great. The overwhelming majority of general purpose software products (such as word processors, database programs, etc.) with encryption capabilities available in U.S. and foreign markets are of U.S. origin. The U.S. presently has few viable foreign competitors in this market. The vast majority of these products can be exported without prior U.S. government authorization because they incorporate weaker encryption algorithms (40 bits or less). In the security-specific software market, however, U.S. manufacturers face competition in foreign markets from countries such as the United Kingdom, Germany, and Israel. To a large extent, markets for these products tend to be "national," with local vendors capturing a large portion of their home markets, in part due to the influence of export controls. In many foreign countries surveyed, exportable U.S. encryption products are perceived to be of insufficient strength. In about half the countries, overseas sources believe that U.S. export controls have limited U.S. market share. Some maintain that U.S. export controls promote indigenous production of encryption software. In the absence of significant foreign competition, the effect of export controls on general purpose software producers has been minimal so far. For these products, customers tend to base purchasing decisions on the primary function of the software (spreadsheet, word processing), not on encryption features. The vast majority of general purpose products are specifically designed with encryption algorithms to be eligible for export. Export controls have, however, affected the plans of general purpose software manufacturers to enhance encryption capabilities to meet anticipated demand. They fear that their foreign competitors may attempt to use encryption features to differentiate their products and capture market share. Many domestic security-specific software producers are restricted to the U.S. market because of export controls. Since security is the primary function of their products, it is not feasible for them to utilize weaker encryption algorithms that could be exported. These companies believe that there is potential for significant foreign sales, but they are unable to quantify it since they do not market overseas. Moreover, there is a widespread perception among foreign purchasers that strong U.S. products may not be exported, and that exportable U.S. products are unsatisfactory. This perception serves to dampen demand for U.S. products. The existence of foreign products advertising DES or other strong encryption has damaged U.S. competitiveness domestically and abroad, regardless of the accuracy of those claims. Some U.S. companies either use or consider using foreign encryption products to communicate worldwide with their customers, suppliers and international partners. Next Steps Our study encouraged us to move ahead with the new approach I mentioned. This policy is based on key recovery, but it will be a flexible approach developed by and based in the private sector. Cooperation with industry is critical, and we are finding a willingness among many firms to work together toward a solution. As it will take some time to complete development of this new approach, we are considering a number of interim measures to ease the burden on industry while it moves to a key management infrastructure. In the expectation of industry cooperation in that regard, the Vice President on July 12 indicated what these measures might include: Liberalizations of existing export controls for certain commercial encryption products. Pilot management programs to test key recovery with industry and with our trading partners. The creation of a private sector advisory committee to develop performance and technical standards for products the government will purchase. And, possibly, the transfer of jurisdiction for commercial encryption products from the Department of State to the Department of Commerce. Our work is not yet done. We are continuing to consult with industry and international partners to refine our proposal, and we plan to send recommendations to the President this September. Our goal is to develop a flexible, market-driven approach that balances public safety, national security, and economic vitality. In the midst of this effort, legislation such as S. 1726 would not be helpful. Its fundamental flaw is that it does not provide the balanced approach we are seeking and instead would unnecessarily sacrifice our law enforcement and national security needs. Legislating decontrol of encryption would destroy any hope of developing a consensus on policy; it would be greeted with dismay by our international partners; and it would pose real risks to the safety of Americans. In addition, from the perspective of the Commerce Department, we have a host of specific concerns about the bill. In particular, we believe it misunderstands and misstates the role of NIST in regulation and standard-setting. NIST is not a regulatory agency and does not "regulate" or control private sector use of encryption. It prepares and recommends to the Secretary for approval Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), which are intended to assist government agencies and are developed in consultation with the private sector. Often these standards, of which DES is one, have been adopted and utilized by the private sector in the interest of standardization -- an important objective in this sector but one which will be determined by the market rather than the government. The private sector has consistently been supportive of NIST's efforts in this area, and it is difficult for us to understand why the authors of S. 1726 would want to preclude that cooperation. As I said when I began my remarks, encryption is one of the most difficult issues in public policy today, but it is a problem which this Administration is committed to solving in cooperation with industry in a way that reinforces market principles and achieves our varied goals. We hope that Congress will work with us to facilitate that process rather than obstruct it by passing unnecessary and harmful legislation. Return to Press Page WT01-B09-3IA096-001028-B017-329http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/warcong2.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215010940 text/html 14461HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:10:44 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14289Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:57:51 GMT Congressional Testimony by Bill Reinsch U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Export Administration Testimony of William A. Reinsch Under Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration July 31, 1996 Before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Subcommittee on International Finance and Monetary Policy On The Omnibus Export Administration Act of 1996 (H.R. 361) Go to: "The Need for a Revised EAA" "Legal Limits" "Policy Ramifications" "Renewal of the EAA of 1979" "The Omnibus Export Administration Act of 1996" "Provisions of Concern" Thank you for the opportunity to testify on H.R. 361, the Omnibus Export Administration Act of 1996. Reauthorization of an Export Administration Act (EAA) that takes into account the end of the Cold War is long overdue. In addition to helping exporters by bringing the law up to date with current global realities, it is also essential that we enact a new law in order to minimize the possibility of legal challenges under the current emergency authority and to enhance our credibility in international fora. The Administration supports H.R. 361. We believe it provides the proper balance for controlling dual-use items while minimizing the burden on U.S. exporters. We do have concerns about several of its provisions, which my testimony details. Before I get to those issues, however, let me explain why enactment of a new EAA is essential. The Need for a Revised Export Administration Act Simply put, continuing to operate under emergency authority raises the possibility of increasing legal and political complications. Operating under authority of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), as we have done on a number of occasions, most recently for the past two years, means that we must function under certain legal constraints, and it leaves important aspects of our dual-use export control system increasingly at risk of legal challenge. Operating under emergency authority also can undercut our credibility as leader of the world's efforts to stem the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. While I do not want to overstate the case, because these complications are currently surmountable, and we will continue to pursue our export control policies despite them, at a minimum they are likely to consume increasing amounts of resources that could certainly be better used to administer and enforce the export control system effectively. Legal Limits In some significant areas, we have less authority under IEEPA than under the EAA. Foremost among them are the penalty authorities. The penalties for violations of the Export Administration Regulations that occur under IEEPA, both criminal and administrative, are significantly lower than those available for violations that occur under the EAA. Even the EAA penalties are too low, having been eroded over the past 17 years by inflation. One of H.R. 361's most useful enforcement features is its increase in criminal and administrative penalties. We rely on the deterrent effect of stiff penalties for export control violations. The longer we are under IEEPA, or even the EAA of 1979, the more the deterrent effect will erode, and companies will begin to think of the lower penalties merely as a cost of doing business, especially for nonproliferation and foreign policy cases. Another limitation of IEEPA concerns export enforcement agents' police powers (e.g., the authority to make arrests, execute search warrants, and carry firearms). Those powers lapsed with the EAA. Our agents must now obtain Special Deputy U.S. Marshal status, which expires and must be renewed annually, in order to exercise these authorities and function as law enforcement officers. While this complication can be overcome, doing so consumes limited resources that would be better used on enforcement. Finally, the longer the EAA lapse continues, the more likely we will be faced with attempts to impose additional limits on our authority. For example, IEEPA does not have an explicit confidentiality provision like that in section 12(c) of the EAA or the similar provision in H.R. 361. As a result, the Department's ability to protect from public disclosure information obtained concerning export license applications, the export licenses themselves, and related export enforcement information is likely to come under increasing attack on several fronts. Similarly, the absence of specific antiboycott references in IEEPA has led some respondents in antiboycott cases to argue -- thus far unsuccessfully -- that BXA has no authority to implement and enforce the antiboycott provisions of the EAA and Export Administration Regulations. Policy Ramifications The lapse of authority also has domestic and international policy ramifications. Although we have made great progress in eliminating unnecessary controls while enhancing our ability to control truly sensitive exports, industry has the right to expect these reforms to be certain and permanent. For example, while the Administration has begun to implement the President's executive order on license processing, which increases the discipline on and timeliness of the license review process, a statutory foundation for that process would send an important message to U.S. exporters that these reforms will not be rolled back. That will give our exporters the certainty they need to plan their export transactions. In addition, failure to enact a new EAA that reflects the changed world situation sends the wrong message to our allies and regime partners, many of whom we have been urging to strengthen their export control laws and systems. We have also been urging, as part of our export control cooperation with the former Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries, that those countries adopt control laws passed by their respective parliaments. Our credibility could be diminished by our own lack of a statute. Renewal of the EAA of 1979 Some of these same issues militate against a simple renewal of the EAA of 1979. For example, as I noted earlier, the penalties of the EAA of 1979 have been substantially eroded by inflation. In addition, the EAA of 1979 is a Cold War statute that simply does not reflect current geo-political realities. Its basic national security control authorities are predicated on the existence ofa multilateral regime, CoCom, that ended more than two years ago. A renewal of the EAA of 1979 is not much better than operating under IEEPA. H.R. 361 - The Omnibus Export Administration Act of 1996 H.R. 361 makes several needed and significant improvements to the EAA which are similar to those proposed in the Administration's 1994 bill. They include control authority updated to address current security threats, increased discipline on unilateral controls, and enhanced enforcement authorities. H.R. 361 also contains provisions consistent with recent Administration licensing process and commodity jurisdiction reforms. H.R. 361's structure reflects the new challenges resulting from the end of the Cold War. The basic control authorities are multilateral and unilateral (emergency) controls instead of the national security and foreign policy authorities of the EAA of 1979, just as the Administration's bill proposed. H.R. 361's new structure explicitly recognizes the preference for compliance with international regimes that the U.S. either is a member of (such as the Wassenaar Arrangement, the Missile Technology Control Regime, the Australia Group, and the Nuclear Suppliers' Group) or may help create or join in the future. H.R. 361's clear preference and explicit guidelines for multilateral controls is essential for achieving our nonproliferation goals without disadvantaging U.S. exporters. Another significant positive feature of H.R. 361 is its increased discipline on unilateral controls. The determinations required by H.R. 361 for the imposition, extension, or expansion of unilateral controls are similar to those proposed by the Administration. These determinations will require a more precise analysis of the anticipated and actual effectiveness of unilateral controls. This more precise analysis will ensure that the economic security of the U.S. is not adversely affected by controls which do not significantly advance national security, foreign policy, or nonproliferationobjectives. H.R. 361 also supports the recent Administration reforms of the licensing and commodity jurisdiction processes. Its standards for license processing, which are consistent with the new executive order, include shortening the time allowed for review of applications and adding discipline to the interagency process, while permitting all pertinent agencies to review any licenseapplications. These reforms improve the system's responsiveness to exporters while also enhancing our ability to meet our national security, foreign policy, and nonproliferation goals. Consistent with the President's recent revision of the commodity jurisdiction process, H.R. 361 requires timely settlement of interagency disputes on whether an item is dual-use or munitions. It also requires increased coordination and transparency among the agencies in commodity jurisdiction and classification determinations. These reforms will make the export control system more responsive to exporters without diminishing the system's ability to meet our national security, foreign policy, and nonproliferation objectives. One other area where H.R. 361 makes significant improvements is enforcement. First, it substantially increases criminal and civil penalties, which, as I mentioned, is long overdue. Not only has inflation eaten away at the 1979 penalty levels, but global political changes demand the significantly higher civil penalties that H.R. 361 provides for violations of nonproliferation controls in order to add credibility to our efforts. H.R. 361 also provides greater operational enforcement authority for undercover operations and forfeitures. These enhancements are particularly important in the current environment, with more diffuse threats, elaborate procurement networks, and suspect end users more difficult to identify. Provisions of Concern We do have concerns, however, about H.R. 361's terrorism, unfair impact, antiboycott private right of action, and judicial review provisions, which I will outline. We also have constitutional concerns which another Administration witness will address. The Administration shares the Congress' concern about terrorism, and we have adopted a very hard line against terrorist states, including support for Senator D'Amato's Iran-Libya legislation. However, H.R. 361's terrorism provision would significantly reduce the Administration's flexibility to regulate exports to countries on the terrorist list to reflect unique or changed circumstances. For example, the Administration would lack the necessary flexibility to supply U.S. government (diplomatic, military, or humanitarian) operations, multilateral peacekeeping and humanitarian missions, International Atomic Energy Agency inspections, and activities of U.S. or third country nationals unaffiliated with the terrorism-list government. H.R. 361's unfair impact provision is a step backward from the Administration's proposal to clarify exporters' rights to petition for relief from burdensome and ineffective export control requirements. The provision limits U.S. exporters' statutory right to seek relief by failing to include ineffective controls and competitive disadvantage as statutory grounds upon which U.S. exporters can petition for relief. Second, it exempts some of the bill's provisions from the unfair impact process entirely. Third, it fails to explicitly allow unfair impact petitions based on anticipated market conditions. H.R. 361's authorization of private actions for antiboycott violations could compromise enforcement of the antiboycott provisions of the EAA. Allowing suits for actual and punitive damages, whether or not a violation has been found through government enforcement action, could jeopardize the record of successful enforcement of the antiboycott law through inconsistent judicial interpretations, diversion of government resources, and private settlements that deny access to evidence. Finally, H.R. 361's judicial review provision should be clarified to ensure it does not inadvertently allow inappropriate judicial review of U.S. foreign and national security policies. Conclusion Those are our concerns, Mr. Chairman, and we look forward to working with the Committee to address them. The important point, however, is the need to act this year on the bill in order to provide the proper balance for controlling dual-use items while minimizing the burden on U.S. exporters. Return to Press Page WT01-B09-4IA096-001028-B019-249http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/UPDATEWest.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215011549 text/html 10057HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:16:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9886Last-modified: Tue, 04 Feb 1997 16:08:28 GMT BXA UpDate West 1997 Announced Bureau of Export Administration UpdateWest '97 San Francisco, CA February 10-11, 1997 Go to Update Agenda Go to Registration Information Go to Three Ways to Register Go to Registration form Who Should Attend? Anyone in your organization in a technical or management position who must know about and comply with the Export Administration Regulations and licensing documentation. CEOs and othercorporate executives, export sales and marketing managers, export administrators, corporate attorneys, engineers, and traffic coordinators. Also freight forwarders, lawyers, export consultants, andother professionals who advise exporters about licensing. Why Should You Attend? The BXA Update West 1997 will highlight the final version of the new U.S. Export Administration Regulations. The program will also cover many other topics of licensing policies/procedures, tradepolicy and government programs available to exporters. It's the only program of its kind on the West Coast - a once-a-year event! If your company manufactures, sells or distributes products, services, or technology for export - in any form - you need to know about and keep current with the latest changes. Who Will Participate? Upwards of 400 executives and professionals from business and industry throughout the United States and overseas who have a need to know about export licensing policy, regulations and trends: Commerce Department officials and licensing officers from BXA; representatives of other federal,state, local and even foreign government agencies. Speakers Leading officials from the Commerce Department, BXA upper management, Washington programdirectors and licensing officers, and other U.S. government agency representatives will participatein the two-day program. Update Agenda: Regularoty Reform Changes License Exceptions Country Charts Follow-up Regulations Wassanaar Arrangement Encryption Regulations & Policies Enforcement SED Information & Guidance Legislative Information OFAC - Embargoes and Sanctions Exporter Management Systems Non-Proliferation Regimes Missile Technology Chemicals/Biologicals Nuclear Technical Data Registration Information Registration Fee The registration fee of $395 includes the cost of conference registration, course materials, a continental breakfast each morning, daily lunches, and a hosted reception. It is payable in advance. You may pay by VISA or MasterCard.-- For those arriving early, there will be a pre-registration on Sunday, February 9th in the early evening. Spaces are Limited To ensure your attendance, complete the attached registration reply form as soon as possible andmail it with a check for $395 (payable to FITA-Update) to: The Federation of International Trade Associations (FITA), 1851 Alexander Bell Drive, Suite 400, Reston, VA 20191. If paying by creditcard, you may FAX your registration to (703) 391-0159. Hotel and Travel Information Hotel and Reservations: The Fairmont Hotel is centrally located in San Francisco atop Nob Hill. FITA has arranged for a block of rooms at a special conference rate of $159 single or $179double occupancy, plus tax. Reserve directly with the Fairmont Hotel by calling Toll Free (800) 527-4727or (415) 772-5000. Be sure to identify yourself as attending BXA Update West '97. Travel: For those arriving by car, the Fairmont Hotel offers limited valet parking. Ample and inexpensiveparking is available in close proximity to the hotel. For those arriving by air at San Francisco Airport,shuttle service is available for $10 and taxi service for about $25. Telephone and Fax Lines Questions? For further information regarding registration or hotel accommodations, contact FITA by phone at: (800) 969-FITA or (703) 620-1588, or by FAX at (703) 391-0159 Forinformation on this and other BXA seminars call the Export Seminar Staff at (202) 482-6031 or the BXA Western Regional Office at (714) 660-0144 or visit the description of the kinds of seminars we offer or our seminar schedule on this website. There are several ways to register for Update West '97: By mail By faxing the form provided below or By electronic mail directly to FITA (fita@mcimail.com) You may also get a copy of this form by calling FITA's toll free fax back line at 1(800) 926-FITA and requesting document number 705 YES! Register me for the U.S. Department of Commerce's BXA Update West '97 Conference on Export Controls and Licensing,Monday and Tuesday, February 10-11, 1997 in San Francisco, California. Enclosed is my check payable to FITA-Updatefor $395 covering an individual registration. PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT METHOD OF PAYMENT Name _______________________________________ ___ Check Company_____________________________________ ___ VISA Address______________________________________ ___ MasterCard Credit Card Number: _______________________________ Expiration Date: _________ Card holder's Telephone No.__________________________ Name shown on credit card: __________________________ FAX No.___________________ Cardholder's Signature________________________________ There will be a $25 handling charge for cancellation prior to January 31, 1997. No refunds can be issued after January 31, 1997. WT01-B09-5IA096-001028-B019-317http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/registab.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215011613 text/html 13682HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:17:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13510Last-modified: Sat, 05 Oct 1996 01:04:19 GMT FY 1998 AMP PROPOSAL U. S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Export Administration Proposed Fiscal Year 1998 AMP Material Units Current FY 97 Quanity Proposed FY 98 Quanity Aluminum Oxide, Abrasive ST 6,000 6,000 Aluminum Oxide, Fused Crude ST 30,000 30,000 Analgesics AMALB 2,500 2,500 Antimony ST 3,000 3,000 Asbestos (all types) ST 20,000 20,000 Bauxite, Metallurgical (Jamaican) LDT 600,000 600,000 Bauxite, Metallurgical (Surinam) LDT 300,000 300,000 Bauxite, Refractory LCT 80,000 80,000 Beryl Ore ST 2,000 2,000 Bismuth LB 300,000 300,000 Cadmium LB 1,200,000 1,200,000 Celestite SDT 3,600 3,600 Chromite, Chemical SDT 100,000 100,000 Chromite, Metallurgical SDT 250,000 250,000 Chromite, Refractory SDT 100,000 100,000 Chromium, Ferro ST 25,000 50,000 Diamond, Bort CT 1,000,000 1,000,000 Diamond Dies, Small PCs PC 25,473 25,473 Diamond Stone CT 2,000,000 2,000,000 Fluorspar, Acid SDT 100,000 180,000 Fluorspar, Metallurgical SDT 150,000 50,000 Graphite, Natural Malagasy ST 1,220 1,220 Iodine LB 450,000 450,000 Jewel Bearings PC 31,000,000 31,000,000 Kyanite SDT 1,200 1,200 Lead ST 60,000 60,000 Manganese, Battery Grade Natural SDT 60,000 20,000 Manganese, Battery Grade Synthetic SDT 3,011 3,011 Manganese, Chemical Grade SDT 40,000 40,000 Manganese, Ferro Alloys ST 50,000 50,000 Manganese, Metal Electrolytic ST 2,000 2,000 Manganese, Metallurgical Grade SDT 400,000 250,000 Mercury FL 20,000 20,000 Mica (All Types) Mica, Muscovite Block Mica, Muscovite Film Mica, Muscovite Splittings Mica, Phlogopite Splittings LB 2,260,000 2,260,000 Nickel ST 10,000 10,000 Quinidine Av Oz 200,000 750,000 Quinine Av Oz 200,000 750,000 Sebacic Acid LB 1,000,000 1,000,000 Silicon Carbide ST 4,500 9,000 Silver (for coinage) Tr Oz 9,000,000 9,000,000 Talc ST 1,000 1,000 Thorium Nitrate LB 1,000,000 1,000,000 Tin MT 12,000 12,000 Vanadium Pentoxide ST V 200 200 Vegetable Tannin Extract, Chestnut LT 5,000 7,500 Vegetable Tannin Extract, Quebrac. LT V 5,000 10,000 Vegetable Tannin Extract,Wattle LT 5,000 10,000 Zinc ST 50,000 50,000 PROPOSED REVISIONS TO FISCAL YEAR 1997 AMP Material Units Quantity Chromium, Ferro SDT 35,000 Diamond Dies, Small PCs CT 25,473 Fluorspar, Acid Grade SDT 180,000 Fluorspar, Metallurgical SDT 50,000 Quinidine Av Oz 750,000 Quinine Av Oz 750,000 Silicone Carbide ST 9,000 Vegetable Tannin Extract, Chestnut LT 7,500 Vegetable Tannin Extract, Quebrac. LT 10,000 Vegetable Tannin Extract, Wattle LT 10,000 PROPOSED NEW MATERIAL DISPOSAL AUTHORITY FOR FY 1997 AND FY 1998 Material Units FY 1997Quantity FY 1998Quantity Aluminum ST 62,881 62,881 Cobalt LBCO 6,000,000 6,000,000 Columbiumm, Ferro LBCB 60,000 100,000 Germanium KG 4,000 4,000 Indium TROZ 35,000 35,000 Palladium TROZ 15,000 15,000 Platinum TROZ 10,000 10,000 Rubber LT 125,000 125,000 Tantalum Carbide Powder LBTA 2,000 2,000 Tantalum Minerals LBTA 100,000 100,000 Tantalum Oxide LBTA 20,000 20,000 Return to Press Page WT01-B09-6IA038-000736-B034-262http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061515 text/html 13670HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum CALSTART User Forum Welcome to CALSTART's User Forum! CALSTART has streamlined its web site discussion groups into a single user forum where you can discuss advanced transportation topics of interest with other online users. Want to post messages on NGVs, EVs, buy or sell vehicles or components, or simply discuss the latest advanced transportation news? Just fill out the easy-to-use form below. While reading messages, post new ones or reply to others using the available form links on every page. For more info on CALSTART's User Forum, please read the FAQ. [ Post Message ] [ FAQ ] Free EV Classifieds - Martyn St.David 17:17:12 2/06/97(0) EV Company Looking for Sponsors and Venture Capital - Al Simpler 13:02:24 2/04/97(0) Buying a used EV - Mike Morley 17:50:41 1/28/97(1) Re: Buying a used EV - Bob Hadden 23:54:13 2/01/97(0) 1997 Bi-fuel Ford Contour Sedans for Sale - Susan Romeo 11:44:41 1/27/97(0) Hybrid Drive Train new & improved - John Silva 10:59:58 1/24/97(0) Request information for DC motors,and Controlers for light weigth use - Miguel Riego 13:23:59 1/22/97(0) motor controller - Matt 15:13:56 1/07/97(0) Personal Rapid Transit Conference report - jerry schneider 01:25:13 12/29/96(0) New Dual-Use EV/HEV Concepts Sought - John Boesel 22:55:37 12/20/96(0) nickel metal hydride - Jim Borland 20:21:14 12/18/96(1) Re: nickel metal hydride - DANIEL CH'NG 15:23:27 2/04/97(0) carbon sheet electrodes - Marc Andelman 03:11:37 12/13/96(0) ELECTRIC BUS INFORMATION - Peter Valko 21:15:29 12/09/96(0) Information required on supplier of PM brushless Motor Drive for EVs - XIA Wei 15:00:05 10/28/96(0) Manufacturers - TV Show wants to sell your cars - Martyn St.David 13:16:01 10/17/96(0) Leasing An Electric Vehicle - Mark Johnson 22:46:42 10/15/96(0) USABC Contract w Electrosource? - John Lu 23:51:15 10/03/96(1) Re: USABC Contract w Electrosource? - Richard Koenig 10:03:49 2/08/97(0) EV for sale - Bob Rickard 20:26:27 10/03/96(1) Re: EV for sale What brand DC motor is in the truck? What is it's horsepower? - Aaron Reizman 05:45:15 12/25/96(0) Electric Vehicle Predictions - Marie 05:40:48 10/02/96(3) Re: Electric Vehicle Predictions - Joe Faggella 05:10:06 11/27/96(1) Re: Electric Vehicle Predictions - Leonardo Pellegrini 14:24:52 12/09/96(0) Re: Electric Vehicle Predictions - Martyn St.David 13:33:11 10/17/96(0) Natural gas - Bob Siebert 16:36:51 10/01/96(2) Re: Natural gas - David F.Cala-Hederich 13:24:12 11/22/96(0) Re: Natural gas - dominik kosman 22:19:27 10/23/96(0) financial helps for ev buying - luca del bo 22:13:09 9/18/96(1) Natural Gas High Pressure Compressor - John S. Green 22:45:23 9/14/96(1) Re: Natural Gas High Pressure Compressor - Bob Siebert 16:43:59 10/30/96(0) Why are solar panels not being used on electric cars? - Leslie Charles Paul Bubik III 16:50:38 9/10/96(3) Re: Why are solar panels not being used on electric cars? - robert E. spenger 05:05:23 12/19/96(1) Re: Why are solar panels not being used on electric cars? - Dave Heckman 09:21:04 1/09/97(0) Re: Why are solar panels not being used on electric cars? - Martyn St.David 14:07:07 10/17/96(0) Need Zebra Electric Car Info - J Hicks 16:43:34 9/10/96(4) Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info - Steve Hutchings 21:45:00 12/03/96(0) Li-Polymer/Li-Ion Battery Differences? - Jonas 18:06:29 9/06/96(1) Re: Li-Polymer/Li-Ion Battery Differences? - Leonardo Pellegrini 16:01:56 12/10/96(0) Mandates - Don Devlin 00:28:34 9/04/96(3) Re: Mandates - Joe Faggella 05:50:19 11/27/96(0) ZEV Mandate Delay - Ed Lovelace 00:27:26 9/04/96(0) ZEV credit for HEV's - Cassandra Quaintance 00:26:16 9/04/96(1) Re: ZEV credit for HEV's - Darren 14:45:22 12/04/96(0) How fast does your average electric car go? - Alex Randolph 00:21:31 9/04/96(1) Re: How fast does your average electric car go? - Dave Sotero 00:22:12 9/04/96(0) System for low voltage batteries - Christer Svensson 00:18:02 9/04/96(2) Are you running wristwatches or EVs? - Cynical Sid 06:45:35 1/04/97(0) Looking for suggestions(Ideal Parts) - Tony Licon 00:13:55 9/04/96(0) Partnering needed on Sleep Detection Technology - James Clark 00:06:33 9/04/96(0) Battery Technology Info Needed - Alton Parrish 00:02:51 9/04/96(2) Re:Exchange Battery Technology Info - li yangxing 06:32:31 12/30/96(0) Re: Battery Technology Info Needed - Martyn St.David 14:54:18 10/23/96(0) Post Your Message! Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Please enter your message here: Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-7IA038-000736-B036-141http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/101.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062131 text/html 3507HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:13:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Free EV Classifieds CALSTART User Forum Free EV Classifieds [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Martyn St.David on February 06, 1997 at 17:17:12: greenshopping.com is offering free classifieds to those of you who have used EV's and alternative vehicles for sale. To post your listing, please email evclass@greenshopping.com. List all information in the email including price, year, conversion info, location, your name and telephone and/or email address for inquiries. Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : greenshopping.com is offering free classifieds to those of you who have used EV's and alternative vehicles for sale.  To post your listing, please email evclass@greenshopping.com.  List all information in the email including price, year, conversion info, location, your name and telephone and/or email address for inquiries. Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-8IA038-000736-B036-160http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/102.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062140 text/html 3419HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:13:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: USABC Contract w Electrosource? CALSTART User Forum Re: USABC Contract w Electrosource? [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Richard Koenig on February 08, 1997 at 10:03:49: In Reply to: USABC Contract w Electrosource? posted by John Lu on October 03, 1996 at 23:51:15: : I've heard Electrosource has obtained a lithium polymere battery contract with US ABC. How do I contact US ABC to find out about details? battery contract. I would like to hear more about it. Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : :   I've heard Electrosource has obtained a lithium polymere battery contract with US ABC. How do I contact US ABC to find out about details?: battery contract. I would like to hear more about it. Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-9IA037-000725-B010-15http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055744 text/html 3689HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:49:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) has partneredwith consortia like CALSTART throughout the nation to develop leading-edgetransportation technologies, both for commercial and military needs. Headquarteredin Hawaii, California, Indiana, Georgia, Pennsylvania and Massachusetts,these consortia operate several hundred technology, development and demonstration projects; all in the electric and hybrid electric vehicle industry. CALSTART presents to you a summary of several DARPA consortiaprojects presented recently to a joint meeting with the Partnership for a New Generation Vehicle(PNGV), a U.S. partnership with the Big 3 automakers. Weve also includedinformation on the PNGV program, which gives their perspectiveon needed technologies for more efficient future passenger vehicles. Consortia Program Summaries: Click on consortia icons above, or click on consortia index listbelow: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project(HEVDP) CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium(SMUD) Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation(SCAT) Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for AdvancedVehicles (MARCAV) Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium(NAVC) PNGV Strategy Documents: Evoking Interest from the Original EquipmentManufacturers (OEMS) Inventions Needed for the Partnershipfor a New Generation Vehicle PNGV Target Attributes PNGV Technical Strategy ARPA Progress Reports: Vol. 3, Issue 1 -- Spring 1996 Vol. 1, Issue 2 -- Spring 1995 Vol. 1, Issue 1 -- Winter 1994 | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-10IA037-000725-B006-219http://www.calstart.org:80/about/anr93/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054524 text/html 2126HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:37:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- 1993 Action Report CALSTART 1993 Action Report Table of Contents: Letter from Michael Gage, President, CEO Building a Blue Sky Industry Consortium Growth in 1993 CALSTART -- An Engine of Innovation Defense Conversion CALSTART Provides Access Putting the Rubber on the Road: Core Program Review CALSTART Board of Directors The CALSTART Technical Advisory Committee CALSTART's Headquarters in Burbank CA. | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 Calstart, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-11IA037-000725-B008-198http://www.calstart.org:80/about/anr9596/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055114 text/html 2384HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:43:28 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- 1995/96 Action Report: CALSTART 1995/96 Action Report Partnering Peopleand Process Table of Contents: The CALSTART Mission A Message from Michael J. Gage and MichaelR. Peevey Advanced Transportation Technologies -- TheMove to the Market CALSTART: A Process More Than a Place --The Move to the Market Assessing Tomorrow's Transportation Technologies Partnering Players in a New Industry Marketing a New Industry Launching and Managing Technology Projects Hatching New Business in Advanced Transportation The Road Ahead How To Join CALSTART A Summary of CALSTART Programs Board of Directors CALSTART Advisory Committees CALSTART Participants | HOME | SEARCH| NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY| FEEDBACK | YELLOWPAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Pleasesend comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-12IA037-000725-B007-124http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054704 text/html 17010HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:39:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- News Notes CALSTART News Notes 02/08/97 - Rules Crimping California Propane Conversions California  While propane-powered vehicles still hold the lead in counts of Californias alternative-fueled vehicles, some in the field say the states tough emissions rules are killing the propane conversion industry, reports Oxy-Fuel News. There are currently 45,000 propane-fueled vehicles in California, but the numbers are misleading, advocates say; almost all were in operation before the California Air Resources Board (CARB) tightened its rules in 1992. Conversion kit-makers are now required to pay CARB more than $200,000 per "engine family type" and submit vehicles to 100,000-mile durability tests, which may take as long as six months to complete. Because of various engine configurations, converters can spend millions of dollars to certify one engine size, said Bruce Eikelberger of Alternate Fuel Technology, a conversion company. CARB spokesman Alan Hearst said CARBs goal is cleaner air; it should be up to the industry to find a way to make their kits meet the standards. 02/07/97 - Nissan 1st Automaker to Offer Lithium-Battery EV Japan  Nissan has begun selling lithium-ion battery-powered electric vehicles (EVs)  but only in Japan, reports Kyodo News International. The automaker is the first in the world to offer an EV with the advanced batteries, which, on a pound-for-pound basis, have triple the energy storage of lead-acid batteries and reportedly last longer. Nissan intends to lease 30 Prairie Joy EVs annually, initially to local governments and corporations. Payments will be $259 (320,000 yen) per month for the three-year leases. The car, sometimes referred to as a "station wagon" and sometimes a "sport-utility vehicle," has a 124-mile range between charges. Sony Corp. helped develop the batteries. Honda is also offering EVs with advanced batteries, but its car uses nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries; lithium-ion batteries store 1.5 times the energy levels of NiMH batteries (News Notes 1/10, 6/18, 6/20, 8/6, 10/15, 11/14 and 12/13/96). 02/07/97 - EPA  Rail Locomotives Must Clean Up Their Act Washington, D.C.  For the first time, railroad locomotives will be subject to air pollution rules from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, standards that will require emissions cuts of up to two-thirds, reports the Los Angeles Times. A typical locomotive puts out as many tons of nitrogen oxides (NOx)  a chief ingredient of smog  as 2,000 passenger cars; 18,000 locomotives in the U.S. are responsible for 5 percent of the countrys air pollution. Beginning in 2001, railroads must gradually begin reducing emissions. By 2005, emissions must be cut 50 percent for hydrocarbons and particulates; 66 percent for NOx. Engine modifications are expected to raise engine costs by about 4 percent, according to EPA estimates. Because Californias air is the worst, the railroads have agreed to put the new engines  not yet engineered  in service there first. 02/06/97 - GMs Bi-Fuel NGV Pickup Launch Approaches Detroit  General Motors has officially announced details  such as price, availability and warranties  for the natural gas vehicle (NGV) pickups it will begin offering in spring 1997. The natural gas option on 1997 Chevrolet C2500 and GMC Sierra full-size pickups will be $5,800, but fuel-cost savings, income tax credits and gas-utility incentives will bring the cost down. Fully certified "factory package" bi-fuel pickups  that will run on either gasoline or compressed natural gas (CNG)  will carry 3-year/36,000 mile "Bumper to Bumper Plus" warranties. The carbon-fiber-wrapped steel CNG tanks carry the equivalent of 13 gallons; a standard 34-gallon gasoline tank is also fitted. Production and installation of the natural gas systems will be done under the auspices of IMPCO Technologies (News Notes 1/15, 3/7, 4/11, 5/16, 6/14, 6/19, 7/3, 9/30 and 12/28/96). 02/06/97 - Olympic Souvenir? How About an Electric Tram? Atlanta, Georgia  For souvenir hunters looking for 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta memorabilia, an offering by Georgia Power just might be a winner: The electric trams that shuttled athletes and coaches around the Olympic Village are now for sale, according to an Electric Vehicle Association of the Americas (EVAA) press release. The 70 trams were used in 24-hour service, but only for 35 days until the games ended. More than 1.3 million passenger trips were logged, but the trams are still in excellent shape. Among the early buyers of the 36-passenger trams have been amusement and state parks, zoos, universities and a church. Each tow trailer, built by Tug Manufacturing, pulls three 12-passenger trailers built by Taylor-Dunn. More information may be obtained by contacting Georgia Power at (770) 216-1315. 02/06/97 - Unique Mobility to Build a Stealth Bus Drivetrain Golden, Colorado  Electric vehicle (EV) drive system-builder Unique Mobility has received a $1.23 million contract to supply an advanced electric drive system for an Advanced Technology Transit Bus (ATTB), or "Stealth Bus." The 18-month contract is with the Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County Texas (Houston Metro), which is co-developing the bus along with Northrop Grumman Corp. and the U.S. Department of Transportation. Unique will produce a 107-kilowatt system that includes wheel motors with gear reduction, microprocessor controls and regenerative braking. The hybrid-electric bus uses advanced materials from military and aerospace applications to cut weight without sacrificing strength, hence its nickname. Last October, Northrop rolled out its first bus (News Notes 10/2/96 and 10/8/96). 02/05/97 - Grand Canyon May Ban Cars, Use Alt-Fuel Buses Grand Canyon National Park  The National Park Service may ban nearly all cars from Grand Canyon National Park as part of its plan to get visitors into light-rail trains or alternative-fueled buses. Some 1.5 million tourist-filled cars enter the park each year, causing significant traffic  and smog that obscures canyon views (News Notes 5/30/96). The plan calls for electric buses or methanol-powered buses and light rail trains to cut 80 percent of the vehicle traffic. Those staying at hotels, camping in the park, or traveling on state Route 64 will still be allowed to drive; others will use a massive parking lot to be built outside the park. The proposal is part of a $350 million plan to improve the park for visitors, which numbered about 5 million last year. 02/05/97 - L.A. Airport Solicits Bids for 39 Clean-Fuel Vehicles Los Angeles  Looking to expand its fleet of clean-air vehicles, Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) officials are soliciting bids for 39 new alternative-fueled vehicles. The Department of Airports is looking to buy 10 liquefied natural gas (LNG)-powered transit buses, eight bi-fuel pickup trucks, 16 bi-fuel sedans, and five police sedans powered only by compressed natural gas (CNG). The bi-fuel vehicles are to be capable of running on either gasoline or an alternative fuel. LAX already operates 21 buses on LNG; with another 6 already on order, 71 percent of its 52-bus fleet will operate on the cleaner-burning fuel. The remaining buses will later be converted to LNG. According to the request for bids, LAX estimates the vehicle costs at $300,000 per bus, $25,000 apiece for the bi-fuel vehicles and $30,000 for the CNG police cars. 02/05/97 - NEC Builds ITS Test Track, Targets $822M in Sales Japan  Looking to reap $822 million in sales for Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) gear it is developing, NEC Corp. has built a new track in Japan for testing ITS technologies, reports Nihon Keizai Shimbun. The .4-mile course in Gotenba, Kanagawa Prefecture cost NEC $1.64 million to build and is part of its plan to invest $82.2 million over the next five years on research and development. Some projects will target electronic toll collection gear, others will develop automated highways that electronically control cars. The course  as part of the automated highway projects  is also set up to test sudden braking after low-friction tiles are spread on portions of the track. 02/04/97 - 1,000 Mexico City Taxis to Become NGVs Mexico City  Penn Octane Corp. is expected to convert up to 1,000 of Mexico Citys taxis to compressed natural gas (CNG) as part of a wide-ranging agreement reached with private owners of public transportation companies there. Its part of a package deal between four entities that includes a $90 million, 1,500-bus purchase through Penn Octanes recently acquired bus dealership (News Notes 1/18/97), the taxi conversions, and CNG refueling stations to be owned and operated by Penn Octane. Taxi operator Sistema De Transportes En Taxis, S.A. de C.V. will also commit to long-term fuel purchases from Houston, Texas-based Penn Octane. About 70 percent of Mexico Citys air pollution  the worlds worst  comes from vehicles (News Notes 1/25/96, 3/14/96, 10/18/96 and 11/7/96). Natural gas-powered vehicles (NGVs) produce 90 percent fewer emissions than conventional vehicles. 02/04/97 - New Jersey Governor Orders 50 NGV Buses New Jersey  New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman  marking a new direction for her state  will be directing the New Jersey Transit agency to begin replacing its diesel buses with natural gas-powered buses, reports the Tri-State Transportation Campaigns newsletter. Whitman wants 50 "cruiser buses," or long- versus short-distance buses, and plans a fast-fueling terminal in Howell, Monmouth County, within two years as part of the $35 million project. Clean-air proponents say New Jersey had been reluctant  despite mounting evidence of diesel exhausts unhealthy effects  to do anything about the problem. Natural gas-powered vehicles (NGVs) emit about 90 percent fewer emissions than diesel-powered models, and many fleets report fuel-cost savings of up to 40 percent (News Notes 8/20/96). To further cut emissions, the state is expanding its random roadside inspection program to include fines; more than 20 percent of vehicles tested failed. 02/04/97 - Singapores Clean Air Stems From Permits, Taxes Singapore  Traffic jams  and air pollution  are rare in Singapore because of government policies including "permits" to own cars, stiff gasoline taxes and a toll system charging drivers $1.40 to enter downtown areas, reports Associated Press. In the 25-mile long island country, vehicle ownership is a privilege, not a right. Limited quantities of 10-year ownership permits sell at monthly auctions at prices up to $75,000; most go to dealers selling car-and-permit packages. Authorities also tax gasoline  to nearly $4.50 per gallon  and parking spaces to discourage stores and churches from offering free parking, while closed-circuit television systems monitor traffic flows and coordinate traffic signals. The nation of three million has 350,000 cars, one for every eight people; the rest use plentiful buses, taxis and a mass-transit rail system that covers much of the country. Singapore also plans to install electronic toll-collection systems on all of its major roads by the end of the year. 02/03/97 - EPA Extends Smog-Plan Comment Deadline Washington, D.C.  The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has extended  for 60 days  the public comment period for its proposed new rules on ozone and particulate air pollution, reports Reuters. The comment period had been set to close Feb. 18, but will now close April 18. The action means the publication of final rules will also be pushed back from June to August. While some groups  including oil industry lobbyists  say the proposed new rules would cost more than the benefits, doctors, health advocates and administration officials cite studies showing 20,000 American lives and billions of dollars in health costs would be saved each year (News Notes 11/25/96, 12/2/96, 1/15/97 and 1/21/97). The EPAs toll-free comment line is 1-888-TELL EPA. 02/03/97 - Pena Calls for Plan to Cut Oil Imports Washington, D.C.  Saying the country is sliding toward "energy insecurity," Energy Secretary nominee Federico Pena is calling for action to reduce the countrys dependence on oil imports, reports Reuters. "I believe that we will not reverse our slide toward energy insecurity without a set of strategies that address both energy production and consumption and that are coupled with specific targets and timetables to measure performance," Pena said during his confirmation hearing before the Senate Energy Committee. His predecessor at the Department of Energy, Hazel R. OLeary, said recently she believes "wake-up calls" such as price shocks will be needed to spur Americans to conserve energy and give more attention to alternative fuels (News Notes 1/20/97). More than half the oil consumed in the U.S. is imported; in May 1996, usage that month spiked to an average of 9.979 million barrels per day (News Notes 6/4/96 and 8/1/96). 02/03/97 - Russian Scientists Develop Hydrogen Car Engine Moscow  Russian scientists have developed a hydrogen-powered automobile engine that produces only water vapor as exhaust, reports Xinhua. Citing the Rossiskaya Gazeta, the article says the hydrogen is stored in a tank thats similar in size to a conventional gasoline tank, then reacts with oxygen in the air through "a special electrochemical dynamo." Electricity produced in the process is then used to power electric drive motors. The article  lean on details  doesnt say if the system is operating in a vehicle or if the project is merely in the preliminary stages. Automakers worldwide are working on similar "fuel cell" projects: Daimler Benz showed its hydrogen fuel cell-powered vehicle in May 1996 (News Notes 5/14/96); Toyota showed its version in October 1996 (News Notes 10/4/96); and last month Chrysler showed its system that will convert gasoline to hydrogen on-board the vehicle (News Notes 1/6/97). 02/01/97 - Half of Berkeleys School Buses to be NGVs in 97 Berkeley, Calif.  The Berkeley Unified School District took delivery of two more natural gas-powered school buses this week as it proceeds with its plan to have half of its fleet running on the cleaner-burning fuel by the end of the year, reports the Alameda Times-Star. The $320,000 buses were paid for with a grant from the Bay Area Air Quality Management District. The school district  like many in the nation  is turning to natural gas because emissions are far less than from gasoline or diesel-powered vehicles, and the refueling and maintenance costs are cheaper too (News Notes 8/20/96 and 1/9/97). Tulsa, Oklahomas school district saved $100,000 last year on fuel costs alone for its natural gas-powered buses. For earlier News Notes, see Back Issues | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-13IA037-000725-B006-70http://www.calstart.org:80/news/backissues/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054356 text/html 156314HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:35:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART Back Issue Index CALSTART Back Issues CALSTART features, newsnotes, press releases and other materials dating back to 1993 are indexed here. Search for specific documents using our Excite Search Engine; CALSTART News items all have "CALSTART News" in their title. 02/10/97- Wildman Becomes First Legislator to Use Electric Car For District Duties 02/08/97- Rules Crimping California Propane Conversions 02/07/97- EPA  Rail Locomotives Must Clean Up Their Act 02/07/97- Nissan 1st Automaker to Offer Lithium-Battery EV 02/06/97- Unique Mobility to Build a Stealth Bus Drivetrain 02/06/97- Olympic Souvenir? How About an Electric Tram? 02/06/97- GMs Bi-Fuel NGV Pickup Launch Approaches 02/05/97- NEC Builds ITS Test Track, Targets $822M in Sales 02/05/97- L.A. Airport Solicits Bids for 39 Clean-Fuel Vehicles 02/05/97- Grand Canyon May Ban Cars, Use Alt-Fuel Buses 02/04/97- Singapores Clean Air Stems From Permits, Taxes 02/04/97- New Jersey Governor Orders 50 NGV Buses 02/04/97- 1,000 Mexico City Taxis to Become NGVs 02/03/97- Russian Scientists Develop Hydrogen Car Engine 02/03/97- Pena Calls for Plan to Cut Oil Imports 02/03/97- EPA Extends Smog-Plan Comment Deadline 02/01/97- Half of Berkeleys School Buses to be NGVs in 97 01/31/97- Fiat Plans to Offer NGVs in 1997, Offers EVs Now 01/31/97- Maxwell Renews EV Ultracapacitor Contract 01/30/97- NYC to Buy 500 Natural Gas and Electric Buses 01/30/97- Penn. Airport Fleets Targeted for AFV Conversions 01/30/97- Costs Savings Sell NGV Conversions in Oklahoma 01/29/97- Shanghai to Replace Gas Bikes with Electric 01/29/97- Major Motor Maker Supports EPAct 01/29/97- Toyota Pull-Out Navigation Units Offer Home Uses 01/28/97- Honda Launches EV PLUS Newspaper Ads 01/28/97- New EV Charger Could be Totally Hands-Free? 01/28/97- Lotus to Unveil 200-HP Electric Sports Car 01/27/97- Air Pollution Too High in 200 Russian Cities 01/27/97- India Launches Propane-Fueled Autorickshaws 01/27/97- New Natural Gas-to-Methanol Discovery Made 01/25/97- Toyota  U.S. Smog Rules Driving its AFV Efforts 01/24/97- EV-Maker Samsung Snatches Ssangyong Motors 01/24/97- Driving Costs Up, Average is 42.6 Cents Per Mile 01/23/97- UPS Delivers $3.7M Order for More NGV Engines 01/23/97- Florida Offers $2.5M for AFV Purchases, Retrofits 01/23/97- Physicians Call on Clinton to Cut Global Warming 01/22/97- Central Calif. Air-Quality Final Report Released 01/22/97- New GRI Report on NGV Cylinder Design, Safety 01/22/97- Indonesia Government Turns to NGVs 01/21/97- Work Begins on LNG Waste-Hauling Truck Station 01/21/97- EPA Holding Hearings on New Air Standards 01/21/97- GM Hybrid May Run on Cruise Missile Engine 01/20/97- IMPCO Gets $1.5 Million Order From NATURGAS 01/20/97- Sacto RTD Saves $1 Million Operating CNG Buses 01/20/97- DOE Head  U.S. Needs Energy-Price Wake Up 01/18/97- Penn Octane Granted Mexican NGV Dealership 01/17/97- British Group Predicts 200,000 NGVs in Five Years 01/17/97- Fight Brewing Over ISTEA Funds 01/17/97- Old Cars Banned, Free Buses in Italy Smog Crisis 01/16/97- ZAP, Italian Electric Scooter Firm Sign Exclusive 01/16/97- Edison EV Joins USABC on Advanced EV Batteries 01/16/97- French City Bans School Sports as Pollution Rises 01/15/97- Cruising Equipment Shows New EV-Battery Meter 01/15/97- EPA Public Air-Quality Hearings, Lobbying Begin 01/15/97- CALSTART Takes Delivery of EV1, Build No. 98 01/14/97- GM  Significant Numbers of AFVs Within 10 Years 01/14/97- Partnership Formed to Produce Zinc-Air EVs 01/13/97- SatCon Awarded $1.5M in Generator Contracts 01/13/97- Alameda Area Obtains Job-Boosting Designation 01/11/97- Mazda to Stop Making Minicars, Will Buy Suzukis 01/10/97- Oil Co. Sins Powering Alt-Fuel Vehicle Programs 01/10/97- Ford to Provide Mazda with its EVs 01/09/97- Orion Bus Orders $1.4M of EDOs NGV Cylinders 01/09/97- Oklahoma School System Saving Big With AFVs 01/09/97- Unique Mobility Lands Asian, Italian EV Contracts 01/08/97- Rosen Motors Announces World's First Successful Road Test of Turbine-Flywheel Powertrain for Automobiles 01/08/97- Rosen Motors Turbine-Flywheel EV Road-Tested 01/08/97- OnStar Navigation Gear Set for More 98 GM Cars 01/08/97- Ballard Receives $766K Order for More Fuel Cells 01/07/97- Indianapolis Airport Test of Hybrid Bus a Success 01/07/97- Michigan Firm Developing NiMH EV Batteries 01/07/97- Electric Bike-Maker ZAP Offers Shares via Internet 01/06/97- West Hollywood Designated EV Model City 01/06/97- Chrysler Unveils Fuel Cell Vehicle Breakthrough 01/06/97- Alt-Fuel Vehicle Fuel-Use Rises, Now 2.7% of Total 01/04/97- Mitsubishi Hybrid EV Powered by Natural Gas 01/03/97- Ford Ranger EV Product of Million Miles of Testing 01/03/97- Honda to Lease EVs for All-Inclusive $499 Month 01/02/97- Chinese-French Joint Venture to Build EVs 01/02/97- Iran Orders All Transit Buses Converted to NGVs 12/31/96- Japan Motorcycle-Makers to Form Alliance 12/30/96- Edison Rose Parade Float is a Solar-Charged EV 12/28/96- GM to Offer Bi-Fuel Natural Gas Pickups 12/27/96- Ford, Northwest Gas Offer 1-Year Free NGV Fuel 12/27/96- Samsung Motors Debuts SEV-IV Electric Car 12/26/96- Pena Named to Head Department of Energy 12/21/96- Edison EV Forms Alliance For EV Charge Networks 12/20/96- 21 Solectria EVs to Become New Jersey Station Cars 12/19/96- AC Propulsions New EV Does 0-60 in 5 Seconds 12/19/96- Bolder Battery Has Half-Million Batteries Pre-Sold 12/19/96- Detroit, Toronto Partner as DOE Clean Corridor 12/18/96- EVs Work For Vermonters, Despite Cold Weather 12/18/96- Penn. Transit Agency to Add 27 Alt-Fuel Buses 12/18/96- BAT Developing Zinc-Air-Battery Delivery Van 12/18/96- Ovonic, Sanoh to Form European NiMH Venture 12/17/96- Ford to Buy EV Batteries From Toyota, Matsushita? 12/17/96- GM Plans EV Grants, Smoggy-Car Buy-Backs 12/17/96- Arizona Resort Offers Flat-Fee, Public EV Charging 12/17/96- New Concrete Paving Blocks Eat Smog? 12/16/96- Clinton Reaffirms Order for AFVs in Govt. Fleets 12/16/96- Electronic Toll System Set For Maryland 12/14/96- 1st of 100 NGV Buses Delivered to Perth, Australia 12/13/96- Nissan Satisfied With Li Batteries; Sets EV Schedule 12/13/96- Toyota Thinks USABC Should Open its Doors 12/12/96- CALSTART's new web resource site for Fleet Managers 12/12/96- CALSTART Launches Web Resource for AFV Fleets 12/12/96- Bombardier NEVs Shipping to Dealers 12/12/96- NAEVI News Nuggets 12/12/96- San Diego Becomes 50th DOE Clean City 12/11/96- EV1 Launch, Gas Giveaway Just a Coincidence? 12/11/96- Ford Offers Free Charger With its EV Pickups 12/11/96- All-Plastic Battery Under Development 12/10/96- Press Release Template 12/10/96- Fast-Charged EV Travels 1,000 Miles in 24 Hours 12/10/96- Honda, Nippon Flywheel Develop Kinetic Battery 12/10/96- Chrysler Uses ITS Gear, Robots for Vehicle Testing 12/09/96- China Counting on AFVs to Solve Energy Woes 12/09/96- Chinas First Solar-Powered Car Lauded 12/09/96- ITS Gear Allows Vehicle Tracking via Internet 12/07/96- GM Ovonic Funded $8M To Cut EV Battery Cost 12/06/96- So. Calif. Utility Pledges $50K For EV Charge Sites 12/06/96- Unique Mobility Developing Hybrid EV for Taiwan 12/05/96- Plugging in to How Electric Vehicles Work 12/05/96- Marketing EV1 the Saturn Way 12/05/96- Canadian Groups Unite to Advance AFVs 12/05/96- GM EV1s Set for First Deliveries Today 12/05/96- EV1s Roll, EV2 4-Place Model Coming Soon? 12/04/96- Toyota Begins U.S. Sales of Auto-Navigation Gear 12/04/96- Matsushita Develops Fuel-Fired EV Heater 12/04/96- Connecticut Casino Bets on Natural Gas Vehicles 12/04/96- Lockheed, Orion Partner on Hybrid-Electric Buses 12/03/96- AFV Web Site Launched in Northeast by NAVC 12/03/96- Restructuring At Delco Electronics? 12/02/96- EPA Proposes Air Standards for Particulate Matter and Ozone 12/02/96- EPA Releases Stringent Pollution-Reduction Plan 12/02/96- Leno Says No to EV1 Lease  Wants to Buy 12/02/96- Zinc-Air Battery-Powered Van Suffers Minor Fire 11/30/96- British Government Receives Natural Gas Car 11/29/96- SoCal Edison Prepares For Deregulation 11/27/96- Freightliner to Build CNG Vans for U.S. Postal Fleet 11/27/96- Automotive News Cheers Toyota AFV Investment 11/26/96- Low-NOx Diesel Engine Technology Announced 11/26/96- EV1 Ad Campaign Features Dancing Appliances 11/26/96- Calif. Co. to Launch Sparrow EV This Week 11/25/96- Honda Laying Groundwork for Calif. EV Launch 11/25/96- U.S. EPA Set to Toughen Air-Quality Standards 11/25/96- GM Begins Fleet Sales of Electric Trucks in Mass. 11/23/96- NYCTA, Nova To Partner On Hybrid-Electric Buses 11/22/96- Calif., 3 States Air Cleaner Than 10 Years Ago 11/22/96- BAT to Market, Install AC Drive Systems for EVs 11/21/96- Indian Court Orders Smoggy Taxis Off the Road 11/21/96- Vehicle Carbon Monoxide Kills 15 Yearly in Calif. 11/21/96- Six New World Markets Developing for Small EVs 11/21/96- Home Refueling a Huge Market Plus for EVs 11/20/96- DOE Grants Expanded to Include EVs 11/20/96- 160-MPH Natural Gas Dragster Used in NGV Relay 11/20/96- EV Motor Controllers Target For Cost Reductions 11/19/96- Toyota to Bet $800M Annually on AFV Projects 11/19/96- SoCal Gas Ordered to Sell Some NGV Stations 11/19/96- Seven Asian Automakers Form California Alliance 11/18/96- Toyota Set to Mass-Produce Hybrid EVs in 1997 11/18/96- High-Efficiency EV Air Conditioner in Vehicle Tests 11/18/96- DOT Secretary Federico Pena Resigns 11/16/96- Zinc-Air EV Battery-Maker Allies With Israeli Utility 11/15/96- Yuasas New EV Battery Gives 93-Mile Range 11/14/96- Kentucky NGV Fuel Station Ramps Up Capacity 11/14/96- Yamahas New Electric Bike to Sell for $790 11/14/96- Czech Capital Bans Vehicles in Smog Emergency 11/14/96- Nissan-Sony Lithium-Ion EV Battery Wins Award 11/14/96- GM  Again  Officially Rolls Out EV1 11/13/96- New York Voters Approve Clean-Air Bond Act 11/13/96- EV Drive-Maker SatCon Acquiring K&D Magmotor 11/13/96- Bombardier Green Lights its Neighborhood EV 11/12/96- Daimler-Benz, Leica Team on Distance Sensor 11/12/96- Calif. Mall Gearing Up for EVs, Installs Chargers 11/12/96- GM  4-Wheeled EV Scooters for Asian Market? 11/11/96- 80,000 NGVs Expected on U.S. Roads by Year End 11/11/96- GM EV1 Wins Four More Engineering Awards 11/11/96- Etak to Participate in San Francisco ITS Project 11/09/96- Major Changes In Store For General Motors Cars 11/08/96- Honda Says Civic NGV Cleanest Car Ever 11/08/96- Scientists Make Hydrogen With Deep-Sea Enzyme 11/07/96- Call Issued for Electric Boats for Sydney Olympics 11/07/96- ITS Gear Improves Taxi Dispatch Times 11/07/96- Mexico City Smog Season Begins Early 11/06/96- Magnets Reduce Emissions, Improve Mileage? 11/06/96- Detroit Diesels NGV Engine CARB, EPA Certified 11/06/96- GM-Hughes Exec  EVs Cheaper to Build, Run 11/05/96- Kummerow to Supply Zinc-Air Batteries to BAT 11/05/96- Battery-Maker Acme Electric Sells Division to BAT 11/05/96- SoCal Edison to Test Automated Meter-Readers 11/04/96- Cleaner-Burning Gas Lowers California Smog 11/04/96- British Cab-Maker Plans Alternative-Fuel Models 11/04/96- Exxon May Build First Natural Gas-to-Liquid Plant 11/02/96- SatCon to Develop Modular Power Electronics 11/01/96- UPS Aims to Double its NGV Fleet by End of 1997 11/01/96- Honda Solar Car Wins 1,870 Mile Australian Race 10/31/96- CARB Responds to Carnegie Mellon Study Errors 10/31/96- CARB Responds to Carnegie Mellon Study Errors 10/31/96- Japan, U.S. to Set Lithium EV-Battery Standards 10/31/96- Daihatsu Plans Urban EV Rental Network 10/30/96- U.S. Senator Barbara Boxer to Tour Alameda Naval Air Station Site; Advanced Transportation Hatchery Now Houses 14 Companies 10/30/96- PIVCO Selects Aurskog, Norway for First EV Plant 10/30/96- Rockwell Demos ITS Gear via Internet Web Site 10/29/96- Briggs & Stratton Engines to Power $3K India Car 10/29/96- Hyundai to Market NGVs, EVs by 1998 10/29/96- 50 Countries Call for Air Pollution Crackdown 10/28/96- FHWA Seeks ITS Partners for Texas Border Project 10/28/96- Nepal Moves to Ban Smoggy Vehicles from City 10/28/96- Audi Expects to Sell 500 Hybrid EVs Annually 10/26/96- Natural Gas to Fuel Connecticut Shuttle Vans 10/25/96- Pennsylvania Expands NGV Fueling Network 10/25/96- Bolder Lands $750K SBIR Advanced-Battery Grant 10/24/96- Jim Boyd Joins CALSTART, Heads New International Consulting Unit 10/24/96- DOE Pledges $106M for EV Battery Research 10/24/96- Former CARB Official to Head CALSTART Unit 10/24/96- Edison Wins National Energy Award for EV Efforts 10/23/96- NGV Corp. Multi-Fuel Motorcycle Debuts 10/23/96- Japan, FHWA Renew ITS Info Exchange Pact 10/23/96- PSA Peugeot-Citroen French EV Market Leader 10/23/96- Interactive NGV Technician Training Proposed 10/22/96- Mexico Seeks to Purchase, Test Dozens of EVs 10/22/96- Peugeot EVs Slated For British EV Experiment 10/22/96- DOE Study Compares Alt-Fuel Buses With Diesel 10/22/96- Electric-Bike Maker ZAP Going Public 10/21/96- Airports Among Worst Polluters, Says NRDC 10/21/96- Ergenics Demonstrates Advanced EV Battery 10/21/96- San Francisco SMARTPool Vans Run on CNG 10/19/96- New NHTSA Rules Could Limit Hybrid EV Efforts 10/18/96- Mexico City Smog Reaches Danger Levels 10/18/96- Delco Shows Heavy-Truck Safety Gear 10/17/96- Ford Shows Voice-Activated Navigation System 10/17/96- SoCal Gas, San Diego Utility Parents to Combine 10/17/96- New Device Could Improve EV Ranges 10/16/96- Maxwell Ultracapacitors Arent Just for EVs? 10/16/96- Advanced Batteries on the Way 10/16/96- At Least 1,000 EVs on Way for U.S.  Stempel 10/16/96- Toyota Hints at Hybrid Car, Will Build Hybrid Bus 10/16/96- More EVS-13 News Nuggets 10/16/96- GM Sets EV1 Price, Dec. 5 Date for EV1 Launch 10/15/96- Hitachi to Market Lithium-Ion EV Batteries 10/15/96- Toyota to Market Hybrid-Electric Buses in 1997 10/15/96- Nissan to Intro All-New EV for Calif. in 1998 10/14/96- Volvo Puts CNG Filling Station at U.S. Offices 10/14/96- Zinc-Air Battery-Powered Van Conquers Alps 10/14/96- U.S. Electricar Shows New EV, Acquires Systronix 10/14/96- Mitsubishi Hybrid Truck Could Cut NOx 98% 10/14/96- EVS-13 News Nuggets 10/12/96- Unique Mobility, Pininfarina Show Ethos 3 EV 10/11/96- CALSTART Unveils Two New Tools for Tracking Electric Vehicle Industry 10/11/96- L.A. Freeway ITS System Could Raise Speeds 15% 10/11/96- SatCon Demonstrates Flywheel UPS Battery 10/11/96- Two CALSTART Publications Track New Industry 10/10/96- Solar-Powered, Concrete-Bodied Car Debuts 10/10/96- Suzuki Announces Low-Cost Electric Car 10/10/96- U.S. Electricar to Acquire Drive-Maker Systronix 10/09/96- Daihatsu to Market Two EV Models in Spring 1997 10/09/96- Electric Bike-Maker ZAP Debuts Electric Scooter 10/09/96- Rockwell, Gillig, Siemens Team on Hybrid Buses 10/08/96- Hybrid-Electric Stealth Bus Publicly Unveiled 10/08/96- Matsushita Orders Ballard Fuel Cells 10/07/96- Arizona Malls, Restaurant to Get EV Chargers 10/07/96- Mitsubishi Develops Compact EV Motor 10/07/96- Fuel Cell Group Chides U.S. For Falling Behind 10/05/96- Chattanooga Team, Costa Rica Partner on EVs 10/04/96- CALSTART Launches Eight New Advanced Transportation Projects 10/04/96- Toyota Announces Fuel Cell-Powered EV 10/04/96- CALSTART, DARPA Team on EV, Hybrid Projects 10/03/96- City of Paris, Utility Company Join to Promote EVs 10/03/96- Hitachi Targeting Three ITS Industry Areas 10/03/96- Matsushita EV Circuit Breaker 1/10 Size of Todays 10/02/96- U.S. EPA OKs California's Anti-Ozone Plan 10/02/96- MTA, Grumman Set Oct. 8 Stealth Bus Unveiling 10/02/96- U.S. Flywheel to Deliver Units for NASA Testing 10/01/96- Jim Boyd Joins CALSTART, Heads New International Consulting Unit 10/01/96- EVS-13 Conference Wrap-Up 10/01/96- Consortium Update 10/01/96- NAS Alameda Hatchery Update 10/01/96- Dallas Natural Gas Vehicle Conference Highlights Industry Growth 10/01/96- Web Talk 10/01/96- Daihatsu, 11 Others Develop 2-Seat Electric Car 10/01/96- EV Hits 206 MPH, Sets Two-Way Record of 198 10/01/96- Pouch-Cell Batteries Could Fit Anywhere? 09/30/96- Vespa Cuts Emissions on Two Scooter Models 09/30/96- Audi May Be First to Market With Hybrid EV 09/30/96- IMPCO Converting 439 USPS Trucks to Natural Gas 09/28/96- Poll  Public Wants Tougher Clean-Air Standards 09/27/96- Auto-Piloted Cars Now in Tests on Japan Roads 09/27/96- Bolder Breaks Ground on Advanced-Battery Plant 09/26/96- VW, Volvo Order Fuel Cells From Ballard 09/26/96- ExproFuels to Convert 28 Minivans to LNG Power 09/26/96- Maxwell, Automaker in $4.5M Ultracapacitor Deal 09/25/96- British Medical Journal  Global Warming is Real 09/25/96- MTA Says Fuel Cells Might be Used in Stealth Bus 09/25/96- Nissan Experiments With On-the-Go EV Charging 09/24/96- EV1 Book Beats EV1 in Race to Market 09/24/96- AeroVironment Solar Plane Heading to Hawaii 09/24/96- Washington D.C. to Convert 200 Vehicles to CNG 09/23/96- Honda Selects EDO Cylinders for its 98 NGVs 09/23/96- USABC Awards Four Battery Research Grants 09/23/96- Largest Natural Gas Station in Nor. Calif. Opens 09/21/96- Electric Fuel Van Heads For Swedish Postal Runs 09/20/96- New Agreement to Clean Up Diesel Exhausts 09/20/96- MTA  23 Sidelined CNG Buses Rolling Again 09/19/96- More Dallas NGV Conference Nuggets 09/19/96- Revi Electric Moped Goes 1,000 Miles for $3 09/19/96- Honda Civic NGV to Cost 30 Percent More 09/18/96- AeroVironment, GT Bicycles Pair on Electric Bikes 09/18/96- Ford Consolidates Global AFV Efforts 09/18/96- Solvang Launches APS-Built Electric Bus 09/18/96- Major NGV Legislation to be Proposed 09/17/96- BAT International Establishes Northeast Subsidiary 09/17/96- Honda Unveils 1998 CNG Civic at Dallas 09/17/96- NGV Systems Introduces Steel CNG Cylinders 09/17/96- Oklahoma Methane Super Gas Ready to Test 09/17/96- Dallas NGV Conference Nuggets 09/16/96- Crude-Oil Prices at Five-Year High 09/16/96- First Electric School Bus in Northeast Now Rolling 09/16/96- Japan Group Develops EV Battery-Life Extender 09/14/96- NYC Dumping 500 Diesel Buses for CNG or Hybrid 09/13/96- Rosen Motors Develops Hybrid Electric Powertrain for Automobiles 09/13/96- Rosen Motors Corporate Backgrounder 09/13/96- AQMD  New Smog Plan to Net $200M in Benefits 09/13/96- Rosen Motors Flywheel-Turbine HEV in Dyno Tests 09/12/96- EPA Updates 20-Year-Old Emissions Test 09/12/96- Roadside Transmitters May Switch HEVs to EVs? 09/12/96- British to Test Gas Turbine in BMWs, Renaults in 97 09/11/96- Virginia Power, GM Pair to Market EVs, Chargers 09/11/96- Mitsubishi Making Car-Navigation Gear Standard 09/11/96- Lockheed Martin Taps SatCon for HEV Project 09/10/96- Natural Gas Van Goes the Distance; Range Concerns Eliminated as 09/10/96- CALSTART Partners Develop Natural Gas Van with 390 Mile Range 09/10/96- Electric Fuel, Holland, Sweden in EV Test Program 09/09/96- Richmond, Va. Launches First Three Electric Buses 09/09/96- EV Logs 50,000 Trouble-Free Miles in Two Years 09/07/96- Detroit Edison to Buy First Ford-Built Electric Trucks 09/06/96- Ford Launches EV Web Page 09/05/96- New Ford Computers Allow $10 Crash Simulations 09/04/96- Calif. Assembly Passes HOV-Lane Access Bill 09/04/96- GM Wins Contract for 250 Electric S-10 Pickups 09/03/96- Automated Meter-Readers Could Reduce Smog? 09/03/96- Ford Drops Price Differential on NGVs 08/31/96- Jay Leno Wants An EV1 08/30/96- New Cummins Natural Gas Engine More Powerful 08/30/96- CNG Cylinders Key Market for Carbon Fiber 08/29/96- University to Build Hybrid EV for Long Island Utility 08/29/96- Higher Gas Prices, More Travelers For Weekend 08/29/96- Electric Bikes  500 Miles Per Dollar of Fuel 08/28/96- EV1 Among Applications Driving Magnesium Use 08/28/96- AC Propulsion EV Hits 145 Miles on Lead-Acids 08/28/96- GM EV1 Launch Set for Early November 08/27/96- Electric and Natural Gas Recharging/Refueling Sites Now on the Internet 08/27/96- EV Charging, NGV Fueling Sites Now on Web 08/27/96- Taiwan Licenses Unique Mobilitys EV Technology 08/27/96- Daihatsu Develops Nickel-Hydrogen Powered EV 08/26/96- Air Pollution in Hong Kong Reaches Record High 08/26/96- MTA Now Sidelining CNG Bus Fleet During Inquiry 08/26/96- Suit Says Parking-Garage Air Bad for Health 08/24/96- Electrosource, Blue Bird Team on Electric Bus 08/23/96- EV1 Gets Thumbs Up From United Auto Workers 08/23/96- No Bus Slowdowns from NGV Tank Rupture 08/22/96- General Motors EV1 Receives CALSTART's Inaugural Blue Sky Award 08/22/96- Road Closures Possible in New British Smog Plan 08/22/96- GM Receives First CALSTART "Blue Sky" Award 08/21/96- Company Converts Missile Materials for Auto Use 08/21/96- PIVCO May Put Additional EV Plant in Scotland 08/21/96- Ballard Receives $2.3 Million Order for Fuel Cells 08/20/96- NGV Fleets Reporting Dramatic Savings 08/20/96- Philadelphia Schools Launch Natural Gas Buses 08/20/96- Amerigon Navigation Gear Debuts in Rental Fleet 08/19/96- 95 Percent of Commuters Shunning Mass Transit 08/19/96- Air Study Calls for Electric Buses in Indian Capital 08/19/96- All 500 NGVs Perform Flawlessly at Olympics 08/17/96- Mechanics Say Theyre Prepared to Service EVs 08/16/96- Average New Car Costs up to 36 Weeks Pay 08/16/96- Costa Rican Pres. To Visit Tennessee to View EVs 08/15/96- $21M Super-Efficient HTS Motor Project Launched 08/15/96- Calif. Denies 'Clean' Cars Access to HOV Lanes 08/15/96- New Jersey Gas, BayTech Partner on AT&T NGV 08/14/96- South African Utility Seeks Local EV Partners 08/14/96- Renault Developing Sleepy-Driver Monitors 08/14/96- National Freight to Fit 900 Trucks With ITS Gear 08/13/96- Fazio Helps SMUD and CALSTART Launch New Business Incubators at McClellan 08/13/96- Hong Kong Buys China-Built Electric Bus 08/13/96- CALSTART Plans Business Incubator in Sacramento 08/13/96- Honda EV Shares Production Line with Acura NSX 08/12/96- Electronic Car-Stopping Device Set for Testing 08/12/96- San Diego to Pay to Clean Up High-Polluter Cars 08/12/96- Japanese Gas Utility Offers Free NGVs and Fuel 08/10/96- LNG Shuttles to Roll at LAX 08/09/96- New Harley-Davidson Emits No Pollution? 08/09/96- Nine Advisors Quit to Protest AQMD Smog Plan 08/08/96- Surf the Net, Check E-Mail in Your Benz? 08/08/96- CARB Orders GM to Recall Smoggy Pickups 08/08/96- Emfree Motors to Sell Tavria, Skoda Conversions 08/07/96- EDO Announces $1.75M in NGV Station Contracts 08/07/96- U.S. Electricar to Sell Former Nordskog Unit 08/06/96- SoCal Drivers Polled on Toll Lanes, Pollution Fees 08/06/96- Nissan Confirms its Building Electric Minivan 08/06/96- SAE Conference Showcases Future Technologies 08/06/96- First Solar Boat Crosses Pacific Ocean 08/05/96- EPA Sets Sights on Smoggy Watercraft 08/05/96- Saft Receives FTA Funding for Hybrid EV Batteries 08/05/96- Bolder Selects Final Distributor, Releases Earnings 08/03/96- Arizona AFVs to be Allowed in HOV Lanes 08/02/96- French Smart Car Plant Gets European Aid 08/02/96- Matsushita Electric to Make EV Motors 08/01/96- EPA Diesel Rules Could Require 'Better' Fuel 08/01/96- U.S. Oil Imports in May Second-Highest Ever 08/01/96- USCAR Tells of PNGV Program Successes 07/31/96- Driverless Trucks Used in Roadway Test 07/31/96- NGVs Help Olympics Breathe Easier 07/31/96- Electricity Helps Clean Oil-Contaminated Soil 07/31/96- Electric Canal Ferries Slated for Bangkok Test 07/30/96- Malaysia to Call For Noise, Pollution Controls 07/30/96- Bangkok May Ban New Cars During Rush Hour 07/30/96- NavTech Issues U.S.-Wide Maps, May Go Public 07/30/96- Kummerow Zinc-Air Battery Tests at 400 Amp Hrs. 07/29/96- Moving Company Selects Qualcomm ITS Gear 07/29/96- Mobil Calls For 100-Year Plan on Global Warming 07/29/96- Justice Dept. Flooded by Oil Antitrust Documents 07/29/96- ECDs Stock No. 1  Says Michigan Stock Survey 07/27/96- Valence Technology Enters Korean Joint Venture 07/26/96- Phoenix Air Pollution Worsening  Group Sues EPA 07/26/96- EV Charger-Maker EPTI Reborn as ACT 07/26/96- CARB Names Michael Kenny as New Head 07/25/96- EVs Shine in Atlanta's Olympic Games 07/25/96- L.A. 'Smart Shuttle' Trial Program Gets Green Light 07/25/96- Southland Smog Plan Shortsighted, Says EPA 07/24/96- L.A. to Recognize Law Firm's Commuter EV Efforts 07/24/96- Toyota to Sell 'RAV4L-EV's in Japan in Sept. 1996 07/23/96- AlliedSignal-GM Team Cuts Cold-Start Emissions 07/23/96- Portland Gearing Up For EVs, Offers Free Charging 07/23/96- Chrysler Gives Electrosource Additional $3 Mil 07/22/96- Advanced Transportation Flourishes at Refurbished Naval Air Station 07/22/96- Tucson Electric Makes Solar Cell Breakthrough 07/22/96- Natural Gas-Powered Boat Launched in Florida 07/22/96- Fuel Cell Developer Lands Three New Grants 07/20/96- NEVCO Rolls Out Gizmo Neighborhood EV 07/19/96- Shanghai Moped Restrictions May Boost Electrics 07/19/96- SoCal AQMD Shifts, Proposes Eased Regulations 07/18/96- ECD, Ovonic, Russia Team on Batteries, Solar 07/18/96- China Mandates Retrofits to Clean Up Exhausts 07/18/96- U.S. Shifts Direction, to Now Fight Global Warming 07/17/96- Europe Proposes Phase-Out of Leaded Gas 07/17/96- Ford Sells 15 EV Pickups, Claims 1st to Market 07/16/96- Toyota Creates $454 Million Venture-Capital Fund 07/16/96- Capstone Turbine Names New CEO 07/16/96- Electric Fuel Delivers Vans to Deutsche Post AG 07/16/96- Rosen Motors to Unveil Hybrid EV Powertrain 07/15/96- Electric Device Can Cut NOx up to 40 Percent 07/15/96- VW Renews Bounty for High-Polluting Cars 07/15/96- GM Subsidiary to Build Batteries in Saudi Arabia 07/13/96- Ventura County Opens First CNG Fast-Fill Station 07/12/96- BAT International & Kummerow Form Electric Vehicle 07/12/96- BAT, Kummerow Corp. Link Up on Zinc-Air Battery 07/12/96- First Purpose-Built NGV Taxis Hit New York City 07/11/96- CARBs Clean-Air Chief Resigns 07/11/96- U.S.A. Today  Thumbs Up to Honda EV After Drive 07/11/96- Arizona Republic  Pent-Up Demand for EV1 07/10/96- Chrysler to Suspend NGV Production, Will Return 07/10/96- Ovonic Teaming With Piaggio on Electric Scooters 07/09/96- CARB Claims RFG Contributed to Benzene Drop 07/09/96- Saft, Ovonic Settle Battery Suit 07/09/96- Bombardier Unveils Neighborhood EV 07/09/96- Samsung Motors Reveals Aluminum Chassis EV 07/08/96- Calif. ITS Truck Program Passes One-Year Mark 07/05/96- Autoweek Survey  Fuel Economy Unimportant 07/05/96- CALSTART Web Site Now Reaching 70 Nations 07/03/96- AirSensors IMPCO Acquires Aussie LPG Firm 07/03/96- 200,000 Vehicles in Uzbekistan to Become NGVs 07/03/96- Toyota to Begin Consumer EV Sales After 2000 07/02/96- Soaring China Energy Use Drives Fuel Changes 07/02/96- BAT Web Site Features Safety Crash-Test Video 07/02/96- DOE to Fund SatCon Electric Motor Research 07/01/96- Boston Edison, GM Team to Market EVs, Chargers 07/01/96- Mass. Gov. Makes State EV Purchase Leader 07/01/96- LPG-, Natural Gas-Optimized Engines Offered 06/29/96- Electric Buses, Cargo Vans to Be Built in Boston 06/28/96- Venezuela Contracts for 120 NGV Fueling Stations 06/28/96- CALSTART Hosts Major Industry Conference 06/28/96- Toyota Joins CALSTART, Marks 200th Participant 06/27/96- San Diego ITS Project to Demo Hands-Free Driving 06/27/96- Hydrogen-From-Sugar Process Discovered 06/27/96- Capstone Turbine Tops Venture Capital List in L.A. 06/26/96- New Monorail System Allows Two Trains at Once 06/26/96- Rechargeable Battery Breakthrough Announced 06/26/96- EV Users May Now Charge It at Sacramento Mall 06/25/96- Greenpeace to Unveil 80-mpg Smile Minicar 06/25/96- EPA Proposes Plan for Cutting Heavy-Truck Ozone 06/25/96- Mitsubishi Materials Jumps Into EV Battery Race 06/24/96- China to Invest in EV Development 06/24/96- Bolder Taps Southwest as First Battery Distributor 06/24/96- Daihatsu-Led Team Produces New Two-Seat EV 06/22/96- Week Marks 100 Year Anniversary of Automobiles 06/21/96- Brooklyn Fleet of 1,000 to Go All-NGV in 1996 06/21/96- Fleet Managers Confront OEMs for More AFVs 06/21/96- Atlanta Launches Largest NGV Taxi Fleet 06/20/96- Nissan to Begin a Limited Lease/Sales Program for the 06/20/96- Unique Mobility Offers Integrated EV Transaxles 06/20/96- New Nissan EV for Calif. Fleets Due in Early 1998 06/20/96- New Study Links Ozone to Rise in Hospital Visits 06/19/96- ZAP Offers Car-Scrap Bounty to Electric Bike Users 06/19/96- IMPCO Supplies LPG Systems to Coke of Mexico 06/19/96- Gas-Guzzlin Behemoths Get Tax Breaks? 06/18/96- Kia First Automaker to Offer Knee Airbags 06/18/96- New York Gov. Proposes $100 Mil for AFVs 06/18/96- Nissan Sets Japanese EV Launch for Spring 1997 06/17/96- Canadian Consortium Teams on Hybrid Van 06/17/96- LNG Tax Correction Stalled? 06/17/96- Pena  ITS Critical for Forecasted 50% Traffic Rise 06/15/96- Hyundai Claims Catalyst Car is 10 Times Cleaner 06/14/96- A Letter from the California Environmental Protection Agency and the 06/14/96- Venezuela Taps IMPCO to Convert Buses to CNG 06/14/96- Ballard Plans New Auto/Bus-Maker Partnership 06/14/96- Dallas Opens Light-Rail Line  1st in Southwest 06/14/96- CARB Proposes Equivalent ZEV Standard 06/13/96- Chilean Smog Crisis Prompts Harsh Measures 06/13/96- British Bus Deregulation, Ridership Plunge Linked? 06/13/96- First Export Products Ship Out of NAS Alameda 06/12/96- Micro Mercedes Won't Sacrifice on Safety 06/12/96- CarMax -- 90 Used-Car Superstores Within 5 Years 06/12/96- Mountain Bike Inventor  Electric Bikes to be Big 06/11/96- Group Offers Internet Test-Drives of 'Virtual Car' 06/11/96- Hybrid-Electric Buses Go Hollywood 06/11/96- Saturn to Teach Saab How to Sell, Service Cars 06/10/96- Volvo to Focus on Vehicles, U.S. Manufacturing? 06/09/96- Gasoline Additive MMT Continues to Stir Controversy in Canada 06/08/96- Scots Find New Way to Make Lithium Ion Batteries 06/07/96- New 'Praxi Vehicle' Prototype to be Unveiled at EVS-13 06/07/96- Swiss City of Monthey Starting Multi-user Commuter EV Project 06/06/96- Great Visuals!! Students Surrounded by Latest in Electric Vehicle Technology 06/06/96- Calif. Assembly Moves to Ease Environmental Laws 06/06/96- Sacramento Launches Electric Shuttle Bus Fleet 06/06/96- Oklahoma Extends 50 percent Tax Credit to EVs 06/06/96- Swiss to Add 7th EV Demonstration City 06/06/96- Praxitele Multi-User EV Program to Launch in France in Early '97 06/06/96- ISATA 'News Nuggets' IV 06/05/96- Chile Declaring its Capitol Ozone Saturated 06/05/96- ISATA 'News Nuggets' III 06/05/96- Thermophotovoltaic Generator to Run Hybrid EV 06/05/96- Chrysler  Gasoline to Power First Fuel Cell Cars 06/05/96- GM's Delphi Tests 12-Min. Fast Charger for Buses 06/04/96- Bolder Technologies Nears Battery Production 06/04/96- U.S. Energy Use Rising Despite Efficiency Gains 06/04/96- Tokyo Suit Claims Auto Pollution Negligence 06/04/96- ISATA News Nuggets II 06/04/96- Isuzu Launches Heavy-Duty Hybrid Trucks 06/04/96- Daihatsu Testing Hybrid-Electric Charade Cars 06/04/96- Smart Speed Limit Signs Save Lives in Finland 06/03/96- Kennedy Space Center Launches NGV Station 06/03/96- Battery Expert  Advanced Batteries On Track 06/03/96- Swiss Govt. to Pay 50% of Cost of Qualifying EVs 06/03/96- News Notes Nuggets from ISATA Conference 06/01/96- Allied Signal Turbogenerator Powers Toward Market 06/01/96- The French Connection: Part 2 06/01/96- Promising Markets for Natural Gas 06/01/96- GM To Receive CALSTART's 1st Blue Sky Award 06/01/96- WEB TALK 06/01/96- CALSTART Participant Spotlight: SAFT America, Inc. 06/01/96- INDUSTRY WATCH 06/01/96- CARB Response: Incentives for EVs Do Exist 06/01/96- CALSTART Launches Eight New Advanced Transportation Projects 06/01/96- Controversy Heats Up Over Possible Science Cuts 05/31/96- Beijing Pollution Very Serious, Says New Study 05/31/96- Flywheel Battery for Hybrid EV Passes Key Tests 05/31/96- Virginia Power Deal Hints at Next GM EV Market? 05/30/96- Awards Honor Vehicle Use of Aluminum 05/30/96- Pennsylvania Asks for Clean Air Help 05/30/96- Tough Air Standards Would Protect National Parks 05/29/96- GM Annual Report Cover Features EV1 05/29/96- New Process Turns Natural Gas Into Liquid Fuel 05/29/96- Ford Adds Bi-Fuel Contour to its NGV Lineup 05/29/96- Calif. Senator Boxer Proposes AFV Incentives 05/28/96- Chrysler Pulls Plug on Patriot Hybrid EV Race Car 05/28/96- EPA  Clean Air Act Saves $6 Trillion, 140,000 Lives 05/27/96- Tax Deductions Make it More Economical to Buy and Convert NGVs 05/25/96- New Consumer Guide for Electric Cars Debuts 05/24/96- NiCad-Powered BAT Electrobike Wins Autocross 05/24/96- EPA Launches Market Incentives Resource Center 05/24/96- Toyotas EV Battery-Maker to Build Them in U.S. 05/23/96- World Energy Use to Jump 50 Percent by 2015 05/23/96- Toyota Says its Fuel Cell Debut Wont Be Long 05/23/96- Clean Cities Now Includes Small Airports 05/22/96- Bus Riders Tell L.A. to Dump Rail, Buy CNG Buses 05/22/96- Las Vegas Finding NGVs a Sure Bet 05/22/96- SatCon Demos Super-Efficient Turbine Alternator 05/21/96- Demand for Bolder Battery Stock High 05/21/96- Iraqs Back  Gasoline Prices to Drop Slightly 05/21/96- ALABC to Put $17 Mil into Lead Battery Research 05/20/96- Sony to Buy Digital Map-Maker Etak 05/20/96- Ban Leaded Gas Worldwide  Says World Bank 05/20/96- Toyota, Matsushita to Team on Electric Vehicles 05/18/96- SuperShuttle Receives Clean Air Award for NGVs 05/17/96- Matsushita Opens Ohio Lithium Battery Plant 05/16/96- DARPA Consortia Showcase High-Tech Technologies in Washington 05/16/96- NYC NGVs to Use IMPCO CNG Conversion Kits 05/16/96- Forward-Thinking Oil Company Offers EV Rentals 05/15/96- General Motors 'EV1' To Receive First CALSTART 'Blue Sky Award' 05/15/96- Blue Sky Award Description' 05/15/96- Daimler-Benz, Ballard Unveil Fuel Cell Vehicle 05/15/96- Solectria EV Sets Another Record  375 Miles 05/15/96- GM, EV1 Receive First CALSTART Blue Sky Award 05/14/96- Budget Offers NGV Rentals at Denver Airport 05/14/96- DOE Funds SatCon Hybrid EV Flywheel 05/14/96- Landfill Gas as a Vehicle Fuel? 05/14/96- Solectria EV Beats Own Record, Travels 258 Miles 05/13/96- Two Ventures Developing Lithium-Based Batteries 05/13/96- ITS System Speeds Chrysler Employees Home 05/13/96- GM Returns to Natural Gas Vehicles 05/11/96- Battery-Builder Bolder Technologies Going Public 05/10/96- GM Sees $1 Billion Annual Profits in ITS Systems 05/10/96- Asia to Buy 29% of Worlds 57 Million Cars in 2000 05/10/96- Edison EV Charging Rates 4X Cheaper than Gas 05/09/96- Oil Lobbying is Big Business in California 05/09/96- Aerospace Firm Wins Ford NGV Cylinder Contract 05/09/96- Selling U.S. Oil Reserve Bad Policy  L.A. Times 05/08/96- Arco Says No Collusion on Gasoline Pricing 05/08/96- Oil Lobby to Stall Nevada Air Quality Study 05/08/96- L.A. No. 1 in Nation in Particulate-Caused Deaths 05/07/96- TDM 'Recycles' Cabs into Alternative-Fuel Cars 05/07/96- Mass. Gov. Eases ZEV Rule, Orders State AFV Buys 05/07/96- Chrysler  Calif. is the 'Place to Be' for NGVs 05/06/96- Powercell, Daewoo Developing Zinc-Bromine EV 05/06/96- ZAP, Electrosource Pair Up on Electric Bicycles 05/06/96- 'Eta Beta' Hybrid EV Wins 'Best Concept' at Turin 05/04/96- New Parking Garage Features 25 EV Charge Sites 05/03/96- SuperShuttle Saves Big Amid Gas Price Hikes 05/03/96- Seminar to Look at AFVs, Responsible Investments 05/03/96- Defense Department Eyes Pollution-Credit Cash 05/02/96- GM EV1 to Pace Atlanta's Olympic Marathon 05/02/96- Daihatsu Unveils Small, 'Neighborhood' EV 05/02/96- World's Largest Fuel Cell Powerplant Now Running 05/01/96- NJ Natural Gas to Provide Postal Vehicle Fueling 05/01/96- Federal Antitrust Inquiry Launched on Gas Pricing 05/01/96- 'Smart' Car May be Launched in U.S. by 2003 04/30/96- Gas Prices Driving Commuters to Metrolink Trains 04/30/96- Gas Prices Spur Calif. Legislators Special Hearing 04/30/96- Amerigon Partners on REVA Electric Car for India 04/29/96- Amerigon Inc. to Produce Low-Cost EVs in India 04/29/96- Electrosource Battery Increases Energy Capacity 04/29/96- Suzuki Shows Electric Bike, to Use Hawker Battery 04/29/96- 1,700 Swap Mowers for Electric, 97% Prefer Them 04/27/96- Refiners Profits Main Reason for Rising Gas Prices 04/26/96- Initial Demand High For RESCU Navigation System 04/26/96- Daimler-Benz to Unveil Fuel-Cell Powered Car 04/26/96- New Govt. Report  Ozone Layer Still Shrinking 04/25/96- Smart Cars, Smart Highways, Smart Wipers? 04/25/96- Marines Open Shared Fueling Site, Plan 100 NGVs 04/25/96- Northern Va. Requires AFVs in Fleets Starting in 98 04/25/96- Gas Price Shocks Caused by Oil Industry, Not Reformulated Gasoline 04/24/96- Saab to Bag Emissions Problems? 04/24/96- Calspan Heads Collision Avoidance Team 04/24/96- Solectria Now Offers EVs With Fuel-Fired Heaters 04/23/96- Delco Shows Ultra-Safe Vehicle at ITS Convention 04/23/96- Car-Scrap Deal Pays Purchase Credit or Bus Pass 04/23/96- Thai Government Launches Anti-Pollution Plan 04/22/96- Electric Moon-Buggy to Sell Through Car Dealers 04/22/96- Futuristic School Bus Runs on CNG, Uses ITS Gear 04/22/96- Trillium USA Unveils Low-Cost CNG Stations 04/20/96- Police Agency Switches All Its Cruisers to NGVs 04/19/96- Honda Covering its Bets on EV Battery Supplier? 04/19/96- Saft, APS to Provide 10 Electric Buses to Olympics 04/19/96- Rising Gasoline Prices Trigger Emergency Plan 04/18/96- Ontario, Calif. Airport Planning for AFV Operations 04/18/96- Mercedes/Swatch Smart Testing in Sweden 04/18/96- Automotive News Says ITS Moving Into Fast Lane 04/17/96- Alamo to Operate Floridas Electric Station Cars 04/17/96- British Columbia Toughening Emissions Standards 04/17/96- Orion to Supply Hybrid EV Buses to New York MTA 04/16/96- News Notes Nuggets 04/16/96- LNG-Fueled Truck Fleet Logs 2.5 Years, 65K Miles 04/16/96- Electrosource to Provide Batteries for Fiat EVs 04/15/96- New Jersey Has First Fuel Cell-Powered Road Sign 04/15/96- Is GM Worth More Broken Up? 04/15/96- Ford to Take Control of Mazda, Appoint President 04/13/96- Nippon Oil Develops Flywheel Battery for EV 04/12/96- Latest CALSTART Industry Meeting -- The Biggest Yet 04/12/96- CALSTART Participant Profile: ISE Research 04/12/96- The World is Watching 04/12/96- Web Talk 04/12/96- Consortium Update -- New CALSTART Participants, Congressional Tour at NAS, TAC Update 04/12/96- Honda, Toyota to Lease EVs; Both Will Use NiMH 04/12/96- Lockheed Martin, Electrosource Team on HEVs 04/12/96- Ford, Black & Decker Unveil ZEV Trucks, Mowers 04/11/96- We are Entering the "Tornado" 04/11/96- HONDA EV - Features 04/11/96- HONDA EV - Features 04/11/96- Texas Announces $50 Mil AFV Loan Program 04/11/96- IMPCO Acquires Natural Gas Small Engine Co. 04/11/96- Honda, Toyota Battle to Announce EV Intros 04/10/96- ECD Announces Honda Investment in Ovonic Battery Company 04/10/96- Toyota Announces Plan to Market Electric-Powered RAV4 in 1998 04/10/96- Toyota RAV4-EV Introduction Speech 04/10/96- American Honda Unveils Electric Vehicle 04/10/96- France Scrambling to Fight Air Pollution 04/10/96- Solectria, Tongue-in-Cheek, Offers 49-State EV 04/10/96- Honda to Become Shareholder of Ovonic Battery 04/09/96- Utilities, States Benefit from Nationwide Sale of Solectria Electric Vehicles 04/09/96- Cairo Choking, Considering CNG Cars and Buses 04/09/96- Toyota to Lease NiMH-Powered RAV4-EVs in 97 04/08/96- Hatchery Alameda Takes Off 04/08/96- American Honda Announces Electric Vehicle 04/08/96- Ford Admits Problems to Woo Wall Street 04/08/96- Volvo to Test CNG Cars in its Company Fleet 04/08/96- Consumer Products Driving Battery Developments 04/08/96- Honda to Lease EVs By Spring 97, Will Use NiMH 04/06/96- Environmental Records Key in Global Markets 04/05/96- News Notes Nuggets 04/05/96- Harlem Group Decries Foul Air, Diesel Buses 04/05/96- Nissan To Step Up Recycling, EV Efforts 04/04/96- News Notes Nuggets -- Trends Worth Watching 04/04/96- Could GMs EV1 Price Hinge on a Luxury Tax? 04/04/96- Oil, Auto Groups Bicker Over Euro Air Clean-Up 04/03/96- Budget Cuts Give the Energy Farm to The Mideast? 04/03/96- EDO to Build Hybrid EV Taxi for New York City 04/03/96- CARB Projects 800,000 EVs by 2010 04/02/96- EDO Corporation Prime Contractor to Develop Prototype Hybrid-Electric Taxi 04/02/96- Samsung Gearing Up for Vehicle Production 04/02/96- DOEs Advanced NGV Passes First Year of Tests 04/02/96- Sanyo Announces High-Capacity NiMH Batteries 04/01/96- INDUSTRY Watch 04/01/96- The French Connection 04/01/96- Carmakers Tackle New Car Affordability 04/01/96- Brake-By-Wire Option for Freightliner Truck 04/01/96- Natural Gas Now an Option From Truck Builders 03/31/96- CARB Proposes Major ZEV Changes 03/31/96- WEB TALK -- "www.calstart.org/your_company_here" 03/31/96- INDUSTRY WATCH -- Recent Actions in Advanced Transportation . . . 03/31/96- CALSTART Participant Spotlight -- Rocketdyne, A Rockwell International Subsidiary 03/31/96- It's Time to Encourage the Clean Car Market 03/30/96- U.S., Mexico Team to Cut Cross-Border Pollution 03/29/96- Consumer Driven Electric Vehicle Introduction Adopted by ARB 03/29/96- Statement of Electric Vehicle Association of the Americas regarding 03/29/96- Automakers Response to CARB Vote to Eliminate ZEV Mandate 03/29/96- National Research Council -- Hybrids Promising 03/29/96- NGV Coalition Names New President 03/29/96- CARB Votes to Delay ZEV Requirement 03/28/96- SAFT America Inc. Awarded USABC/DOE Contract to Develop Lithium Ion Battery for Hybrid Vehicles 03/28/96- Toshiba Develops Low-Cost, High-Power IGBTs 03/28/96- Mitsubishis EV Program Charges Ahead 03/28/96- CARB Board to Vote in Final ZEV Hearing 03/27/96- Japanese Automakers Aim for 95% Recycling 03/27/96- Cadillacs Now Smarter, Thanks to OnStar Option 03/27/96- Hyundai  New EV Has Nearly 250 Mile Range 03/26/96- AIR POLLUTION KILLS PEOPLE, COSTS BUSINESSES 03/26/96- Canada May Adopt U.S Clean-Air Standards 03/26/96- New Study Shows Economic Value of ZEV Plan 03/26/96- B.C. to Buy 3 Ballard Fuel Cell Buses; Stock Too? 03/25/96- GM Ordering EV1 Components from Suppliers 03/25/96- CalETC Offers Meetings on EV Charging Codes 03/25/96- CALSTART Wins Clean-Air Award 03/22/96- L.A. Announces Purchase of 110 Electric, Natural Gas Vehicles 03/22/96- It's Now Official  Cows Pollute Less Than Cars 03/22/96- Saft to Develop Lithium-Ion Battery for USABC 03/22/96- L.A. Newest DOE "Clean City", To Buy 110 AFVs 03/21/96- NedCar Shows All-Aluminum Concept Car 03/21/96- Rockwell Commercializing, to Sell Aerospace? 03/21/96- Unique Mobility, Northrop Team on EV Drivetrains 03/20/96- 95 A Banner Year for Industry, CALSTART 03/20/96- Electric Bicycle Co. Teams with SANYO; Ships "EV Warrior" 03/20/96- Commuter Bike Station Opens in Long Beach on March 29th 03/20/96- Consortium Update -- New CALSTART Participants, CALSTART Awards, International Border Electronic Clearance 03/20/96- RFG Already Causing Gasoline Price Hikes 03/20/96- U.S. Trails Japan in Car Reliability Rankings 03/20/96- GM to Launch its Own Fuel Cell Program 03/20/96- $5 Million More for Los Angeles MTAs Stealth Bus 03/19/96- Electrosource Partners with Black & Decker 03/19/96- Bombardier Wins Two U.S. High-Speed Rail Deals 03/19/96- Deere Develops Clean CNG School Bus Engine 03/19/96- Rockwell Demos 200-hp Superconductor Motor 03/18/96- ZAP Electric Bikes Offered by Sharper Image 03/18/96- Clean Vehicle Fleet Requirements Now Law 03/18/96- Britains Vehicle Miles, Smog Double in 25 Years 03/18/96- New Study Says Environmental Rules Create Jobs 03/15/96- Electric Grand Prix Car Trounces Gasoline Foe 03/15/96- Horlacher Builds Car for Thai Electric Car Co. 03/14/96- Nor. Calif.s First Electric School Bus Now Rolling 03/14/96- Carpet Fibers to Make New Lithium EV Batteries 03/14/96- Lab Confirms CNG Cleaner Than RFG, M85, E85 03/14/96- Mexico City Launches $13.3 Billion Smog Program 03/13/96- Calif. Cracks Down on Gross Polluting Vehicles 03/13/96- Lithium-Polymer Promises EV Range of 500 Miles? 03/13/96- Electronics Firms Team in Manufacturing Effort 03/12/96- Health Effects of Two Gas Additives Questioned 03/12/96- NiMH Beats Lead-Acid In APS EV Race 03/12/96- Automakers Widen Use of Recyclable Plastics 03/11/96- Ovonic Counter-Sues Matsushita Over Batteries 03/11/96- Amerigon Revenues Up Due to EV Projects 03/11/96- South Africa Steps Up Interest in Electric Vehicles 03/11/96- Ford Intros Natural Gas-Powered Pickup 03/08/96- European Union Agrees on Year 2005 Smog Goal 03/08/96- Car Dealer Dumps Dealership to Sell Electric Bikes 03/07/96- Matsushita, Ovonic Battle Over NiMiH Patents 03/07/96- Japanese Giant Teams With Calif. Hi-Tech Co. 03/07/96- Federal Fleet to add 7,800 AFVs in 1996 03/07/96- Oil Co. Finds More Profitable Uses for Petroleum 03/06/96- Smart Picks Franchises, Targets Urban Young 03/06/96- VW Launches 'New Beetle' on Internet 03/06/96- EPA Approves California Clean-Air Plan 03/05/96- Ford NGVs Targeted for Fleets in 10 U.S. Cities 03/05/96- New EV Supercapacitor Promises Big Price Drop 03/05/96- New LNG Tanks Mean Less Vehicle Conversion 03/04/96- Atlanta Seeks to Have Largest U.S. CNG Bus Fleet 03/04/96- Corning, Englehard Team on Motorbike Catalysts 03/04/96- AlliedSignal Selling a Part of Its Auto Business 03/01/96- Calif. Economy Fully Recovered, Says Think Tank 03/01/96- Cummins Adds 8.3-Liter Natural Gas Engine 02/29/96- Advanced Transportation Industry Meeting. to be held March 8, 1996 02/29/96- Fleets Ready for Clean Cars --New CALSTART Survey Finds AFV Range, Cost Fit Fleet Needs 02/29/96- SuperShuttle International Joins CALSTART, Board 02/29/96- BIOGRAPHY -- Mitchell Rouse 02/29/96- New Edison Venture to Provide EV Chargers 02/29/96- CALSTART -- Connection Goes Monthly 02/29/96- New Participants Join CALSTART 02/29/96- Capstone Turbogenerator Project 02/29/96- Advanced Transportation Industry Meeting. to be held March 8, 1996 02/29/96- Participant News -- Electric Bicycle Readies for Market Launch 02/29/96- Bolder Technologies Product in Chrysler ESX 02/29/96- WEB TALK 02/29/96- CALSTART Participant Spotlight -- Clean Air Vehicle Technology Center 02/29/96- Natural Gas, Advanced Transportation  Markets are Growing Now 02/29/96- Singapores Smart Taxis Linked to GPS Satellites 02/29/96- Foreign Cities Seek to Join Clean Cities Program 02/29/96- Ford Adds One AFV to its Fleet, But Pledges More 02/29/96- Zinc-Air Battery Powers Italian Sub-Compact Car 02/29/96- A Billion Cars Forecast in World Within 25 Years 02/28/96- Remote Control for Car by Phone 02/28/96- EPA Eases Rules for NGV Conversion Kits 02/28/96- Corning Claims New Device Cuts Smog by 88% 02/28/96- APS Race Pits Battery Goliaths Against Each Other 02/27/96- L.A. Transit Agency Ditching Methanol Buses 02/27/96- Ford, DOE Developing Hybrid EVs, Fuel Cells 02/27/96- Car Price Hikes Outpacing Average Salary 02/27/96- Unique Mobility Supplying Hybrid Components 02/26/96- Reformulated Gas May Cut Calif. Emissions 15% 02/26/96- Chrysler, DOE Teaming on Hybrid Electric Cars 02/23/96- Ovonic Battery Parent Shows Profits 02/22/96- Aluminum-Composite Brake Parts to Lighten EV1s 02/22/96- Ford Drops Plans to Use Smog-Eating Radiators 02/21/96- South Africa to Increase Use of EVs, NGVs 02/21/96- Asian EV Builder Courted by GM, 10 Others 02/20/96- SatCon, Delco to Develop High-Power Alternators 02/20/96- BMW, Volvo to Offer Natural Gas Models in 96 02/20/96- General Motors Jumps Onto the Net 02/20/96- EV1 Intro Beats Super Bowl, 94 Mil to 83 Mil 02/20/96- 3M Group to Build Lithium Polymer EV Battery 02/16/96- More Electric Police Bikes Added to Arsenals 02/16/96- Despite Warnings, Gasoline Use on the Rise in U.S. 02/16/96- Could Oil, Water Mix Be A Clean Fuel? 02/15/96- Presidential Panel - Cut Pollution, Save on Taxes 02/15/96- Smoggy Arab Oil States Developing Solar Power 02/15/96- Honda to Use Ballard Fuel Cells 02/14/96- Aluminum in Cars Growing 4-6% Per Year 02/14/96- European Carmakers Back Tougher Smog Laws 02/14/96- French Dying From Air Pollution 02/13/96- Hybrid EVs to be Tested by Italian Lab 02/13/96- Toll Lanes, Metrolink Reducing Freeway Jams 02/12/96- Chemical Plant to Support Lithium-Ion Batteries 02/12/96- SANYO and Electric Bicycle Co. Form Partnership 02/12/96- Car Dealers Tackle Used-Car Superstore Threat 02/09/96- Insurance Co.s Worried About Global Warming 02/09/96- GM Van Nuys Plant - From Cars to Caramel Corn? 02/09/96- 'EV Warrior' Electric Bike Ships to Dealers 02/08/96- ARB Announces Proposed Agreement with Automakers for Zero Emission Vehicles 02/08/96- Environmentalists Call CARB Secret Vehicle Agreement Illegal 02/08/96- CARB Staff Proposal Repeals ZEV Mandate, Capitulates to Oil and Auto Industry 02/08/96- AQMD Smog Plan Will Shift Emissions to Winter 02/08/96- Saturn Steps Up Marketing of GM EV1 Electric Car 02/08/96- CARB Reveals ZEV Plan Revisions 02/07/96- EV1 to be Marketed in Unique Way by Saturn 02/07/96- Survey Sees EV Market Niche in Next Two Years 02/07/96- Samsung Opens Calif. Automobile Design Studio 02/06/96- Smart Car-Phone Link Joins Cars, Computers 02/06/96- Battelle - AFVs to be One of 06s Top Ten Products 02/06/96- Delco Chief - Car Technology Trails Computers 02/06/96- Unique Mobility Assists With Stealth Humvee 02/05/96- AFV Incentives Proposed by Arizona 02/05/96- Nations First Commuter Bike Station to Open 02/05/96- GMs EV Company Changes Name, Moves Up 02/02/96- Natural Gas Vehicles Heating up in So. America 02/02/96- Automobile Imports Hit a 20-Year Low 02/01/96- NAVC Kicks Off 1996 with 9 New Alternative Vehicle Initiatives 02/01/96- Two New Studies See Oil Price Shocks, Point to Growing Need for Renawable Fuel, by Fuels for the Future 02/01/96- NAVC Announces $3.6 Million in New Projects 02/01/96- SCAT To Develop $3.2 Million in New EV Projects 02/01/96- Two New Studies Cite Potential Oil Price Shocks 01/31/96- New EV Education Program Launched in Schools 01/31/96- GMs 1995 Earnings Hit Record $6.9 Million 01/31/96- Ford Opens NGV Line to Consumers 01/30/96- Calif., Mass. Officials Propose High-Tech Teaming 01/30/96- Edisons Parent Co. Restructures, Changes Name 01/29/96- L.A. Councilman Seeks to Buy First L.A. GM EV1 01/29/96- Oil Co. Ads Downplay Auto Pollution, AFVs 01/26/96- South Africa Joins Deutsche Post Field Test 01/26/96- Arizona Declares Jan. 29 AFV Awareness Day 01/25/96- Ecotrans, Cardinal Auto Team to Produce NGVs 01/25/96- Thousands Ill in Mexico City Smog, Driving Limited 01/24/96- Canada Co. Develops Natural Gas-EV Hybrid 01/24/96- Chrysler, Aura Team on Electronic Valve System 01/23/96- Toyota Charges Up ZEV Monitoring Program 01/23/96- Chrysler Goal -- Design-to-Launch in 24 Months 01/23/96- First U.S. NiCad Recycling Plant Opens in Penn. 01/23/96- Poll Finds Americans Want Energy Efficiency, Renewable Fuels 01/23/96- Toyota Announces Its New EV Test Program 01/22/96- Innovation Key to Auto Suppliers' Success in '90s 01/22/96- New Cars To Average $22,000 by Year 2005 01/19/96- DOE Proposes Fleet AFV Purchases Be Mandated 01/19/96- Candadian Diesel-CNG Systems OK'd by Japan 01/18/96- Fuel Cell Bus Maker's Stock Now on NASDAQ 01/18/96- Carmakers Looking at Natural Gas Cars For Brazil 01/18/96- NiMiH Batteries Achieve Record Power Density 01/18/96- Edison EV Predicts $100 Mil Revenues in 5 Years 01/17/96- SCEcorp Announces New Business, Partnerships With General Motors and Delco Electronics 01/17/96- Press Conference Statement by John Bryson, CEO SCEcorp 01/17/96- Edison EV Rollout Fact Sheet 01/17/96- French Group Designs 4-Wheel Drive Hybrid EV 01/17/96- Lead-Acid Batteries Close To USABC Criteria 01/17/96- Lead Batteries Are Most Recycled Products 01/17/96- Study Says EVs Are Cost-Effective Smog Reducers 01/17/96- SCEcorp Partners With GM, Delco For New EV Co. 01/16/96- Taiwan Conglomerate to Build 200,000 EVs a Year 01/16/96- SCEcorp to Announce New GM EV Partnership 01/16/96- Electric Utilities to Buy 900 Electric Chevy Trucks 01/15/96- IMPCO Converting Texas Postal Vehicles to NGVs 01/15/96- Australian Solar-Powered Boat Topples Record 01/15/96- Detroit Edison to Buy 50 Electric S-10 Pickups 01/12/96- CARB Rolls Back, Industry Rolls On 01/12/96- Solar-Powered Bike Crosses Australia in 7 Days 01/12/96- AQMD Board Must Decide Future of 'RECLAIM' 01/12/96- Toshiba Expands Production of IGBT Devices 01/12/96- Westinghouse Fuel Cell Ranks High on Power 01/11/96- Wilson Orders Halt to Underground Tank Cleanup 01/11/96- Bolder Batteries Power New Chrysler Hybrid EV 01/11/96- German Opel May Use GMs EV1 Technology 01/11/96- Analyst Says Japan May Take the Lead on EVs 01/11/96- GM Says Japan Wont Catch Up to GMs EVs 01/10/96- CALSTART Launches Seven New AT Projects for 1996 01/10/96- UPS, NGV and Trucking Groups Like Calif. LEV Bill 01/10/96- Prototype Mitsubishi Hybrid EV Goes Up in Smoke 01/10/96- CALSTART Launches 7 New Hybrid EV Projects 01/10/96- Norway Launches `NORSTART AT Consortium 01/10/96- Travis Air Force Base To Add 47 Bi-fuel NGVs 01/10/96- EVs May Be Eligible to Use Carpool Lanes in Calif. 01/10/96- Nissan Introduces Lithium Ion-Powered FEV-II 01/08/96- Trade Mag Says GM Will Grossly Underestimate EV Sales 01/06/96- Comments from GM Chairman John F. Smith About EV1 01/04/96- GM Announces Saturn to Market Electric Vehicle 01/04/96- Fully Automated Orange County Toll Lanes Open 01/04/96- Wal-Mart Opening EV-Ready Store in California 01/04/96- Kilovac to Supply Relays For Chryslers EVs 01/04/96- GM Announces It Will Sell `EV1 To Public In Fall 01/04/96- Earths Surface Temperature Sets Record High 01/03/96- Delco, Toyota Partner On EV Charging System 01/03/96- NGV Industry Wont Challenge Purchase Delay 01/03/96- Mass. Gov. Remains Committed to ZEV Program 01/03/96- Business Week Reports Electric Bike is Best New Product 12/31/95- CALSTART Launches New Hybrid EV Projects 12/31/95- GM Stakes Future Reputation on EV1 12/31/95- CALSTART Demonstrates ITS System Demonstration at the U.S./Mexican Border 12/31/95- CALSTART Consortium Update 12/31/95- CALSTART Web Site -- Advanced Transportation Now on the Internet 12/31/95- ARPA Demonstration Projects 12/31/95- CARB Rolls Back ZEV Requirement 12/31/95- Project Hatchery Participant Spotlight -- NASA Far West Regional Technology Transfer Center 12/31/95- CARB Rolls Back  Industry Rolls On ! 12/31/95- CALSTART Participants by Region 12/22/95- Calif. ARB Staff Releases Its Revised ZEV Proposal 12/22/95- Ovonic Battery Hopes to Drop Price 80% in Year 12/22/95- California Leads Nation in EV Charging Sites 12/22/95- Two So. Calif. Counties Add Clean Fuel Corridor 12/22/95- So. Calif. AQMD Replaces Ride-Share Rule 12/20/95- Solectria EV Overcomes Below-Freezing Weather 12/20/95- Obstacle Detectors Could Be on Cars By 1999 12/20/95- CARB Says Governor Didnt Order ZEV Changes 12/20/95- CARB Showdown Looms on ZEV Mandates 12/19/95- Ford Unveils High-Mileage, Hybrid-Electric Car 12/18/95- GM to Road-Test Turbine-Powered Hybrid EV 12/18/95- GM Exec Reveals Problem with its Impact EVs 12/15/95- Smog Warnings Widened to All Southland Schools 12/15/95- New Canadian Survey Shows Support For NGVs 12/15/95- ITS, `Smart Highways Save Time, Money, Lives 12/14/95- Electric Vehicle Industry Ad - A Message to Governor Wilson 12/14/95- Chrysler Intros New EPIC Electric Minivan 12/14/95- Chrysler Issues Order For Horizon EV Batteries 12/14/95- Ford, Chrysler Agree on EV Charging Standards 12/13/95- EPA Revising Smog Testing After Record GM Fines 12/13/95- New Air Conditioner Ideal For Electric Vehicles 12/12/95- Carmakers EV Progress Further Than Represented 12/12/95- First Electric Police Bike on Patrol in Northern Calif. 12/12/95- Canada To Adopt Calif.-Style Emission Laws 12/11/95- Natural Gas Beats Reformulated Gasoline in Tests 12/11/95- California May Delay 98 Electric Car Mandate 12/11/95- Atlanta Olympics to Get 250 Clean-Burning NGVs 12/07/95- UPS Fleet Gearing Up For LNG, CNG Trucks, Vans 12/07/95- Nickel-Metal Hydride Batteries Near USABC Goals 12/07/95- US Postal Service Releases Electric Vehicle Stamp 12/06/95- Canada Gives Rebates For Factory-Built NGVs 12/06/95- Lone Star, Amoco Alliance To Promote LNG Use 12/06/95- BAT Awarded U.S. Postal Service Contract 12/06/95- Electronic Border Clearance Saves Time, Pollution 12/04/95- Advanced 'Smart' Transportation System Speeds Cargo Across U.S./Mexico Border 12/01/95- GM To Pay Fines, Recall Polluting Cadillac Chips 11/30/95- U.S. Electricar, Hawaii Testing Advanced Batteries 11/30/95- Automakers EV Price Estimates High, Study Says 11/29/95- Pittsburgh Joins DOEs Clean Cities Program 11/29/95- Automakers Exploring Ways to Build $7,000 Cars 11/29/95- Ford To Install Side-Impact Airbags, Absorb Costs 11/28/95- CPUC Approves Alternative Fuel Vehicle Funding 11/28/95- Volvo Unveils Environmental Concept Truck 11/28/95- Congress Urged to Investigate EV Battery Study 11/27/95- Survey Says Europe is Ahead in EV Promotion 11/27/95- EPA Certifies First Heavy-Duty Natural Gas Engine 11/21/95- Lightweight CNG Tank Builder To Supply Japan 11/21/95- Solectrias Composite EV Crash-Tested, Succeeds 11/20/95- Arizona Opens Its Largest CNG Station 11/17/95- Ford 'Glider' Manufacturing Program Moves Ahead 11/17/95- German City Serious About Natural Gas Vehicles 11/17/95- New Motorcycle Uses Natural Gas, Asia Targeted 11/16/95- CARB Backs 1998 ZEV Program, Offers Flexibility 11/16/95- China Plans to Spend $12 Mil on Electric Vehicles 11/15/95- Smog-Eating Radiator Results Disappointing 11/10/95- Alameda Naval Station Given New Life as Advanced Transportation Manufacturing Site 11/08/95- Safe LNG Fueling Nozzle Development Deal Announced 11/07/95- ZEV Mandate Spurring Calif. Economy, Study Says 11/01/95- Cell Phones To Network With Car Computers 10/31/95- PIVCO and CALSTART Roll Out $10,000 Electric Commuter Car Vehicles 10/31/95- CALSTART Partnership Launches Electric Vehicle Manufacturing 10/31/95- Meet California's Clean Bus Makers 10/31/95- Project Hatchery Participant Spotlight: CALSTART Participants 10/31/95- An Industry Perspective by: Lee Ackerson, President, Jefferson 10/31/95- Despite Efforts To Stop Them, Clean Personal Cars Are Coming 10/31/95- CALSTART and APS Systems Launch Nation's Most Advanced Electric 10/31/95- CyberTran and CALSTART Team To Bring New Light-Rail System 10/31/95- New UK Consortium Building Hybrid Bus and Van 10/31/95- Speed Record For Electric Bikes Is Zapped 10/31/95- Huge NGV Fleets Predicted by Princeton Report 10/31/95- Curbside EV Charging Sites Patented By Hughes 10/31/95- Ford sells 5,000 AFVs in 95, Offers New Incentives 10/30/95- AFVs in U.S. To Reach 420,000 by End Of 96 10/26/95- New Calif. Law Promotes Electric Bicycle Use 10/25/95- Transit Agency Pledges to Buy Only Natural Gas Buses Only 10/25/95- Electric Station Cars Roll In Northern California 10/24/95- U.S. Report Details Emerging Overseas Markets 10/23/95- Dirty Motor Oil Is Recycled, Becomes Hydrogen 10/19/95- EV and NGV Rentals at Sacramento Airport 10/18/95- Mass. Turnpike EV Drivers Will Be Able To Fill Up 10/17/95- Real-World Honda NGV Coming to California 10/17/95- GM Impact EV Public Demonstrations Move To South Florida 10/17/95- OBD II May Reduce Smog But Increase Car Repairs 10/17/95- Methanol Reformer Improves Fuel Cell Performance 10/12/95- Big Three Tap Student Talent To Build 'Future Car' 10/10/95- Calstart Unveils $10,000 Electric Car 09/28/95- Cybertran Teams With Calstart to Bring New Transit Concept to California 09/18/95- Calstart Rolls Out Nation's Most Advanced Electric Transit Bus 09/05/95- Calstart Partnership Launches Electric Car Manufacturing at Alameda Naval Air Station 09/05/95- It Can Be Done: A Practical, Affordable EV 08/21/95- First Electric Car Bodies Arrive in U.S. 07/24/95- BAT to Import Lightweight Gliders for Electric Vehicle Production 04/01/95- New CALSTART Projects Move NGVs Closer to Market 04/01/95- Long-Range NGV Chassis 04/01/95- NGV Leak Detection 04/01/95- Bare Hands Refueling 04/01/95- Ultra-Efficient Compressor 04/01/95- Northern California Defense Conversion 04/01/95- CALSTART Connects with BMW 04/01/95- Industry News -- Oil Industry Campaign Fights Intro of Clean Vehicles, Study Says 04/01/95- Participant News -- Hub Training Program Teaches 'Bottom-up' Composites Manufacturing 04/01/95- Lancaster Becomes California's First 'Blue Sky City' 04/01/95- Blue Sky License Plate for Clean Cars 04/01/95- CALSTART Wins Renew America Award 04/01/95- Project Hatchery Participant Spotlight -- Avoid Getting Stuck in Traffic, Relief is a Phone Call Away 04/01/95- New CALSTART Participant Profile: IXYS -- A Revolution in Power 04/01/95- Industry Jobs and Investment to Soar, CALSTART Survey Finds 04/01/95- CALSTART Participants, Advertise Free on the Internet! 04/01/95- Technology Changes: Lead-Acid Study Flawed 02/28/95- CALSTART Rolls Out Hybrid Military Buses 02/28/95- Consortium Launches $12.7M in New Programs 02/28/95- Electric Vehicles to be Price Competitive in '98, Study Finds 02/28/95- International Symposium Proves Electric Transportation is Here 02/28/95- ITS: the Next Step in Advanced Transportation 02/28/95- CALSTART and Silicon Valley Explore New Advanced Transportation 02/28/95- 1994: A Year of Rapid Innovation 10/31/94- Utah Firm Moves to California to Build EVs 10/31/94- Hatching Tomorrow's Technologies 10/31/94- CALSTART to Hold Major IVHS Symposium 10/31/94- MBE Symposium Draws Potential New Industry Leaders 10/31/94- HUB Engineering Conducts Retraining Program for Displaced Defense Workers 10/31/94- Ecotrans Ramps Up Production of Natural Gas Vehicles 10/31/94- 'Blue Team' Assessing NGV Technologies 10/31/94- The Oil Dinosaur Roars --An Editorial By Michael Peevey, Chairman, CALSTART 06/30/94- Air Board Keeps ZEV Mandate on Track 06/30/94- Reading', Writin', and Rheostats 06/30/94- U.S. Sen. Boxer Visits CALSTART 06/30/94- Kids, Buses, and California's Polluted Skies 06/30/94- CALSTART Kicks off NGV Infrastructure Program 06/30/94- U.S. Electricar Opens EV Production Plant in Los Angeles 06/30/94- State Utilities Launch 'EV America' 06/30/94- Independent Studies Champion Viability of Electric Vehicles 06/30/94- Clean Vehicles, Cleaner Air - Winning Combination 03/30/94- CALSTART Rolls Out Running Chassis to Lower Cost, Speed Production of Electric Vehicles 03/30/94- CALSTART Members Invest Millions in Advanced Transportation Industry 03/30/94- New Fast Charger Responsible for EV Distance Record 03/30/94- Industry Watch 03/30/94- Katz Hearing Hosts First Salvo in Clean Car Fight 03/30/94- Technology Spotlight 03/30/94- CALSTART Initiates Marketing Program for California Fleet Managers 03/30/94- CALSTART Looking for California Blue Sky City 03/30/94- Traditional Thinking Won't Work for New Industry 02/28/94- Clinton Supports California's Clean-Fuel Vehicle Mandates 02/28/94- CALSTART Beats the Odds Winning ARPA TRP Funds 02/28/94- Northeast States Adopt California's Clean Air Standards 02/28/94- CARB's New Chairwoman Supports ZEV Mandate 02/28/94- CALSTART Opens Northern Cal Office 02/28/94- SoCalGas Creates Ecotrans to Bring NGVs to State 12/01/93- Clinton Supports California's Clean-Fuel Vehicle Mandates 12/01/93- 14 of World's Major Automakers Come to CALSTART to Explore Clean-Car Partnership 12/01/93- What is C-5? 12/01/93- U.S. Automakers Challenge California's Clean Air Rules 12/01/93- C-5: A Clean Car Partnership 12/01/93- CALSTART Members Meet the World's Major Automakers 12/01/93- Specialty Vehicles Rolls Out Nation's First Medium-Duty Electric-Only Transit Bus 12/01/93- Yosemite Looks into Alternative Fuel Vehicles for Park Transportation Routes 12/01/93- California's Clean Air Rules are Good for Business 09/01/93- CALSTART Awarded $4 Million in ARPA Funds for New Programs 09/01/93- California Can't Wait 09/01/93- The First: Green Motorworks 09/01/93- The Largest: Solar Electric 09/01/93- The Latest: Electric Vehicles Corp. 09/01/93- Nation's First Electric School Buses to Roll This Fall 09/01/93- Congressional Delegation Backs CALSTART 09/01/93- SOCALGAS Joins CALSTART 09/01/93- ARPA Award Creates $10 Million in New Programs 09/01/93- CALSTART Responds to EV Critics 09/01/93- Team Member Profile: Aerojet Invests Technology into Clean-Air TransportationExamples of Promising CNG Markets: | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-14IA038-000736-B035-218http://www.calstart.org:80/news/pr/97021001.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061909 text/html 4101HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:11:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- News -- 02/10/97 CALSTART Press Releases Press Advisory Wildman Becomes First Legislator to Use Electric Car For District Duties ASSEMBLYMAN RECEIVES CALSTART AWARD FOR "NOT BLOWING SMOKE" What: Assemblyman Scott Wildman (D-Burbank, Glendale, L.A.) will become the first member of the California State Legislature to use a commercially produced electric vehicle, GM's EV1, as his official state car. Where: Burbank City Hall, 275 E. Olive Avenue (Parking will be available on Olive Avenue, in front of City Hall) When: Monday, February 10 10:00 a.m. Visuals: A new EV1 electric car will be delivered to Wildman at his district offices in Burbank at a news conference hosted by CALSTART. The vehicle will be available for press driving, and the assemblyman will receive an award for "not blowing smoke" in his new vehicle. Who: Scott Wildman, Assemblymember, 43rd District Michael J. Gage, President & CEO, CALSTART Enid Joffe, Edison EV (charger provider) Ron Stassi, General Manager, Burbank Public Service Department Tim Carmichael, Coalition for Clean Air Background: The EV1 is a "zero-emission vehicle" produced in America by General Motors. Assemblyman Scott Wildman becomes the first legislator to use an electric car in his job. Wildman's commitment to electric vehicles as an environmentally sound means of personal transportation is especially important for the Burbank-Glendale area, which is considered by many to be the birthplace of the advanced transportation technologies industry. Other participating organizations include Saturn/GM; Edison EV; the City of Burbank (which will unveil a new public charger for use by electric vehicles); and the Coalition for Clean Air. Also attending will be the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, United Auto Workers, and several Burbank and Glendale businesspeople. Contact: Bill Van Amburg/Melanie Savage, CALSTART: (818) 565-5600 Ron Smith/Assemblymember Wildman's Office: 818/240-6330 | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.org WT01-B09-15IA038-000736-B035-233http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020801.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061917 text/html 2445HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:11:30 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/08/97 - Rules Crimping California Propane Conversions California  While propane-powered vehicles still hold the lead in counts of Californias alternative-fueled vehicles, some in the field say the states tough emissions rules are killing the propane conversion industry, reports Oxy-Fuel News. There are currently 45,000 propane-fueled vehicles in California, but the numbers are misleading, advocates say; almost all were in operation before the California Air Resources Board (CARB) tightened its rules in 1992. Conversion kit-makers are now required to pay CARB more than $200,000 per "engine family type" and submit vehicles to 100,000-mile durability tests, which may take as long as six months to complete. Because of various engine configurations, converters can spend millions of dollars to certify one engine size, said Bruce Eikelberger of Alternate Fuel Technology, a conversion company. CARB spokesman Alan Hearst said CARBs goal is cleaner air; it should be up to the industry to find a way to make their kits meet the standards. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-16IA038-000736-B035-252http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020701.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061929 text/html 2317HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:11:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/07/97 - EPA  Rail Locomotives Must Clean Up Their Act Washington, D.C.  For the first time, railroad locomotives will be subject to air pollution rules from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, standards that will require emissions cuts of up to two-thirds, reports the Los Angeles Times. A typical locomotive puts out as many tons of nitrogen oxides (NOx)  a chief ingredient of smog  as 2,000 passenger cars; 18,000 locomotives in the U.S. are responsible for 5 percent of the countrys air pollution. Beginning in 2001, railroads must gradually begin reducing emissions. By 2005, emissions must be cut 50 percent for hydrocarbons and particulates; 66 percent for NOx. Engine modifications are expected to raise engine costs by about 4 percent, according to EPA estimates. Because Californias air is the worst, the railroads have agreed to put the new engines  not yet engineered  in service there first. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-17IA038-000736-B035-265http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020702.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061937 text/html 2388HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:11:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/07/97 - Nissan 1st Automaker to Offer Lithium-Battery EV Japan  Nissan has begun selling lithium-ion battery-powered electric vehicles (EVs)  but only in Japan, reports Kyodo News International. The automaker is the first in the world to offer an EV with the advanced batteries, which, on a pound-for-pound basis, have triple the energy storage of lead-acid batteries and reportedly last longer. Nissan intends to lease 30 Prairie Joy EVs annually, initially to local governments and corporations. Payments will be $259 (320,000 yen) per month for the three-year leases. The car, sometimes referred to as a "station wagon" and sometimes a "sport-utility vehicle," has a 124-mile range between charges. Sony Corp. helped develop the batteries. Honda is also offering EVs with advanced batteries, but its car uses nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries; lithium-ion batteries store 1.5 times the energy levels of NiMH batteries (News Notes 1/10, 6/18, 6/20, 8/6, 10/15, 11/14 and 12/13/96). | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-18IA038-000736-B035-280http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020601.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061945 text/html 2271HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:11:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/06/97 - Unique Mobility to Build a Stealth Bus Drivetrain Golden, Colorado  Electric vehicle (EV) drive system-builder Unique Mobility has received a $1.23 million contract to supply an advanced electric drive system for an Advanced Technology Transit Bus (ATTB), or "Stealth Bus." The 18-month contract is with the Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County Texas (Houston Metro), which is co-developing the bus along with Northrop Grumman Corp. and the U.S. Department of Transportation. Unique will produce a 107-kilowatt system that includes wheel motors with gear reduction, microprocessor controls and regenerative braking. The hybrid-electric bus uses advanced materials from military and aerospace applications to cut weight without sacrificing strength, hence its nickname. Last October, Northrop rolled out its first bus (News Notes 10/2/96 and 10/8/96). | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-19IA038-000736-B035-296http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020602.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062002 text/html 2320HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:12:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/06/97 - Olympic Souvenir? How About an Electric Tram? Atlanta, Georgia  For souvenir hunters looking for 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta memorabilia, an offering by Georgia Power just might be a winner: The electric trams that shuttled athletes and coaches around the Olympic Village are now for sale, according to an Electric Vehicle Association of the Americas (EVAA) press release. The 70 trams were used in 24-hour service, but only for 35 days until the games ended. More than 1.3 million passenger trips were logged, but the trams are still in excellent shape. Among the early buyers of the 36-passenger trams have been amusement and state parks, zoos, universities and a church. Each tow trailer, built by Tug Manufacturing, pulls three 12-passenger trailers built by Taylor-Dunn. More information may be obtained by contacting Georgia Power at (770) 216-1315. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-20IA038-000736-B036-2http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020603.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062010 text/html 2319HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:12:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/06/97 - GMs Bi-Fuel NGV Pickup Launch Approaches Detroit  General Motors has officially announced details  such as price, availability and warranties  for the natural gas vehicle (NGV) pickups it will begin offering in spring 1997. The natural gas option on 1997 Chevrolet C2500 and GMC Sierra full-size pickups will be $5,800, but fuel-cost savings, income tax credits and gas-utility incentives will bring the cost down. Fully certified "factory package" bi-fuel pickups  that will run on either gasoline or compressed natural gas (CNG)  will carry 3-year/36,000 mile "Bumper to Bumper Plus" warranties. The carbon-fiber-wrapped steel CNG tanks carry the equivalent of 13 gallons; a standard 34-gallon gasoline tank is also fitted. Production and installation of the natural gas systems will be done under the auspices of IMPCO Technologies (News Notes 1/15, 3/7, 4/11, 5/16, 6/14, 6/19, 7/3, 9/30 and 12/28/96). | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-21IA038-000736-B036-20http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020501.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062027 text/html 2187HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:12:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/05/97 - NEC Builds ITS Test Track, Targets $822M in Sales Japan  Looking to reap $822 million in sales for Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) gear it is developing, NEC Corp. has built a new track in Japan for testing ITS technologies, reports Nihon Keizai Shimbun. The .4-mile course in Gotenba, Kanagawa Prefecture cost NEC $1.64 million to build and is part of its plan to invest $82.2 million over the next five years on research and development. Some projects will target electronic toll collection gear, others will develop automated highways that electronically control cars. The course  as part of the automated highway projects  is also set up to test sudden braking after low-friction tiles are spread on portions of the track. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-22IA038-000736-B036-37http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020502.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062035 text/html 2305HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:12:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/05/97 - L.A. Airport Solicits Bids for 39 Clean-Fuel Vehicles Los Angeles  Looking to expand its fleet of clean-air vehicles, Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) officials are soliciting bids for 39 new alternative-fueled vehicles. The Department of Airports is looking to buy 10 liquefied natural gas (LNG)-powered transit buses, eight bi-fuel pickup trucks, 16 bi-fuel sedans, and five police sedans powered only by compressed natural gas (CNG). The bi-fuel vehicles are to be capable of running on either gasoline or an alternative fuel. LAX already operates 21 buses on LNG; with another 6 already on order, 71 percent of its 52-bus fleet will operate on the cleaner-burning fuel. The remaining buses will later be converted to LNG. According to the request for bids, LAX estimates the vehicle costs at $300,000 per bus, $25,000 apiece for the bi-fuel vehicles and $30,000 for the CNG police cars. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-23IA038-000736-B036-54http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020503.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062043 text/html 2223HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:12:56 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/05/97 - Grand Canyon May Ban Cars, Use Alt-Fuel Buses Grand Canyon National Park  The National Park Service may ban nearly all cars from Grand Canyon National Park as part of its plan to get visitors into light-rail trains or alternative-fueled buses. Some 1.5 million tourist-filled cars enter the park each year, causing significant traffic  and smog that obscures canyon views (News Notes 5/30/96). The plan calls for electric buses or methanol-powered buses and light rail trains to cut 80 percent of the vehicle traffic. Those staying at hotels, camping in the park, or traveling on state Route 64 will still be allowed to drive; others will use a massive parking lot to be built outside the park. The proposal is part of a $350 million plan to improve the park for visitors, which numbered about 5 million last year. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-24IA038-000736-B036-69http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020402.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062050 text/html 2399HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:13:03 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/04/97 - New Jersey Governor Orders 50 NGV Buses New Jersey  New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman  marking a new direction for her state  will be directing the New Jersey Transit agency to begin replacing its diesel buses with natural gas-powered buses, reports the Tri-State Transportation Campaigns newsletter. Whitman wants 50 "cruiser buses," or long- versus short-distance buses, and plans a fast-fueling terminal in Howell, Monmouth County, within two years as part of the $35 million project. Clean-air proponents say New Jersey had been reluctant  despite mounting evidence of diesel exhausts unhealthy effects  to do anything about the problem. Natural gas-powered vehicles (NGVs) emit about 90 percent fewer emissions than diesel-powered models, and many fleets report fuel-cost savings of up to 40 percent (News Notes 8/20/96). To further cut emissions, the state is expanding its random roadside inspection program to include fines; more than 20 percent of vehicles tested failed. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-25IA038-000736-B036-79http://www.calstart.org:80/news/newsnotes/97020403.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062057 text/html 2324HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:13:10 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART News CALSTART News Notes 02/04/97 - 1,000 Mexico City Taxis to Become NGVs Mexico City  Penn Octane Corp. is expected to convert up to 1,000 of Mexico Citys taxis to compressed natural gas (CNG) as part of a wide-ranging agreement reached with private owners of public transportation companies there. Its part of a package deal between four entities that includes a $90 million, 1,500-bus purchase through Penn Octanes recently acquired bus dealership (News Notes 1/18/97), the taxi conversions, and CNG refueling stations to be owned and operated by Penn Octane. Taxi operator Sistema De Transportes En Taxis, S.A. de C.V. will also commit to long-term fuel purchases from Houston, Texas-based Penn Octane. About 70 percent of Mexico Citys air pollution  the worlds worst  comes from vehicles (News Notes 1/25/96, 3/14/96, 10/18/96 and 11/7/96). Natural gas-powered vehicles (NGVs) produce 90 percent fewer emissions than conventional vehicles. | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-26IA037-000725-B008-151http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055055 text/html 6942HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:42:39 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Report, Vol. 1, Issue 1 -- Winter 1994 The Latest Innovations Developed by America'sLeading Advanced Transportation Consortia Meet America's Transportation Innovators Are electric cars becoming a reality? Has anyone built a "hybrid" vehicle yet? Whos tackling the technical problems of making cleaner cars?The answers are yes -- we are. We are Americas advanced transportation consortia., dedicated to creating good jobs in a new global industry. Spread across the breadth of the nation, we represent six regional hubs of technical innovation in advanced transportation (see participant map, pages 14-15). Focused public investment has meant significant innovation. Linked in a cooperative information-sharing web, our networks of leading-edge firms and organizations -- many formerly involved in defense efforts  are rapidly tapping Americas talent to create the world's next generation of cars, trucks and buses. A Bias for Action Each of the six consortia are unique. But by working together through the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), we are taking the knowledge of a nation and focusing it on electric and hybrid electric vehicle development. Our charter is not talk and study  we believe in acting and building. In this year alone we will have placed more advanced vehicles on the road than anyone else in America including automakers. Dual-Use A key focus of the consortia effort has been to further the development of dual-use technology  components and systems that serve not only commercial vehicle markets but also meet emerging requirements for our nations defense. The value of this approach is underscored by the fact that much of each regions technology and job growth can be traced back to specific military or space-based initiatives. Closing the loop with a diverse portfolio of commercial and defense transportation technologies serves not only national priorities, but will strengthen local economies for years to come. A Model for Success Teamwork, motivation and true public/private cooperation are making it happen. At the direction of Congress, ARPA in 1993 created an electric and hybrid electric vehicle development program. ARPA took a modest $25 million federal investment and more than doubled it by partnering with industry. But you cant buy innovation. It has to be encouraged. ARPA realized not all the answers are at the top. It sought the best talent and approaches from diverse teams of more than 130 private companies working together. And then set them to work. Tomorrow is Here Today We are making the so-called impossible happen today. Have you heard of flywheel mechanical batteries? Theyre real. Were testing them now. Can a car be built entirely of lightweight composite materials? Ask us. Were doing it. Can an electric car be manufactured affordably? Look at our design. Its on the road today. Does fast recharging work? Look up the 24-hour distance record for EVs. We set it. We go from paper to prototype in months, not years. Like a fresh wind blowing across America, there is new spirit of innovation moving across the land. It is based on cooperation tempered with competition, a can-do approach that encourages the best teams to tackle tough problems on tight deadlines. And deliver. It can happen. Let us show you how. So please read on and meet Americas innovators. Because in transportation, America cant afford to stall. New ARPA Consortium Formed for Mid-Atlantic States America's newest advanced transportation consortium, the Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles (MARCAV), has just received ARPA funding to demonstrate and deploy several innovative transportation technology projects. This new consortium focuses the talents of New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, West Virginia, Virginia and Pennsylvania, where it is based.Some of the first technologies under development include a high efficiency DC motor and controller, composite utility EV and polymer batteries. Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles (MARCAV) Concurrent Technologies Corporation Robert Swanson, Executive Director 1450 Scalp Avenue Johnstown, PA 15904 (814) 269-2520 New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-27IA037-000725-B007-325http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/arpaw94-1.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054919 text/html 7242HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:41:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project An environmental/economic winner for Hawaii Electric Vehicles just make sense on the islands of Hawaii. Take Oahu, for instance. It is no more than 45 miles across, hardly any need for the distance demands accommodated by conventionally fueled vehicles. Most of the driving is done on flat, sea-level roads, ideal conditions for getting the most range out of electric vehicles. Because many of the islands' cities and residents share extremely close quarters, the demand for clean and efficient transportation within this lush environment is not just a goal to shoot for, but a mission. The HEVDP Mission Enter the Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP). It was started in 1993 with a $5 million earmark from the Advanced Research Projects Agency. The coalition itself raised $5.7 million in matching funds for a total $10.7 million in its first year of operation. ELECTRIC RIDE -- The Honolulu Public Transit Authority will place two electric transit buses into service in Hawaii. HEVDP is managed by the High Technology Development Program, which operates as an attached agency of the State of Hawaii's Department of Business, Economic Development & Tourism. HEVDP's mission is to: Maximize the number of new electric vehicles on the road; Broaden the range of EV types and sizes to fit an increasing array of applications; Develop EV infrastructure such as EV centers and special chargers; Provide data acquisition and analysis such as sensors, data acquisition systems and software; Enhance technical opportunities in the areas of EV conversion and training; and Support military and commercial EVs by providing warranties and service centers. Accomplishments HEVDP's key accomplishments to date include: Designing and preparing to deploy 37 electric vehicles in Hawaii; Successfully crash testing S-10 pickups converted by U.S. Electricar to all-electric drive based upon design changes recommended by ARPA coalition crash simulation software. This software is available on-line via Internet to all consortium members connected to the ARPA Electric Vehicle National Data Center in Hawaii; Developing electronic data interchange software for EVs; Developing noise protected sensors and digitizers used for vehicle testing and analysis; Developing 40-foot transit bus at the Honolulu Public Transit used on regular bus routes. Expected for roll-out soon. Electric tank motor reconfigured as electric bus motor; Setting up an electric vehicle manufacturing facility in Hawaii for U.S. Electricar. The facility will convert Chevrolet S-10 pickup trucks and Geo Prizms to electric power; Funding the fast pulse battery charger by consortium member Electronic Power Technology, Inc., also supported by the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation. This effort achieved a 24-hour distance world record of 831 miles for an all-electric vehicle without changing batteries; Our goal is to achieve superior electric vehicle performance and make results available to all coalitions from the National Electric Vehicle Data Center in Hawaii." -- Dr. David Y.Y. Yun Principal Investigator, HEVDP Developing ARPA-funded 30-foot and 40-foot propane hybrid buses with team members El Dorado National and Kaman Electromagnetics that recover 30% of electric drive energy through regenerative braking due to stop and go routes; Conducting an EV course with the Kaui Community College to study electric vehicles; Opening a composite EV manufacturing facility in Hawaii by Suntera; and Designing lightweight "from the ground up" Suntera composite electric pickup trucks which have a new "skin and bones" structure design to provide crash protection equivalent to metal vehicles. Future Directions HEVDP's future involvement in the advanced transportation industry include: Developing advanced new types of vehicles and doing extensive battery testing and certification; Developing much more powerful motors; and Expanding into electric boats and trolleys; HEVDP's future plans also involve becoming a manufacturing center using preformed EV parts so that various models can be made quickly and cheaply. Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project Herbert C. Hendrickson, Project Manager 531 Cooke Street Honolulu, HI 96813 (808) 594-0100 E-mail: herbh@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-28IA037-000725-B007-347http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/arpaw94-2.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054935 text/html 7523HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:41:39 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports CALSTART California-made technologies for a new industry CAN'T DRIVE 55 -- ARPA Program Manager Richard Cope burns rubber in CALSTART's running chassis. "CALSTART recognized the economic and environmental benefits to be gained from the emerging industry of advanced transportation. CALSTART serves as an example of how the consortium process works, showing how innovative transportation projects can go quickly from paper to prototype." -- Michael J. Gage President and CEO, CALSTART It is fitting that the nations oldest and largest advanced transportation consortium originated in California. Always on the leading-edge, California finds itself once again facing issues in advance of the world: severe air pollution, defense downsizing, and fundamental changes in the global economy. These liabilities have actually created major opportunities for the Golden State. Through CALSTART, it is taking its considerable skills in defense, aerospace and other high-tech industries and applying them to a new industry. The venture has already shown a return in hundreds of jobs created and thousands more coming, leadership in world-leading technologies, and vehicles on the road that significantly improve air quality. The CALSTART Mission CALSTART is a state-wide, non profit consortium dedicated to creating an advanced transportation technologies industry in California that will create high-quality jobs, clean the states air, and improve economic competitiveness. CALSTART accomplishes its goals by tapping the skills and experience of Californias world-leading defense, aerospace and high tech industries and teaming them with the entrepreneurial spirit for which the state is famous. This charter has launched CALSTART in just over two years from its original 40 participants to well over 100 firms and organizations. In that time CALSTART and its private and public partners have created and operated more than 15 major technology programs totaling more than $60 million (mostly privately funded), pushing forward technologies for electric, hybrid electric and natural gas vehicles and systems. The results have been measured in real products built, placed on the streets and demonstrated, and real companies growing, finding markets and beginning to sell those products. ARPA is just one of CALSTARTs public partners, but its an important one. ARPAs approach to innovation matches CALSTART's: seek out the best thinking and technologies; create strategic teams of companies to quickly develop prototypes and products; focus on performance, not paperwork; and operate a network of shared knowledge to maintain industry momentum. Accomplishments Successful roll-out of the running chassis, essentially the "guts" of an electric vehicle minus the body and interior, proving that a fully capable electric vehicle can be affordably produced in consumer volumes. Estimated final price with body and interior is under $18,000. The 7 1/2 month development cycle sets a standard for rapid production; Nine electric pick-up trucks deployed and operating at Edwards Air Force Base, California's famous flight test center, proving out dual-use capabilities; hree hybrid electric buses completed and ready for delivery to Vandenberg Air Force Base, the West Coast space launch site. Vehicles incorporate electric drive systems with a clean, on-board CNG-powered charging system for extended range. Two commercial hybrid electric buses are under development, to use different drive/generator combinations; Electric station car program ready to select supplier for 45-car fleet for use at five Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) stations in the San Francisco region; Multi-vehicle charging station, using both inductive and conductive systems, finished for use at BART station; and Several electric Kewets modified for use in roles such as traffic enforcement in cities of Alhambra, Chula Vista, Irvine and Davis. Future Directions CALSTART currently includes more than 100 participating firms and organizations. In the next year it intends to both advance needed technologies and encourage the involvement of more companies in the advanced transportation industry, expanding the web of creative thinking and information-sharing that is helping quickly drive this new industry forward.Among new technology projects underway: Flywheel and CNG-turbogenerator hybrid electric vehicles; State-of-the-art low-cost hybrid "power" batteries; Advanced electronic energy management controllers for hybrid vehicles; High-power supercapacitors; Advanced fuel-storage chassis for NGVs; Electronic valve control for multi-fuel engines. CALSTART Mike Gage, President and CEO 3601 Empire Avenue Burbank, CA 91505 (818) 565-5600 E-mail: calstart@netcom.com New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-29IA037-000725-B008-6http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/arpaw94-3.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054946 text/html 7847HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:41:59 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium A leader in electric transportation SWORDS INTO PLOWSHARES -- Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium fleet pickup and a Stealth Fighter. "The Sacramento Consortium has embraced the vision of 'dual-use' technology development, demonstrating it as a practical reality by developing super efficient composite vehicles, better batteries and state-of-the-art fuel cells for transportation use." -- Mike Wirsch Project Manager, SMUD Utilities throughout California have demonstrated their commitment to alternative fuel vehicles not just to provide the "fuel" for tomorrow's vehicles, but to increase the peak efficiency of their own power generation, and, just as important, to meet the needs of their customers who want cleaner air. The Sacramento Municipal Utility District (SMUD) has taken a clear leadership role in electric transportation research and development. It has led the formation of a unique public/private effort which utilizes the technological capabilities of the Sacramento Air Force Logistics Center (SM-ALC) housed at McClellan Air Force Base. The Sacramento Consortium Mission Already a model for "dual use" technology, the Sacramento Consortium has successfully leveraged federal funds with millions of private dollars to dramatically enhance electric transportation technology research and development on a national scale. This venture seeks to: Provide for a stronger national defense through economic and energy security; Develop advanced, efficient electric vehicle components and charging infrastructure to minimize utility system impacts of military and civilian electric vehicle charging; Create and maintain jobs for the nation, state, community, and SM-ALC; and Improve air quality throughout the nation. Accomplishments The Sacramento Consortium's significant success to date is attributed to a systems approach to satisfying diverse consumer needs while applying valuable dual-use technologies in the commercial sector. For the military, drive element flexibility, reduced vehicle silhouette, signature and volume, as well as increased mobility and deployability are considered. For the commercial side of "dual-use", project goals include consideration of fuel economy, efficiency, air quality, manufacturing scenarios, safety and military benefits -- as many "commercial" vehicles are used to perform various military tasks. To date, Sacramento accomplishments include: Developing a lightweight, safe, freeway-capable electric utility pickup, utilizing structural composite materials. The market potential is more than 80,000 units for both military and civilian uses; Placing a pre-production prototype vehicle into service in May 1994. The vehicle is being road and lab tested, and has a range potential of 100 - 155 miles per charge; A redesigned second phase prototype vehicle will be in service by April 1995, meeting 1996 FMVSS standards. Full production assembly is feasible by 1998; Field testing advanced lead-acid Horizon batteries in 12-16 vehicles within SMUD and McClellan Air Force Base fleets. These long-life batteries offer marked improvement in vehicle range, efficiency and performance in "real-world" tests; Producing six hundred of these batteries at a pilot plant; over 36,000 are expected to be produced in 1995. Site evaluation is underway to locate a full-scale manufacturing facility; Developing the world's first electro-mechanical flywheel battery (EMFB) intended specifically for vehicular applications; Designing an optimization model for this flywheel battery that has identified an optimum storage capacity of nearly 4 kWh per unit at minimal cost, in a unit weighing less than 100 pounds; and Fabricating a vacuum test fixture for the EDU and developing and testing a high-efficiency motor/generator at speeds approaching 100,000 RPM. Future Directions Internationally acclaimed Oak Ridge National Laboratories is developing a lightweight, durable rotor. A fully operational EDU is scheduled for availability by April 1995; A clear "dual use" example is the development and demonstration of a hybrid-electric propulsion system in a M113 Personnel Carrier; 48 three-wheeled neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs) have been field and market tested. A four wheeled, higher speed vehicle has been designed and is due for completion and testing by January 1995; and The Sacramento consortium is developing advanced proton exchange membrane fuel cell stacks that will be smaller, lighter weight and more cost effective than current fuel cell technologies. This work is expected to result in the development of a transportation-use fuel cell that will significantly increase EV efficiency and range while providing jobs within the aerospace industry. Sacramento Municipal Utility District Mike Wirsch, Project Manager 6201 S Street, P.O. Box 15830 Sacramento, CA 95852-1830 (916) 732-5486 (916) 732-6839 FAX E-mail: mwirsch@smud.org New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-30IA037-000725-B008-23http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/arpaw94-4.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054954 text/html 7870HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:42:06 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Electricore Powering the Future in Mid-America RACING TOWARD THE FUTURE -- Live on ESPN, the Notre Dame formula lightning race car whips around the fourth corner turn at Indianapolis Raceway Park in August 1994. The Electricore Inaugural Formula Lightning Race was the nation's first televised electric automobile race. "When we gave Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt the keys to a clean electric tram at a wildlife refuge, we were expanding the market niche uses of advanced transportation vehicles. Electricore is working to keep opening people's eyes about what's possible now." -- Ellen G. Engleman Executive Director, Electricore While the 'Silicon Valley' may be in California, the 'electric fields' will be based on Mid-America." So state the goals of Electricore, the Mid-America Electric Vehicle consortium. Based in Indianapolis, Indiana, Electricore's participants from 17 states seek to help U.S. automakers reach the critical mass needed to successfully introduce electric vehicles in the region where many of these vehicles may first be built. Electricore is closely allied with industry participants which include the recently announced AC Delco Systems merger of Delco Remy and AC Rochester to focus on EV/hybrid vehicle technology and alternative fuels. In addition, General Motors has formed Delco Propulsion Systems, based in Indianapolis, consisting of AC Delco Systems, Allison Transmission and Delco Electronics to coordinate the development of components and propulsion systems and offer sales and marketing of EV batteries, motors and related systems. The Electricore Mission Electricore is committed to rapidly developing and deploying electric vehicle technology and products both at home and abroad. It seeks to create thousands of jobs in Mid-America, significantly improve the environment through the reduction of toxic emissions and, as EVs become a major part of the American transportation system, reduce the nation's dependence on foreign oil. Serving as a technology catapult, Electricore is also a successful economic development tool for the region, partnering technological and manufacturing expertise in the unique partnership with ARPA. Over $8 million worth of projects are now being developed with ARPA. Additional opportunities are now being considered in excess of $10 million. Electricore pulls together the managerial and technical expertise of its participants, which range from small start-up companies to major corporate manufacturing entities. While Electricore's manufacturing partners focus on the development of technology for EVs, its utility partners, like the rest of ARPA-supported consortia nationwide, work to design and develop the appropriate infrastructure needed to support the vehicles, whether they be cars trucks or buses for military and commercial applications. Accomplishments Electricore's accomplishments include: Partnering with General Motors EV technicians, Electricore worked to establish a land speed record for EVs over 1,000 kg. Using the GM Impact automobile and AC Delco Systems batteries, the car surpassed all expectations when it achieved a closed course land-speed record of 183.075 mph; The Cleveland Electric Formula Classic was won by the University of Notre Dame electric formula race car, sponsored by AC Delco Systems. Utilizing advanced technology and batteries, the race car won the pole position with an 85.8 mph lap speed and hit a top speed of 110 mph, winning over 15 other university entries; Electricore provided a specially designed, all electric tram to the Department of the Interior for use in the Patuxent Wildlife Refuge in Maryland. The first of its kind, this quiet, non-polluting all-electric vehicle will be used in areas which are environmentally sensitive and contain species on the endangered list. Future Directions Electricore plans to deploy 15 mid-size electric powered pickup trucks and electric and hybrid electric buses. Seven trucks will be field tested at both the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Crane Division in Indiana and at the Tank Automotive Command base in Michigan. The hybrid electric powered shuttle buses will be evaluated in real life, real time testing situations in Indianapolis, Indiana and Chattanooga, Tennessee. Electricore has also created a unique educational program called "Teach the Technology" which partners engineers and students grades 5-12 and in universities to demonstrate the advantages of EV technology and interest students in engineering and EV-related technology careers in science, math, engineering and manufacturing. Electricore is negotiating with two major cities to use electric vehicle transportation for public transit activities and is expanding its community outreach to increase public awareness of EV technology and its benefits through enhanced communication with government officials, community leaders and economic development specialists. Electricore Consortium Ellen G. Engleman, Executive Director 723 West Michigan Street, SL-164 Indianapolis, IN 46202 (317) 278-1667 E-mail: engleman@aol.com New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-31IA037-000725-B008-47http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/arpaw94-5.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055005 text/html 7102HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:42:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation EV and Hybrid EV development for Southern States STEALTHY TRANSIT -- The same qualities that make electric buses attractive for cities  no noise, emissions or waste heat  are mission requirements for future troop transport and combat systems. While Detroit will always remain the "Motor City," there are many excellent reasons why every region of the nation will contribute to the growth of todays transportation industry and the evolution into tomorrows. Helping spur this evolution from the nations Southern region are the companies, universities and governmental groups making up the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT). Organized in 1993 by Georgia Power Co. and a handful of regional companies, SCAT has grown to include 45 leading utilities, universities and manufacturers ranging from small converters to some of the worlds largest firms. Together they are working on over $24 million in joint research projects and demonstrations, including a major electric vehicle fleet to support the 1996 Olympic Games in Atlanta. The SCAT Mission A key focus of SCAT has been to further the development of dual-use technology  components and systems that serve not only commercial vehicle markets but also meet emerging requirements for our nations defense.In the latest bidding to the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), 17 projects proposed by SCAT were selected. These projects will total about $15 million, with over half of the funding coming from SCATs members.The new research is in addition to last years $9 million for electric vehicle technology projects  $4 million from ARPA and the balance from SCATs members. Accomplishments SCAT teamed with the Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium and the Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project to develop and demonstrate a rapid-charging system by Electronic Power Technology, Inc. (EPTI) that permits complete vehicle charging in less than 20 minutes. Using the EPTI system, a 24-hour worlds distance record for EVs of 832 miles was set at the Atlanta Motor Speedway in a Solectria pick-up truck powered by advanced sealed lead-acid batteries from GNB Battery Technologies; GNB and FMC Corporation worked with SCAT in converting an M113 armored personnel carrier to battery-powered electric drive in time for field demonstrations at the 1994 Clean Air Grand Prix and EXPO in Atlanta. Future Directions SCATs future ARPA projects are designed to improve overall battery system economics by reducing manufacturing costs and improving performance of batteries and battery charging: A Virginia team led by Virginia Power will develop a method of combining EPTIs efficient pulse charge strategy with the GM Hughes inductive charging system to increase net charging efficiency; the system will then be evaluated in an EV using GNBs batteries; A Florida East Team led by the Florida Alliance for Clean Technologies and Florida Power & Light will produce a high-efficiency, 200 kw rapid charger capable of mass production at low cost. This team will also develop a "smarter" charging system by which all batteries in a pack are kept equally full and by which EVs switch from battery to flywheel to auxiliary fuel as driving needs dictate; A Texas Team led by the University of Texas Center for Electromechanics will develop a lightweight, efficient flywheel battery and install it in a hybrid electric transit bus. Overall, SCATS projects target some of the most important components for emerging electric and hybrid vehicles, including: Variable field alternators and fuel cells for electric and hybrid EVs; Power control for motor and ancillary systems, energy management/communication; Composite flywheel battery manufacturing; Advanced, efficient charging systems in conductive and inductive battery charging; High-performance electric drives; and Lightweight composite plastics for chassis and shells. All components will be developed and tested on existing SCAT-ARPA platforms as well as on new state-of-the-art buses, airport support equipment and a "highly mobile multi-wheeled vehicle" commonly known as a HMMWV or "humvee." Southern Coalitionfor Advanced Transportation John Wilson, President and CEO< 395 Piedmont Avenue, N.E. Atlanta, GA 30308 526-7228 (404) 526-3452 FAX E-mail: scat@gpc.com New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-32IA037-000725-B008-69http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/winter94/arpaw94-6.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055018 text/html 7286HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:42:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium The Northeast Alternative Fuel Vehicle Advantage EVS IN THE SNOW -- A recent NAVC study indicates that cold weather is not a problem for EV operation. "NAVC is about bringing together the creative and entrepreneurial inventors and manufacturers of the Northeast and to expand technology R&D in alternative fuel vehicles. Creating jobs in our region, improving our air quality and putting clean cars on the road  that's what NAVC is all about."  Sheila Lynch, Executive Director, NAVC The Northeast United States, with its large defense-oriented sector, is poised to find new business, markets and export products in the upcoming industry of advanced transportation. The Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium (NAVC) helps focus this industry and technology activity in a region ranging from New Jersey to Maine, and reaches out to participants across the Eastern United States. It is helping define a leadership role for the Northeast in alternative fuel vehicle technology and development. The NAVC Mission The Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium (NAVC) is a non-profit association of private/public firms and agencies, working together to promote the advancement of alternative fuel vehicle technologies in the Northeast. NAVC's mission is to: Strengthen the Northeast economy by supporting the creation of highly-skilled technology jobs in the region; Increase the use of clean-fuel vehicle technology within the Northeast corridor, to help reduce the region's serious air quality problems; and Expand energy fuel and transportation planning possibilities by the use of alternative fuel vehicles. Accomplishments In November 1993, and with the support of the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), NAVC initiated its $11.45 million technology and demonstration program for advanced transportation. The four-phase program includes: Part 1: Vehicle demonstrations (pickup trucks, buses, utility vans and passenger vehicles) and infrastructure implementation (electric recharge and a natural gas refueling station) at a military site: Hanscom Air Force Base in Bedford, MA. Part 2: Civilian pilot projects, testing various vehicles and performance criteria, in each of the six New England states and New York City. Part 3: Several technology development projects, including lightweight composite vehicles, development of an AC drive system, and a hybrid electric lightweight composite bus. Part 4: Several educational and informational activities, designed to share developments with other regions, industry and general public. NAVC has also just released the results of a crucial production cost analysis study of near-term electric vehicle costs. Prepared by the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy and Tufts University, the report concludes that no dramatic technology improvements are necessary to lower electric vehicle costs. It found that by 1998 electric vehicle costs will drop substantially, on the order of 35-45% even at conservative production levels, due to economies of scale. In addition, the study found that, with the exception of the major automakers, current electric vehicle prices range from $15,000 to $45,000. It also concluded that a converted commuter car costing $22,500 in 1994 should cost roughly $12,500 in 1998, with total purchase, operation and maintenance costs of 17- cents per mile, comparable to the 16-cents a mile expected for similar conventional vehicles. Future Directions A new funding award from ARPA has enabled the consortium to operate more than $25 million in projects for the advanced transportation industry. At least 12 new projects will now be able to get underway in the Northeast. These projects include: Testing and modeling of a lightweight electric vehicle for broad manufacturing capability; Developing a low-cost, effective modeling program for design and testing of composite body components to meet safety standards; Upgrading flywheel motor size for bus and heavy-duty vehicle applications; Providing thermal management for electric vehicles suitable for cold (and hot) weather climates; Developing and testing EV supercapacitors; Conducting design testing on hybrid variable reluctance motors; an Several projects addressing motor controllers. Northeast AlternativeVehicle Consortium Sheila Lynch, Executive Director 205 Portland Street, 5th Floor Boston, MA 02114 (617) 371-1420 (617) 371-1422 FAX E-mail: sheila.lynch@navc.ci.net New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-33IA038-000736-B036-93http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210062106 text/html 6058HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:13:18 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Report, Vol. 1, Issue 2 -- Spring 1995 The Latest Innovations Developed by America'sLeading Advanced Transportation Consortia ARPA Consortia Put Advanced Vehicles On the Road America's Military Readiness Can't Wait Faster, smarter, better. That's the goal for America's military, and it alsoapplies more than ever to how advanced military technologies aredeveloped, produced and deployed. Given current budgets, it'sa must. The Advanced Research Projects Agency - ARPA - isdeveloping critical new technologies faster, smarter, and bettertoday in a unique cost-shared partnership with industry. As aresult, its projects are placing more advanced electric and hybridelectric drive systems and technologies on the road than anyonein the world. Here are just a few examples since last winter'sProgress Report: The nation's first fully integrated hybridelectric troop transport buses entered service at Vandenberg AirForce Base; Two ground-breaking all-composite electricvehicles were unveiled; Electric-powered armored transport vehiclestook to the roads; A flywheel-powered truck began testing. And dozens of advanced electric vehicles, rangingfrom bus-sized to pick-ups, were being built, tested and deployedin military and civilian missions across the nation. Innovative Regional Teams ARPA has made this happen by helpingcreate and support innovative regional teams of technology developers.These consortia are made up of defense and aerospace firms, hi-techcompanies, national and private labs and universities, utilitiesand others. Their task: push the limits on new drive systems andvehicles. The results of these efforts are substantial technologyimprovements developed quickly at minimal public investment. What's the critical need for this technology? ARPAhas looked over the horizon and found America's current groundvehicle systems will be obsolete in just 10 years. What Americaneeds now for military preparedness is a headstart on what willmove tomorrow's combat vehicles. What will survive on the battleground of the future?Something that's quiet... stealthy... ultra-efficient... fast...requires less logistical support... and can power the next generationof smart, powerful offensive/defensive capabilities. The answeris advanced electric drive systems. Leading-Edge Capabilities But there's more to the ARPA consortiathan just rapid technology development. Just as important is creatinga flexible manufacturing base to support future military needs,a base that can support itself in the marketplace while stillproviding leading-edge capabilities to America's defense. This is possible because the very same technologiesso vitally important to our national defense are also criticalto America's industrial and environmental future. These drivesystems have tremendous commercial uses in clean, efficient transportationsystems, as well. That mutual need not only provides the marketbase that lowers costs, it's helping speed development and innovationtimes tremendously. We're doing it the ARPA way. Faster, smarter, and better. New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-34IA037-000725-B007-195http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/arpas95-1.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054751 text/html 7169HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:40:03 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project An environmental/economic winner for Hawaii Striving to Place Over 60 Clean Vehicles On Hawaiian Roads Hawaii has had a close relationship with the U.S.Armed Forces long before it became the 50th state. And today,that association is more prevalent than ever, making the AlohaState a natural to serve as the hub for one of the seven consortiaon the ARPA team. All military services are represented within a 375-squaremile area adjacent to Honolulu and stand ready as the power projectionbase for the Pacific Theater. To that end, the Hawaii ElectricVehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) is developing technologyfor military vehicle application and demonstrating capabilitieson commercial and military vehicles. Managed by the High Technology Development Corporation,an agency of the State's Department of Business, Economic Developmentand Tourism, the HEVDP Consortium has 40 participating companies/agenciesrepresenting 11 states throughout the country. Hybrid electric crew bus for Hickam Air Force Base willtransport flight crews between flight- line and crew rest areas. The HEVDP mission The HEVDP mission includes: Maximizing the number of commercial and militaryelectric vehicles on state roads; Developing an electric vehicle infrastructurewith conversion, assembly and servicing facilities as well ascharging stations; Operating an Electric and Hybrid Vehicle NationalData Center to collect, analyze, store, report and share electricand hybrid vehicle data for all seven consortia through the Internetand World Wide Web; Advancing the development of technology tomeet military and commercial electric vehicle needs. These activities are energizing the transportationtechnologies industry in Hawaii, which creates high quality jobsand improves economic competitiveness. Accomplishments The first phase of this project, which is drawingto a close, resulted in a $10.7M cost-sharing program among federaland state governments and private companies. The second phaseis just beginning and the magnitude of the program has increasedto a $17.7M cost sharing effort. These initial two phaseswill result in over 60 vehicles operating on Hawaii roads,to include small composite utility vehicles, sedans, pickup trucks,buses and a trolley. Operators include the Navy at Pearl HarborNaval Station and the Air Force at Hickam Air Force Base, as wellas the Hawaiian Electric Company and the Honolulu Public TransitAuthority. Additionally, plans call for converting the twodiesel engines driving a Navy Shuttle Boat to electric motors.To further develop an electric motor used for a prototype tank,variants are being installed in the shuttle boat anda 40-foot bus, the first electric transit bus of this size. Otheraccomplishments include establishing an electric vehicle conversionfacility and opening a composite, lightweight electric vehicleproduction facility. These activities, along with state legislature-proposedincentives for electric vehicle sales and use, demonstrate thecommitment of the State of Hawaii to take a lead in the electrictransportation industry. This Navy shuttle boat will use a variantof a prototype electric tank motor to reduce air, water, and noisepollution at Pearl Harbor. U.S. Pacific Command Forces are using environmentallysuperior electric vehicles to meet the EPA mandate for federalfleets. Future Directions Future plans call for extensive battery testing and certificationto extend the operating range of existing and projected electricvehicles, and developing more powerful electric motors to meetthe specifications for light- and medium-weight tactical vehicles.The National Data Center will continue to expand its capabilitiesto include simulation, analysis/visualization and a virtual electricvehicle laboratory. With strong interests in protecting the cleanenvironment which we enjoy, the State of Hawaii actively supportsthis expanding industry and its positive impact on our citizensand the Armed Forces. Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project Thomas Quinn, Director 531 Cooke Street Honolulu, HI 96813 (808) 594-0100 (808) 594-0102 FAX E-mail: tquinn@eve.ev.hawaii.edu New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-35IA037-000725-B007-208http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/arpas95-2.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054759 text/html 7157HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:40:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports CALSTART California-made technologies for a new industry Moving Technologies from Paper to Pavement The advanced transportation technologies industry continues toexpand rapidly, driven by military requirements for more capable,stealthy vehicles, and by global needs for cleaner, more efficienttransportation. CALSTART- the nation's largest advancedtransportation consortium - continues to be on the leading edgeof this growth, both in new companies and new capabilities. The CALSTART Mission CALSTART is dedicated to enhancing the advanced transportationtechnologies industry it helped jumpstart in California. It currentlyoperates 17 different programs in these key areas: electric, naturalgas, and hybrid vehicles, infrastructure and technologies andIntelligent Transportation Systems. The goals are to create high-qualityjobs, clean the air, and improve economic competitiveness. CALSTARTis a new business model. It servesas the link for a highly skilled, diverse network of more than120 companies and organizations, which works as a flexible "virtual"organization, rapidly able to respond to military and commercialtechnology needs and opportunities. CALSTART rolled out the nation's first fully integratednatural gas/electric "hybrid" buses now used as militarytransports at Vandenberg Air Force Base. Accomplishments CALSTART placed the nation's first fully integrated hybrid buses inDecember, 1994 at Vandenberg Air Force Base. The three militarytransports use an electric drive system coupled to an on-boardnatural gas-powered generator. The bus can operate on batteriesalone, on the generator alone, or on both. Combined range nearlytriples that of an electric bus, while cutting diesel pollutionby as much as five times; Advanced commercial bus variants of thehybrid drive system are under constructionand due for roll-out soon. One bus will use the FMC high-powerAC drive system, a proven military design whose commercial useswill help greatly reduce its cost; An advanced 24kW turbogenerator from NoMac Energy Systems approaches completion. This extremely low-emission turbine generator can operate on multiple fuels, serving as the main power generator on a hybrid vehicle. Integrationof a unit aboard a Vandenberg hybrid bus will allow side-by-sidetesting of performance with variant systems. AlliedSignal is completingits own turbogenerator design; The "running chassis" is rapidly moving from prototypeto production phase, with orders for well over 100 of theelectric vehicle chassis and drive systems. The lightweight, aluminumspace frame design is providing a flexible platform for electricvehicle models; Performance, operations and use data is being developed on a fleetof electric pick-up trucks in service at Edwards Air Force Baseand its Flight Test Center. The vehicles serve flight-line andother duties at Edwards; The Hughes multi-vehicle charging "kiosks"are completed, with the first one deployedand operational in Northern California at the Walnut Creek BARTsite. The kiosk can control eight, with capacity up to 16, independentvehicle charging units from the central site. Advanced electronics allows the Hughescharging kiosk in Northern California to serve as the energy stationto recharge up to eight electric vehicles. The AlliedSignal turbogenerator is being adapted for multiple vehicle uses as an on-board generator. Future Directions CALSTART continues to develop new projects in the most crucial areas of technology development, including ultracapacitors, an energy management controller for hybrids, and zinc-air batteries, among many others. In natural gas technologies critical to the industry,CALSTART teams were recently picked for four of seven ARPA developmentprojects, including sensors and innovative chassis designs. CALSTART also continues to build relationships with vehicle makersand those who will use advanced vehicle systems. As one example,BMW and CALSTART recently co-hosted an Environmental Vehicle PartneringWorkshop to bring together key developers in this new industry. Michael J. Gage, President and CEO 601 Empire Avenue Burbank, CA 91505 (818) 565-5600 (818) 565-5610 FAX E-mail: calstart@ix.netcom.com New Updates on Consortia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-36IA037-000725-B007-227http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/arpas95-3.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054815 text/html 7428HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:40:21 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium A leader in electric transportation Paving The Way for a Thriving New Industry Combining the electric transportation technologyexperience of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District and theadvanced research and development capabilities of McClellan AirForce Base, members of the Sacramento Electric TransportationConsortium have made great strides toward developing electrictransportation technologies. This broadbased consortiumis paving the way for a thriving new U.S. manufacturing industrywhile enhancing our nation's military readiness. The SMUD Mission The Sacramento Consortium has successfully leveragedfederal funds with millions of private dollars to dramaticallyenhance electric transportation technology research and developmenton a national scale. Its goals: Stronger national defense through technological superiority, economicand energy security; Develop advanced, efficient EV components and charging infrastructureto minimize utility system impacts of military and civilian EVcharging; Utilize existing advanced technologies andhighly trained personnel throughout the nation and at McClellanAir Force Base; Improve air quality nationwide. Aerojet General Corporation and H Power Systems have begun their projectto develop very compact proton exchange membrane fuel cell stacksutilizing integrated fluid management made possible by Aerojet'splatelet technology. The consortium is installing a unit in anexisting composite-based vehicle fueled with compressed hydrogen.This will result in the consortium's first hybrid EV. The composite Pickup II developed by SMUDteam members. Advanced Lead-Acid Battery Testing and Development A packof Horizon advanced lead-acid batteries, produced by Electrosource,Inc., has been range-tested in the Sacramento Consortium's compositePickup I. With 80% depth of discharge, the vehicle cantravel in excess of 110 miles on a single charge in city trafficaveraging approximately 40 mph. During the same tests, the vehicle achieved an astonishing9.23 miles/DC kWh. This high level of efficiency is due partlyto the ultra-efficient battery system, including the high inoutefficiency of the Horizon batteries, ultra-efficient chargingsystem and the efficient design of the vehicle itself. PurposeBuilt Composite EV A fullscale model of the Sacramento Consortium's secondgeneration purposebuilt, composite, lightweight and safeelectric vehicle, the Pickup II, was recently unveiledat the Los Angeles International Auto Show. A fully functionalvehicle will be completed May, 1995. The first generation vehiclehas been in operation since May, 1994, and is operating as a test-bedfor "realworld" testing of the Horizon battery. The newest, most advanced composite pickup was rolledoutin May, 1995 in Washington, D.C. A similar vehicle is expectedto be available for fleet purchases in the next two to three years. Electromechanical Flywheel Development An engineering test unit is being developed for performancetesting. Recently, a prototype motor/generator has completed high-speedtesting exceeding 60,000 rpm. The rotor design has been completed,materials have been selected and rotor fabrication and testingwill be completed by late Spring, 1995. Progress on other componentsis leading toward completion of the Engineering Development Unitby November, 1995. The ultra-efficient Horizon advanced lead-acidbatteries. Neighborhood Electric Vehicles Pacific Electric Vehicleshas designed and built a fourwheeled neighborhood electricvehicle based on the Danish threewheeled CityEl. Additionally,a prototype neighborhood EV is scheduled for delivery this summer.This economical composite materials-based vehicle will accommodatetwo passengers plus about four cubic feet of cargo; be designedfor fortyplus mph cruising speed; and be designed to satisfyfederal safety standards. This vehicle will be ideal for nonhighwaytravel on military bases and campustype settings as wellas neighborhoods throughout the nation.us_ Sacramento Municipal Utility District Mike Wirsch, Project Manager 6201 S Street, P.O. Box 15830 Sacramento, CA 95852-1830 (916) 732-5486 (916) 732-6839 FAX E-mail: mwirsch@smud.org New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-37IA037-000725-B007-244http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/arpas95-4.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054822 text/html 7882HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:40:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Electricore Powering the Future in Mid-America Developing Competitive and Collaborative Partnerships Electricore, the Mid-America Electric Vehicle Consortiumis "powering the future" through its non-profit associationof private sector companies, universities and public sector organizations,partnering in the development of advanced electric vehicle technologiesand related infrastructure. Acting in an atmosphere of competitivecollaboration and in partnership with the Department of Defensethrough the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), the consortiumhas invested in a 1:1 match of private monies with publicfunds to support almost $20 million of advanced researchand development projects. The Electricore Mission Electricore's success is founded on our commitmentto: Pursue research and development activities and demonstrate enablingelectric and hybrid electric vehicle technologies that are appropriateto both commercial applications and military missions, functionsand usefulness; Demonstrate scalable technology with reducedsize and weight advantages, economic viability, increased reliabilityand performance and energy savings and environmental goals; Analyze and develop innovative processes for system and componentmanufacturing which can combine common military and commercialtechnologies for reduced engineering and manufacturing costs; Design and develop the appropriate and applicable infrastructureto support the introduction and public acceptance of electricvehicle technologies; Ensure maximum return on the joint investmentof funds through strict accountability and efficient program management. Accomplishments Electricore's accomplishments include: Vehicle demonstration for 15 electric pick-ups and infrastructureimplementation at the military sites of TACOM (Tank AutomotiveCommand) in Warren, Michigan, and Naval Surface Warfare Center,Crane Division in Crane, Indiana; Electric vehicles in use in Indiana. The Electric pick-uptruck is part of Electricore's development activities. This electricbus, in service in Anderson, Indiana, was manufactured by Electricoreparticipant AVS. Design, development and manufacture ofone military and two civilian buses. Thebuses are to be tested and demonstrated at the military sitesof TACOM in Warren, Michigan, and Naval Surface Warfare Center,Crane Division in Crane, Indiana, and the cities of Indianapolis,Indiana and Chattanooga, Tennessee; Teaching the next generation about electricvehicle technology under Electricore's unique education programfor grades 5-12 called "Teach the Technology." Public Acceptance and Information Disseminationactivities involve the development ofan electric vehicle information center, in conjunction with theTennessee Valley Authority, the Electric Vehicle Research Network,Electricore, Chattanooga Area Regional Transit Authority and theCity of Chattanooga; Educational outreach activitiesinclude the development of technology dialogues providing noncompetitiveforums for data exchange and personal interchange among regional,industry, and university systems; the design and distributionof "Teach the Technology" reaching students in grades5-12 enhancing the study of science and mathematics; Development of performance criteria andmeasurement tools for electric vehiclesto support the development of the necessary infrastructure forsupport of successful EV introduction, which includes the designof the patented portable Alpha electronic meter for EV charginganalysis; Development of advanced components for electric vehicles,including an air conditioning system that is lightweight, modular,high performance, environmentally friendly, with a low vapor pressureHFC refrigerant. The system uses advanced aerospace turbine technology,high efficiency permanent magnet brushless motors and advancedmotor controller technology. This AC system is applicable to allcivilian and military vehicles using electric drives includingsurface, air and water craft; Development of a complete parallel hybrid electric vehicle(HEV) scheme which is scalable to large tracked combat vehiclesand civilian applications. This HEV systems integration connectspropulsion system units to achieve improved efficiencies for electricand hybrid electric applications. Charging analysis is made easy with the patented portableAlpha electronic meter which allows data on EV charging, includingkW, kVA and kVAR metering on a variety of voltages. Electricore Consortium Ellen G. Engleman, Executive Director 723 W. Michigan Avenue, Rm SL174 Indianapolis, IN 46202-5160 (317) 278-1661 (317) 278-1671 FAX Email: eengleman@aol.com New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-38IA037-000725-B007-265http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/arpas95-5.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054834 text/html 7783HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:40:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Electric and Hybrid TransportationIn The South Advancing Rapidly With Mission-Ready Vehicles ARPA's electric and hybrid vehicle program is producingtangible results in the South as technologies developed by membersof the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) beginto roll at military bases and other locations. Military Base Deliveries The Air Force Alternative Fuels SystemsProgram Office at Robins Air Force Basetook delivery in March of its first electric pickup,a Dodge Dakota conversion by Georgia Power Company containingthe new Westinghouse Electric Corporation 100-hp AC inductiondrive train. This vehicle will soon be followed by two identicaltrucks and a 31-foot diesel hybrid-electric bus being builtby Metrotrans, Spartan Motors and General Electric. "I was really impressed with the performance,"said Major General William P. Hallin, after taking his first spinin an all-electric pickup. The vehicles will be rotated amongthree different directorates at the busy base, which supportsa SAC bomber wing and an avionics group in addition to the AirForce's worldwide vehicle directorate. All of the vehicles willincorporate advanced data acquisition systems, providing datato ARPA's National Data Center on vehicle performance throughoutthe base testing period. Buses Loaded With Technology An all-electric shuttle bus will also debut in Aprilas one of the campus shuttle buses on Atlanta's Georgia Tech campus.The 32-foot "Stinger" has been built through a partnershipforged under the ARPA program between Westinghouse and Blue BirdCorporation, a partnership which has already fostered the nation'sfirst all-electric purpose-built school bus. SCAT's first armored transport conversion to batterypower, utilizing GNB Technologies' advanced lead-acid batteries,shows its "quiet power" at an Atlanta demonstration. The Tech shuttle bus features all-electric air-conditioning,a wheelchair lift, 0-50 acceleration in 30 seconds, and an impressiverange of 70-80 miles between charges.It also features a rapid recharger engineered by Westinghouseutilizing Electronic Power Technology's efficient charging system,allowing an electric "fill-up" in under two hours. EPTI's efficient pulse charging systemis also being installed by the owner-operator of the nation'sfastest growing fleet of electric shuttle buses, the ChattanoogaArea Regional Transit Authority. Located inside CARTA's shuttlepark south facility, the 200kW charge system will allow "toppingoff" during regular shuttle stops at the station, furtheringSCAT's research into optimum battery charging techniques. Anotherunit is destined for Florida's Patrick Air Force Base while atest unit will go the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Crane, Indianafor controlled testing with a wide array of battery chemistriesand manufacturers. Future Directions SCAT's members have also begun workon a number of other projects destined for military settings,including an advanced hybrid-electric HMMWV ("humvee")from Alabama's Pentastar Electronics for the Army's Tank and AutomotiveCommand and AC induction-powered electric tow tractors from Georgia'sTug Manufacturing for Robins Air Force Base. Westinghouse EV program manager CurtisPearson gives Major General Hallin a tour under the hood of theWestinghouse-Georgia Power electric vehicle conversion. The Blue Bird/Westinghouse &QUOT;Stinger"225-hp electric shuttle has 70-80 mile range, fully charges inunder two hours, and carries 20 standees in all electric air-conditionedcomfort. While complete vehicle systems are among SCAT's highest priorities,advanced technologies "under the hood" will offer advantagesfor military and commercial customers alike. New fuel cell systemsfrom Florida's Sustainable Power Systems will provide for stealthyauxiliary power systems, a must for range extension in commercialsettings and a clear asset in tactical and combat settings. Newflywheel systems from a team led by the University of Texas atAustin will provide load leveling for cars, buses and locomotivesas well as storage for massive pulsed power systems in developmentfor the military. Advanced motors and controllers will provideperformance superior to today's technologies, and battery managementand charging systems will extend range and improve storage systemcosts for vehicles from trucks to armored transports. Southern Coalitionfor Advanced Transportation John Wilson, President and CEO< 395 Piedmont Avenue, N.E. Atlanta, GA 30308 526-7228 (404) 526-3452 FAX E-mail: scat@gpc.com New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-39IA037-000725-B007-287http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring95/arpas95-6.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054844 text/html 8224HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:40:55 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- ARPA Progress Reports ARPA Progress Reports Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium The Northeast Alternative Fuel Vehicle Advantage Strengthening the Economy with CleanTechnologies The Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium (NAVC)is a nonprofit association of private/public companies andagencies working together to promote the advance of alternativefuel vehicle (AFV) technologies in the Northeast United States. The NAVC Mission NAVC's mission is to: Strengthen the Northeast economy by supportingthe creation of highly skilled technology jobs in the region; Increase the use of cleanfueled vehicle technology withinthe Northeast corridor to help reduce this region's serious airquality problems; Expand energy fuel and transportation planning possibilities bythe use of alternative fuel vehicles. In partnership with the Advanced Research ProjectsAgency (ARPA) of the U.S. Department of Defense, NAVC has enabledover $29 million of alternative fuel vehicle projects to beginin the Northeast in the last two years alone. The Northeast isa natural region for EV/hybrid development. With its traditionallylarge defenseoriented sector, its network of universitiesand high technology firms, and its air quality problems, the Northeasthas many reasons to move forward through NAVC to develop EV/hybridtechnology projects. These ARPA programs provide economic development,technology advances and new opportunities for the region. The ARPA-funded Solectria Sunrise featuresa composite-based structure with aerodynamic styling, an AC inductiondrive system, and a driving range of 120 miles per charge usingadvanced lead-acid batteries. Accomplishments NAVC recently finalized its second major grant agreementwith the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). This program9424, in combination with the current NAVC 9323 program,provides a total of over $29 million in advanced vehicle technologydevelopment projects to the Northeast. The current fourphase9323 program includes: Part 1: Vehicle demonstrations , (pickuptrucks, buses, utility vans and passenger vehicles) and infrastructureimplementation (electric recharge and a natural gas refuelingstation) at a military site: Hanscom Air Force Base in Bedford,MA. Part 2: Civilian Pilot Projects, testing various vehicles and performingcriteria, in each of the six New England states and New York City. Part 3: Technology development projects, including lightweightcomposite vehicles, development of an AC drive system and a hybridelectric lightweight composite bus. Part 4: Educational and informational activities designed to share developments with other regions, industry, andthe general public. The 9424 technology development projects include: Design and testing of a lightweight composite electric vehiclefor broad manufacturing capability; Development of a lowcost, effective modeling program fordesign and testing of composite body components to meet safetystandards; >Upgrading flywheel motor sizefor bus and heavyduty vehicle applications; Providing and testing thermal management for electric vehiclessuitable for cold (and hot) weather climates; Development and testing EV supercapacitors; Conducting design testing on hybrid variable motors andseveral projects involving motor controllers. These dualuse programs retain both civilianand military applicability. Components of particular interestto the military include: UTC's flywheel; Kaman's hybrid motor; Federal Fabric's supercapacitor. NAVC also participated in the unveiling of the SolectriaSunrise in December, a lightweight pure electric sedandesigned to meet all zero-emission vehicle and Federal Motor VehicleSafety Standards. Highly positive results of recent winter drivingtests in the Boston area in which advanced thermal managementtechnologies proved successful in enabling cold weather EVoperation without significant decrease in performance. Kaman Electromagnetics Corporation engineerworking on a large commercial permanent magnet electric motor.NAVC is funding Kaman to develop hybrid-electric drivetrains formilitary and commercial applications. Future Directions A major market focus of NAVC will be heavy-duty vehicles.Last December NAVC established its Northeast Clean Bus Committee.NAVC plans to explore, with bus suppliers, transit authorities,utilities and others, the opportunities for greater clean fuelbus operations. This market is also of great interest to the militarybecause of similar powertrain requirements. Finally, NAVC is working to expand its links with business partnersin the region on infrastructure development and other market issues.The ARPA technology programs are providing the foundation forthis emerging dual-use market. Northeast AlternativeVehicle Consortium Sheila Lynch, Executive Director 205 Portland Street, 5th Floor Boston, MA 02114 (617) 371-1420 (617) 371-1422 FAX E-mail: sheila.lynch@navc.ci.net New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-40IA038-000736-B035-13http://www.calstart.org:80/misc/messages/6.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061641 text/html 3437HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:08:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART Opportunity Center -- Re: Employment: Senior Engineer position in the EV Industry CALSTART Opportunity Center Re: Employment: Senior Engineer position in the EV Industry [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART Opportunity Center ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Eamon Searson on September 17, 1996 at 18:58:08: In Reply to: Employment: Senior Engineer position in the EV Industry posted by Anonymous on September 07, 1996 at 00:23:53: Emma, could you please let me know what is the location of the above opportunuty, and what the fax number is? I'd like to apply, but I would prefer to use fax as a medium. Thank you, Eamon Searson Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : Emma,: 	could you please let me know what is the location of: the above opportunuty, and what the fax number is?  : I'd like to apply, but I would prefer to use fax as a medium.: Thank you,: Eamon Searson [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART Opportunity Center ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-41IA037-000725-B007-88http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/index.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054644 text/html 8803HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:38:55 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Report, Vol. 3, Issue 1 -- Spring 1996 The Latest Innovations Developed by America'sLeading Advanced Transportation Consortia ARPA Consortia Put Advanced Vehicles On the Road Speeding Critical Electric and Hybrid-Electric Vehicle Technologies for Military Readiness and Economic Strength When it comes to advanced technologies, America must remain the leader. Technology innovation is the cornerstone of continually modernizing our military - and maintaining our ability to compete in the world economy. Whether the battlefield is military or economic, our future success depends on a new generation of combat vehicle capabilities - hard to detect, easy to deploy and support, fast and maneuverable. A Partnership That Works In a unique, results-oriented partnership with industry, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is successfully accelerating America's technical progress in advanced vehicles. The vehicle on this cover - and the technologies highlighted in this report - are examples of that fast track progress. This HMMWV (Humvee) operates on a quiet, powerful, efficient hybrid-electric drive system. It represents the face of our future. And it's being built now. This HMMWV (Humvee) operates on a quiet, powerful, efficient hybrid-electric drive system. It represents the face of our future. And it's being built now. A Clear Need Through seven regional technology consortia (listed below), DARPA's Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Technology Program has structured the teams to rapidly spur technology advances for leading-edge products. It is encouraging teams of companies to make them, building the civilian manufacturing support structure to ensure costs are kept low and capabilities high. DARPA sees a clear need for new military capabilities. Future combat vehicles bring greatly increased electrical power requirements for weapons, sensors and defensive systems. To provide that power while staying highly mobile, DARPA is combining power generation for these systems and propulsion into one system - hybrid electric. It means smaller engines running at peak efficiency. Reduced thermal and acoustic signatures. A doubling of fuel economy for sustainability in the field. Lighter-weight, faster and easier to deploy vehicles. And integrated systems with reduced cost. Results Count Through private industry cost-shared projects, the seven DARPA consortia operate a vast range of innovative research, development and deployment programs in all regions of the nation, each pushing forward advanced electric and hybrid electric vehicle technologies. What has our unique partnership accomplished? On the broadest level, the DARPA consortia have proven out a new model for rapid technology development. By maximizing both cooperation and competition among a skills-rich network of companies, research organizations, labs and universities spanning America, the best technologies are encouraged, quickly developed and tested. This innovative approach has been recognized for its success by the prestigious Hudson Institute. That's the model. What physical projects can we point to? The pages of this report chronicle significant progress across a range of critical technology areas: You'll find key, "enabling" technologies for electric and hybrid vehicles - such as low-cost power electronics. You'll discover a staggering array of new, efficient energy generators for hybrid vehicles - from turbogenerators to fuel cells to rotary-engine generators. You'll see real improvements in energy storage - from advanced lead-acid batteries to flywheel "mechanical" batteries to supercapacitors. You'll learn about new light-weight, high-strength materials for vehicle bodies and chassis. And you'll see full vehicle "integrations" - from a new military scout vehicle to Humvees to Bradley fighting vehicles, as well as a range of new clean and efficient civilian vehicles from commuter cars to buses, all able to tap the same technology base. Meeting Multiple Missions What each of these innovative technology projects share is that each is a part of a broader whole. The DARPA Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Program is a flexible yet highly coordinated effort to push forward critical vehicle performance goals through increased power generation, improved energy storage, reduced weight and enhanced efficiencies. Please read our report of progress. We think you'll find a program showing results quickly, cost-efficiently and with an eye toward meeting multiple missions -- from improved military capabilities, to reducing oil imports and enhancing energy security, to meeting critical clean air standards. These are missions with a future. What is DARPA? DARPA stands for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the guardian of the future for the Department of Defense. Ever heard of the Internet? DARPAinvented it. Designed to link national labs and researchers, it's fast becoming the global model for civilian communication and commerce. And DARPA placed America squarely in the middle of the future. DARPA's Electric and Hybrid Vehicle Program has the same goal. Future combat vehicles need to be stealthy, nimble and carry a huge electronic punch. Recognizing that civilian vehicles increasingly need similar technologies to cut air pollution and reduce dependence on foreign oil, DARPA launched a program to encourage those technologies to be developed and built in the United States. The track record to date? Over 350 American companies are working together - and in competition with each other - to push the limits of energy storage, drive system efficiency and high-power electronics for combat vehicles. Maybe just as important - companies around the world are now launching into these same technologies. That's a sign of their importance and a testament to DARPA's scanning of future needs. Just as with the Internet, DARPA is giving us the early lead. Now we must maintain it, to keep the edge in military capabilities and to carve out another area of commercial leadership in the global market. New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-42IA037-000725-B006-262http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/arpas96-2.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054540 text/html 9236HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:37:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports CALSTART California-made technologies for a new industry Latest Projects Bring Critical Technologies to the Next Level CALSTART's partnership with DARPA is pushing forward a range of technology projects to meet the next level of key power and performance goals required not just for military vehicles, but commercial vehicles as well. The Joint Tactical Electric Vehicle (JTEV) will be used to test high-risk components for a new military hybrid reconaissance vehicle. CALSTART continues the rapid pace of advanced vehicle and technology development. Within the last year, we placed the nation's first fully integrated hybrid buses at Vandenberg Air Force Base, developed advanced turbogenerators to serve as the main power generators for hybrid vehicles, and installed a multi-vehicle charging kiosk at a transit station in Northern California. This year, CALSTART's partnership with DARPA is pushing forward a range of technology projects to meet the next level of key power and performance goals required not just for military vehicles, but commercial vehicles as well. CALSTART was particularly successful in advancing flywheel and auxiliary power unit (APU) technologies and hybrid-electric electronics components in the latest round of DARPA-partnered projects. The CALSTART Mission CALSTART's core mission is a broad one: to create a new advanced transportation industry, bringing with it cleaner air and high quality jobs. As a critical component of this effort, we focus our DARPA programs on advancing electric and hybrid-electric vehicle technologies to meet military and commercial needs. To make this happen, CALSTART acts as an advanced transportation industry "solution provider" that quickly taps its network of more than 185 participating companies and organizations to obtain the resources needed for custom-made, market-oriented solutions to technology barriers. CALSTART provides these services to the advanced transportation industry: Technology assessment Strategic partnering Business incubation Launching and managing technology projects Networking and education opportunities Information services and marketing, including a major Internet Web Site at http://www.calstart.org that is updated twice daily. Accomplishments Evidence of these solutions can best be seen through the participants that have led this year's technology drive: CALSTART launched the nation's first electric station car program with the San Francisco Bay Area Rapid Transit District. The first 12 purpose-built EVs are on the road and the final 28 will be delivered later this year. Building on an earlier DARPA program, CALSTART has built two new EV chassis: one for advanced urban vehicles and one for low-cost to Asian countries. CALSTART opened a business cluster at the Alameda Naval Air Station, the base's first civilian reuse project. The site houses eight businesses in advanced transportation. Capstone Turbine of Tarzana, Calif., developed a compact, lightweight advanced turbine for heavy-duty hybrid electric vehicles, providing equivalent range of conventionally fueled vehicles but with dramatic performance, energy efficiency, and emissions improvements. Jefferson Programmed Power, now at the Alameda Naval Air Station, is developing a programmable DC controller and software to help improve the performance and extend the range of electric vehicles with DC drive trains. The Moller rotary-powered auxiliary power unit may enable 70 mile per gallon hybrid vehicles with near-zero emissions Future Directions Rocketdyne/Rockwell Corporation of Seal Beach, Calif., will conduct safety and containment testing of a low-cost titanium flywheel using a unique rotor design which allows the flywheel to fail in a very safe mode. U.S. Flywheel Systems in Newbury Park, Calif., will test four different high-energy density composite rotor flywheel energy storage systems to determine durability and failure modes. The systems have a projected capability of enduring 10,000 charge/discharge cycles. AVCON will manufacture and test magnetic bearings for four flywheel projects at its Agoura Hills, Calif. facilities to improve the performance of high-speed magnetic bearing systems. Coriolis Corporation of Saratoga, Calif., will demonstrate a low-cost high-voltage circuit breaker that could be used as a battery safety switch, with strong applications to high-powered vehicles such as trucks and tanks. Moller International of Davis, Calif., will develop a very low-emission rotary-powered auxiliary power unit engine for hybrid electric vehicles. The unit will be tested to determine if target goals of more than 70 miles per gallon and equivalent zero-emissions vehicle emissions are met. Aerovironment Inc. in Monrovia, Calif., and Rod Millen Motorsport will evaluate and test a wide range of high risk components for the second generation Advanced Hybrid Electric Reconnaissance Vehicle (AHERV). The companies will test traction motors and batteries, among others, in the existing Joint Tactical Electric Vehicle. Alturdyne of San Diego, Calif. will build a 40 kW rotary power unit as a power generator which will be tested aboard a next generation hybrid electric bus. CALSTART will continue to help develop critical technologies while also working to encourage large-scale deployment of clean fuel vehicles in market segments where they work best. We will also continue to provide the base of information services and education that encourage industry growth, particularly through expansion of our Internet Web Site for Advanced Transportation. CALSTART STATS PARTICIPANTS: 185+ DARPA Program Areas: Flywheels Auxiliary Power Units Turbogenerators OTHER INVOLVEMENTS: Purpose-built, affordable lectric commuter car Hybrid buses EV/NGV Infrastructure For More Information Contact: Michael J. Gage, President and CEO 601 Empire Avenue Burbank, CA 91505 (818) 565-5600 (818) 565-5610 FAX E-mail: calstart@ix.netcom.com New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-43IA037-000725-B006-272http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/arpas96-3.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054549 text/html 9108HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:38:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium A leader in electric transportation Paving The Way for a Thriving New Industry Recognized as an industry leader, our consortium has combined the technological capabilities of McClellan Air Force Base, the experience of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District and the innovation of many private companies to realize the advantages of electric transportation. Enhancing the nation's military readiness while creating a new industry is among the many substantial benefits derived from the broad-based multilateral effort. Electrosource is developing the Maximizer battery management system into a robust automotive component. The Sacramento Mission The Sacramento Consortium's objectives go hand-in-hand with those of the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles (PNGV). To date, the Consortium has successfully leveraged federal funds with millions of private dollars to dramatically enhance electric transportation technology research and development on a national scale. Its goals: Stronger national defense through technological superiority, economic and energy security: Develop advanced, efficient EV components and charging infrastructure to minimize utility system impacts of military and civilian EV charging; Create and maintain jobs for the nation, state, community and McClellan Air Force Base; Improve air quality nationwide. Accomplishments Fuel Cells Testing of H Power Systems' 10 kilowatt proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell stack continues. This stack design will lead to a larger 50 to 70 kilowatt system for test and demonstration in buses. Additionally, an advanced, multi-fuel processor to convert liquid hydrocarbons to hydrogen for the fuel cell is under development. Key to both stack performance and cost reduction are the use of patented platelet technology to reduce separator plate mass and meet cost targets for mass produced systems. Advanced Lead-Acid Batteries Field testing is continuing to prove out the Horizon batteries in a variety of SMUD/McClellan vehicles, including sedans, trucks and vans. Horizon batteries, produced by Electrosource, Inc., deliver the highest specific energy of any advanced lead acid battery available for electric vehicles. Electrosource S-Fold Battery for Hybrid Vehicles Development of this technology will result in a battery with high voltage and high specific power, with respect to battery volume and mass (750 to 1,000 w/kg), which is 3 to 4 times greater than its nearest competitor. This battery model will enable successful operation of PNGV hybrid vehicles in the future. Purpose-built EVs A second generation electric pickup truck, Pickup II, premiered at the 1995 DARPA conference. It is a two passenger, lightweight, all-composite vehicle with the following dimensions: 155" long, 62" high and 61" wide. Already road-tested and receiving rave reviews from fleet users, the Pickup II has front wheel drive, a curb weight of 2,100 pounds, Horizon batteries, Brusa motor (gt20-T) and controller (AMC325), safety glass, and 14 inch aluminum wheels with Michelin Proxima tires. A multi-year effort to take the Pickup II to production has been initiated, utilizing as many OEM subsystems and components as possible. The composite process required for large structural components is being developed and the vehicle is being redesigned for improved manufacturability and cost-effectiveness. EV Testing & Data Collection Both monthly energy logging and detailed "time-series" data collected for in-depth study of EV performance is yielding valuable information. This project has been expanded to upgrade monthly logging hardware, add 8 more vehicles to the "time-series" study program, and develop systems to automatically record performance data from fleet EVs. "Time-series" data systems are able to record 20-40 individual measurements throughout the vehicle every 200 milliseconds. This data will allow the analysis of entire vehicle performance as well as subsystems within the vehicle and is needed for new vehicle development efforts, utility power planning, fleet operations planning and infrastructure development. Sacramento Battery Test Facility Equipped with two AeroVironment ABC 150 Advanced Battery Cycler Test Systems this new facility is capable of cycling four battery packs in a variety of cycling regimes such as hybrid EV and rapid charge cycles. Several new battery management systems developed to maximize capacity and protect life of electric vehicle battery packs will be tested and evaluated here. Additionally, SMUD will field test the Electrosource Maximizer Battery Management System being developed to ensure longer life for advanced batteries. It will charge each battery in a pack individually to achieve maximum capacity from the battery pack on every cycle. Voltage and temperature sensors on each battery are used to provide an accurate "state of charge" reading for the driver. This proven system is being developed to the robust automotive component stage for the EV industry. Electromechanical Flywheel Battery A working engineering test unit will soon be completed. Due to substantive progress made by American Flywheel Systems, Inc. since 1995, the fabrication of a flywheel rotor system is scheduled for completion by mid-1996, with testing of an electromechanical flywheel battery engineering unit to begin thereafter. Neighborhood Electric Vehicles Pacific Electric Vehicles is scheduled to complete its Peregrin prototype in May of this year. This economical monocoque composite chassis is a low performance, 40+ mph two passenger vehicle suitable for residential neighborhoods and campus-type settings. SMUD STATS PARTICIPANTS: 36+ DARPA Program Areas: Flywheels Auxiliary Power Units OTHER INVOLVEMENTS: Advanced Battery Systems For More Information Contact: Sacramento Municipal Utility District Mike Wirsch, Project Manager 6201 S Street, P.O. Box 15830 Sacramento, CA 95852-1830 (916) 732-5486 (916) 732-6839 FAX E-mail: mwirsch@smud.org New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-44IA037-000725-B007-12http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/arpas96-4.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054556 text/html 8439HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:38:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports Electricore Powering the Future in Mid-America Paving The Way for a Thriving New Industry Electricore, the Mid-America Electric Vehicle Consortium, is successfully building the foundation for true development of the necessary technologies, industrial base and support infrastructure for a viable commercial electric/hybrid-electric vehicle industry. Electricore's participants span the United States, from California to Massachusetts. This industry is integral to the development of cost-effective military electric and hybrid-electric vehicle applications. As military demand, alone, will not be large enough to support a defense-unique industrial base, the Electricore consortia partnerships have successfully developed advanced technology systems from the lab to the marketplace, yielding the technology "guts" required for both military and civilian applications. Successful project developments include advanced batteries specifically designed for electric vehicles, special battery monitoring packs and safety improvements which have had ground-breaking impact. Technology developments are having actual impact on the market. In January, 1996 General Motors introduced the EV-1 -- the first production electric vehicle introduced by one of the "Big Three." Two Electricore participants supported the development of the technologies used in this vehicle via design of the electric drive motor system, a drive motor and gear set designed to produce the vehicle with the smoothest possible acceleration. Development of the battery pack system occurred concurrently alongside the development of the drive unit and includes a purpose built, deep-cycle, maintenance-free, valve-regulated, lead-acid recombinate battery. This battery is the first of its kind in the market and is the same system used in the DARPA military bus projects. The successful marriage of key developmental technologies with civilian markets has underscored the importance of dual use technologies. Current projects which will impact both the military and civilian markets include: Electric Variable Transmission Led by Allison Transmission, the system offers efficiency benefits over the conventional powertrain for high average power vehicle applications. This scalable technology is appropriate for military applications for a HMMWV, a five ton truck or a 25 ton tracked vehicle or civilian applications for a 30' or 40' city bus. High Efficiency Air Conditioning Led by Nartron, this advanced high efficiency, microprocessor controlled, turbine driven, modular air conditioner will meet both electric bus requirements, all types of military vehicles including surface, air and watercraft such as locomotives and rail cars, heavy duty trucks, off road equipment, shipboard tower mounted electronics, fixed wing and non fixed wing aircraft. Synchronous Reluctance Motor Led by Delphi Energy and Engine Management Systems, the SRN represents a new motor design which combines novel manufacturing processes, new composite materials and new control strategies to mass produce advanced motors with optimized efficiencies at lower cost and weight than similar induction motors. These motors will be suitable for electric and hybrid electric military and civilian vehicles including all but the largest tracked military vehicle applications Non-Invasive Battery Measurement Technology Led by Premium Power of Slidell, Louisiana, this project is developing a new non-invasive technique to measure battery state-of-charge called "Time Domain Spectroscopy." This technology has many potential applications in all areas of electrochemistry including military electrochemical storage units, quality control in battery manufacturing, accurate on-board electric vehicle "fuel" gauge, as well as medical applications. Advanced Mos-Gated Thyristers Led by Rutgers University, this project is designing and fabricating a novel MOS-gated Thyristor, using a SiC wide bandgap semiconductor for high power and high temperature applications in electric vehicles. Electric/Hybrid Vehicle Virtual Proving Ground Led by the University of lowa, the virtual proving ground focuses on the Army's high mobility Multi-purpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV) with an experimental electric/hybrid drive train. The virtual proving ground is designed to support hybrid-electric vehicle systems, including development of drive train, energy storage, and motors, carrying out simulation based trade off analysis and design optimization. Lower Management and Storage Systems for Hybrid Electric Drives Led by SATCON, the program develops and tests hybrid electric drive system control and energy storage for a wide variety of military and commercial vehicles using flywheel energy storage units. Electricore Stats PARTICIPANTS: 25+ DARPA Program Areas: Power Electronics AC Synchronous Motors Energy Storage OTHER INVOLVEMENTS: Education: EV "Teach the Technology" program for grades 5-12 Undergraduate and Graduate EV Technology courses at Indiana-Purdue University,Indianapolis For More Information Contact: Electricore Consortium Ellen G. Engleman, Executive Director 723 W. Michigan Avenue, Rm SL174 Indianapolis, IN 46202-5160 (317) 278-1661 (317) 278-1671 FAX Email: eengleman@aol.com New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-45IA037-000725-B007-27http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/arpas96-5.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054607 text/html 8520HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:38:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Electric and Hybrid TransportationIn The South Technologies Are Racing To Market Electric and hybrid-electric vehicle development is truly a national phenomenon, with commercial and military activities firmly moving in all corners of the nation, and the Southern United States region is no exception. GM's Impact was previewed in several Southern markets during 1996 to set the stage for the EV1's launch in 1997. In the Southern region, GM's decision to go into production on the EV1 sedan and electric S-10 pickup have sharpened the focus on both critical technology development and market realities. While the focus of much public attention is drawn to the racy EV1 which will initially be offered for sale only in California and Arizona, utilities and other electric transportation partners are already installing infrastructure for the eventual sale of EVs throughout the sunbelt. Production Ramping Up In the Region Although the EV1 will be produced in Michigan and initially be sold only in the Southwest, the electric pickup will be manufactured in Louisiana and be offered for sale to fleet customers throughout the nation. GM's moves have helped create a "race to market" atmosphere which is helping "pull" technologies developed through the DARPA program into commercial and military platforms. For example, Chrysler will be counting on AC induction drive trains developed in Maryland by Northrop Grumman (formerly Westinghouse Automotive Systems) and advanced lead-acid batteries from Texas-based Electrosource to power its 1997 model EPIC electric van. Pentastart's high performance hybrid-electric HMMWV featuring advanced lead-acid batteries from Electrosource and permanent magnet motors from Unique Mobility. Electrosource batteries are also at the heart of several military vehicle prototypes, including hybrid-electric HMMWVs being developed by Alabama-based Pentastar Electronics, a division of Chrysler, and a hybrid-electric M113 armored personnel carrier converted by United Defense. When completed this summer, the HMMWV is expected to outperform conventional HMMWVs in several areas, including speed, maneuverability, stealth, and gradability. Its permanent magnet motors from Unique Mobility will deliver twice the horsepower to the wheels than the conventional drive system, with three times the overall efficiency. Small, efficient permanent magnet motors developed by Fisher Technologies entered production to meet the need for more efficient climate control systems on Ford Ranger upfits by Troy Design & Manufacturing. High efficiency alternators and traction motors also developed by Fisher under SCAT's DARPA program are being considered by other manufacturers for heavy duty vehicles, including buses. DARPA Program to Cut Bus Drive Train Costs Electric bus shipments are picking up quickly with sales for 1996 looking to double or triple 1995's figures. Northrup Grumman is in production in Puerto Rico with its 200KW AC drive train for Blue Bird school buses and transit-style buses, manufactured in Fort Valley, Georgia. General Electric has entered the shuttle bus drive train market with AC induction inverters and motors on buses built by Chattanooga's Advanced Vehicle Systems. Both Northrup Grumman and GE are participants in DARPA-funded programs to dramatically slash the price of their heavy-duty drive trains. These programs focus on reducing parts count, integrated chip design, advanced motor controls, and smarter power electronics. The GE system, being developed in conjunction with Analog Devices and IXYS, will produce open architecture components for the industry, including a new motor control chip, smart IGBT modules, and a new low-cost AC inverter package. The goal is a minimum 50% reduction in price, with increased performance, over today's drive package New Cooperative Thrusts Hasten Technology Development & Market Readiness New SCAT research focus areas include battery management systems, larger battery packs for heavy duty vehicles, flywheel containment testing and a continuation of SCAT's pioneering work in pulse charging techniques. The flywheel containment program involves development teams from every region of the nation, combined with several national labs, in an DARPA/DOE coordinated program of controlled destructive testing to develop affordable approaches to flywheel containment design. SCAT is also increasing its contributions to the DARPA modeling and simulation system, with new emphases on advanced batteries, pulse charging, and multiple drive trains. In response to requests by SCAT's 50 plus members, the organization is also expanding its program focus to include major thrusts in education and infrastructure development, including coordinated training programs for residential code officials, and a program of coordinated web page development with the other DARPA consortia. SCAT Stats PARTICIPANTS: 50+ DARPA Program Areas: Flywheels Motors and Controllers Modeling and simulation OTHER INVOLVEMENTS: Electric transportation for the Olympic Village High speed rail and electric transit For More Information Contact: Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation John Wilson, President and CEO 395 Piedmont Avenue, N.E. Atlanta, GA 30308 526-7228 (404) 526-3452 FAX E-mail: scat@gpc.com New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-46IA037-000725-B007-48http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/arpas96-6.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054616 text/html 7803HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:38:28 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Clean Power Solutions for National Security Civil-Military Development From DARPA'S Youngest Consortium The MARCAV regional consortium joined DARPA in July, 1995 to aid the United States in advancing electric and hybrid-electric drive systems and technologies. The hybrid-electric HMMWV, operating in a battery-only mode, eliminates fuel fumes and motor noise, making it difficult for enemy detection. The MARCAV consortium is operated by Concurrent Technologies Corporation (CTC), an independent nonprofit organization in Johnstown, Pennsylvania. MARCAV develops, demonstrates, and deploys advanced transportation technologies nationwide to improve environmental air quality, increase energy security, rejuvenate the U.S. civil-military industrial base, and increase vehicle performance, particularly for the defense industry. MARCAV Mission The mission of MARCAV is to pursue research and development technology that will: Develop advanced vehicles and components that approach competitiveness with conventional internal combustion engines, on both cost and performance; Demonstrate that clean vehicles can be produced which are attractive to the commercial and military markets; and Provide a mechanism so that innovative technology and entrepreneurial businesses can be developed alone or in partnership with other U.S. industry, leading to the enhancement of the U.S. civil-military industrial base. Developments for Future Defense and Commercial Applications MARCAV's focus on the civil-military industry is illustrated through its many projects. Examples of projects making great progress include the Hybrid Electric High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), the Utility Electric Vehicle and the Hybrid Electric Bradley Fighting Vehicle. The HMMWV, supported by CTC, focuses on converting a conventional HMMWV to hybrid electric power. In other words, the components of the internal combustion engine will be replaced by a smaller diesel motor-generator set in series with dual electric motors. The energy needed for mobility will then be provided through advanced lead-acid batteries. This will minimize the use of imported oil which, in turn, helps the environment, our national security, and our trade deficit. In addition, the Hybrid Electric HMMWV will be capable of operating in a battery-only mode, giving it the ability to move undetected on the battlefield  a huge advantage for U.S. defense operations. The Utility Electric Vehicle project, supported by the Keystone Consortium, focuses on demonstrating the feasibility of an all electric, all composite vehicle designed for commercial on-the-road use. This vehicle's low-weight composite structure will enable the vehicle to travel at speeds up to 70 mph. The Utility Electric Vehicle was recently honored at the Composite Fabricators Association Convention with the 1995 Technical Innovation Award, while placing third overall at this international show. Twenty-three of the utility electric vehicles are to be produced within the next three years, using three for crash tests and 20 for road tests. The Hybrid Electric Bradley Fighting Vehicle project, supported by United Defense, L.P., focuses on converting a standard Bradley Fighting Vehicle to a hybrid electric drive. The objective of this conversion is to demonstrate the automotive and operational advantages of a hybrid electric drive for tracked combat vehicles. The Hybrid Electric vehicle will be enabled by high power density electric drive components developed for heavy-duty applications  a necessity for such combat vehicles. MARCAV's developments do not stop here. MARCAV is working on a number of other projects to help improve and upgrade the design, development, and manufacture of defense and commercial electric and hybrid electric vehicles. These include the Hybrid Electric M113 Demonstrator, High Capacity Hydrogen Storage Demonstrators, Fixed Speed Ratio Transmission, Polymer Multi-Layer Capacitors and Batteries, and the implementation of Integrated Product and Process Design (IPPD) throughout the consortia. The newest member to MARCAV's family of projects is the Flywheel Energy Storage System project, focusing on the development of secure flywheel containment units. MARCAV's progress on its electric and hybrid-electric vehicle projects is sure to be consistent and abundant. MARCAV looks forward to continued opportunities with the other DARPA consortia and in the defense market. MARCAV Stats PARTICIPANTS: 7+ DARPA Program Areas: Electric HMMWV Utility Electric Vehicles Hybrid Electric Bradley Fighting Vehicle OTHER INVOLVEMENTS: Flywheels Hybrid Electric M113 Demonstration Project Integrated Product and Process Design New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-47IA037-000725-B007-66http://www.calstart.org:80/about/arpa/spring96/arpas96-7.html 207.104.9.100 19970210054629 text/html 9757HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:38:38 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Progress Reports DARPA Progress Reports Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium The Northeast Alternative Fuel Vehicle Advantage Strengthening the Economy with Clean Technologies The Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium (NAVC) is a non-profit association of public and private companies and agencies, working to promote the advance of alternative fuel vehicle technologies in the Northeast United States. NAVC's mission includes: strengthening the Northeast economy by allowing for the transfer of existing workforce skills out of exclusively defense related areas and into highly skilled clean-fuel vehicle related jobs with commercial/defense dual-use marketing potential; meeting the region's air quality goals through the use of clean-fueled vehicles; taking advantage of the Northeast's wealth of technology innovators and get them working together. In partnership with DARPA, NAVC is now managing over $32 million in alternative vehicle technology initiatives. Through NAVC, this diverse group of organizations can move forward, linked by a common interest in furthering technologies for clean air, sustainable energy/energy security, technological competitiveness and economic development. A soldier demonstrates Hughes' easy-to-use inductive charger at Ilanscom Air Force Base. Accomplishments NAVC has expanded its program of advanced transportation technology with nine new projects for 1996. This latest addition to the program brings the total of NAVC-managed projects to nearly 50. The Northern Region Thermal Management Technology Project An ongoing NAVC project that, due to its impressive results thus far, has received funding under this award to expand its program. The project is managed by EVermont and the Atlantic Center for the Environment. Vermont's cold, rural environment makes it ideal for the testing and development of advanced thermal management technologies vital to the successful operation of military and civilian EVs. NAVC has provided funding for this charging station which supports a fleet of electric pickup trucks and vans at Hanscom Air Force Base. Nickel Metal Hydride Battery Testing in a Cold Weather Environment Research by Michigan's Ovonic Battery Company has shown no performance loss in nickel metal hydride batteries in temperatures as low as -20 degrees Fahrenheit. In this project, the Massachusetts Division of Energy Resources and EVermont will test this finding in day-to-day applications. The initiative also involves testing the nickel metal hydride batteries in hot weather. Conversions of Sport Utility Vehicles The New York City Department of Environmental Protection, Wilmington, Massachusetts-based Solectria Corp., Boston Edison, and Hanscom Air Force Base in Bedford, Massachusetts will collaborate on a series of conversions to optimized electric vehicles. The conversions will be performed at Solectria, followed by testing and analysis at Hanscom AFB, then delivery to New York City and Boston for operation and data collection. Solectria plans to add the converted sport utility vehicle to its product line, to be available at reduced cost for both military and civilian applications. NAVC is funding development and crash testing of the Solectria Sunrise all-composite electric vehicle. High Efficiency, High Voltage DC Motor/Controller Design and Development The revolutionary technology results in a motor/controller that exceeds the performance of current technology, yet costs less to produce and also eliminates the need for a conventional transmission. Solectria is working on several concepts in this program. Integrated High Voltage Power Electronic Module Will provide dramatic cost reduction, simplified installation, and increased safety. Single-Processor Fully Digital AC Motor Controller Involves redesigning the motor controller to make it fully digital, add computational power, and lower the cost. The process will simplify manufacturing and produce a more efficient and user-friendly motor/controller system. Horizon Battery/Vehicle Validation Using Horizon batteries, a battery management system and other related technologies, the system will feature increased range and improved life. The ambitious initiative aims to establish market viability in just six months. High Voltage Variable Speed AC to AC Motor Drives D.C. Transformation, Inc. of Beverly, Massachusetts, is doing ground-breaking work on motor drives for military applications. This project will include a traction drive inverter demonstration. The payoff of this amazing technology is reduced weight and volume, extreme cost reduction, increased efficiency and superior regulation, control and protection capabilities. Electric Vehicle Monitoring and Display System Commercialization To be developed by New London, Connecticut's Naval Undersea Warfare Center, the Connecticut Municipal Electric Energy Cooperative, the Thomas G. Faria Corporation of Uncasville, Connecticut, and Solectria Corp. The team will use their combined expertise to develop a cost-effective instrumentation panel to be used in the Solectria Sunrise, but also adaptable to other vehicles. NAVC has also had great success recently with ongoing projects. A notable example is the NAVC-sponsored Solectria Sunrise, which recently added crashworthiness to its list of remarkable achievements. The 4-passenger sedan had extremely encouraging results in crash testing. The damage to both the vehicle and the crash-test dummies were well within allowable limits. Production composite vehicle structures are of great interest to the military for stealth and lightweight strength. Future Directions NAVC will continue outreach to further the DARPA military needs of low-cost hybrid and electric vehicle technology and continue to meet the needs of the Northeast for economic development and cleaner air. NAVC Stats PARTICIPANTS: 55+ DARPA Program Areas: Flywheels Supercapacitors AC and DC Motor Development Thermal Management OTHER INVOLVEMENTS: Northeast NGV Committee Northeast Clean Bus Committee For More Information Contact: Northeast AlternativeVehicle Consortium Sheila Lynch, Executive Director 205 Portland Street, 5th Floor Boston, MA 02114 (617) 371-1420 (617) 371-1422 FAX E-mail: sheila.lynch@navc.ci.net New Updates on Consoritia Projects: Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project CALSTART Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Electricore Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation Mid Atlantic Regional Consortium for Advanced Vehicles Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Back to Report Main Page | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-48IA038-000736-B034-316http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/43.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061540 text/html 4042HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info CALSTART User Forum Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Dan Segal on September 11, 1996 at 17:24:52: In Reply to: Need Zebra Electric Car Info posted by J Hicks on September 10, 1996 at 16:43:34: : Saw the 'Zebra' 2-seater white all-electric car on the business news tonight. A price was mentinoned and a production run of 5000 coming up - I am interested!!!! The report did not mention manufacturer but that most electric cars are under the CALSTART umbrella. Can you help me? CALSTART should have an index of car names so if a person sees one on the tv we can get in touch. Follow Ups: Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info Peter Carleton 15:42:44 9/18/96(1) Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info Steve Hutchings 21:45:00 12/03/96(0) Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : : : Saw the 'Zebra' 2-seater white all-electric car on the business news tonight.  A price was mentinoned and a production run of 5000 coming up - I am interested!!!! The report did not mention manufacturer but that most electric cars are under the CALSTART umbrella. Can you help me? CALSTART should have an index of car names so if a person sees one on the tv we can get in touch. Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-49IA038-000736-B034-335http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/48.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061551 text/html 4200HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:08:02 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info CALSTART User Forum Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Peter Carleton on September 18, 1996 at 15:42:44: In Reply to: Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info posted by Dan Segal on September 11, 1996 at 17:24:52: : The item I saw was The News Hour with Jim Lehrer, and the production run quoted was 500, not five thousand. : : Saw the 'Zebra' 2-seater white all-electric car on the business news tonight. A price was mentinoned and a production run of 5000 coming up - I am interested!!!! The report did not mention manufacturer but that most electric cars are under the CALSTART umbrella. Can you help me? CALSTART should have an index of car names so if a person sees one on the tv we can get in touch. Follow Ups: Re: Need Zebra Electric Car Info Steve Hutchings 21:45:00 12/03/96(0) Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : : The item I saw was The News Hour with Jim Lehrer, and the production run quoted was 500, not five thousand.: : : Saw the 'Zebra' 2-seater white all-electric car on the business news tonight.  A price was mentinoned and a production run of 5000 coming up - I am interested!!!! The report did not mention manufacturer but that most electric cars are under the CALSTART umbrella. Can you help me? CALSTART should have an index of car names so if a person sees one on the tv we can get in touch. Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-50IA038-000736-B034-299http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/44.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061533 text/html 2961HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:44 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- followup to zebra CALSTART User Forum followup to zebra [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Dan Segal on September 11, 1996 at 17:27:45: In Reply to: Need Zebra Electric Car Info posted by J Hicks on September 10, 1996 at 16:43:34: have you seen the solectria sunrise? (www.solectria.com) Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : have you seen the solectria sunrise? (www.solectria.com) Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-51IA038-000736-B034-373http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/33.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061623 text/html 4784HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:08:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: Mandates CALSTART User Forum Re: Mandates [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Mike Mitchell on September 04, 1996 at 00:29:34: In Reply to: Mandates posted by Don Devlin on September 04, 1996 at 00:28:34: : To back away from the original mandates is a mistake of historic : significance. The American lead in these technologies will recede and the : European and Asian countries will make dramatic advances. Once again : the pressure from well know self interest industries will prevail for their : own narrow interests and America will be the worse for their influence : among politicians. Pete Wilson and the carb board will go down in : history fot this failure. Sincerely, Don Devlin Never used a Browser based news group before. Interesting. I love EVs, but am concerned about goverment mandating product design (vs mandating average emmisions, etc). It is just not free enterprise and I believe will hurt competition in the long run. On the other hand, this contract I just read will be obsolete soon as competition will drive EVs to the market sooner than 2003. You see the Hyundai (sp?) news blerb? Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : : To back away from the original mandates is a mistake of historic: : significance. The American lead in these technologies will recede and the: : European and Asian countries will make dramatic advances. Once again: : the pressure from well know self interest industries will prevail for their: : own narrow interests and America will be the worse for their influence: : among politicians. Pete Wilson and the carb board will go down in: : history fot this failure. Sincerely, Don Devlin: Never used a Browser based news group before. Interesting. I love: EVs, but am concerned about goverment mandating product design (vs: mandating average emmisions, etc). It is just not free enterprise and I: believe will hurt competition in the long run. On the other hand, this: contract I just read will be obsolete soon as competition will drive EVs: to the market sooner than 2003.: You see the Hyundai (sp?) news blerb? Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-52IA038-000736-B034-384http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/24.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061629 text/html 3796HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:08:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: System for low voltage batteries CALSTART User Forum Re: System for low voltage batteries [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Charles Behrens on September 04, 1996 at 00:18:52: In Reply to: System for low voltage batteries posted by Christer Svensson on September 04, 1996 at 00:18:02: : Anyone interested in systems for cha DC-DC conversion of very low : voltage battery systems? : We have developed basic technology for manipulating high power at 1-5 : V . One possible use is for low cell coun atteries, ich y be ls esitive to : overcharge, aging etc. : Contact me. My vehicle runs on 120V, so I would be very interested in this. Thank you. Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : : Anyone interested in systems for cha DC-DC conversion of very low: : voltage battery systems?: : We have developed basic technology for manipulating high power at 1-5: : V . One possible use is for low cell coun atteries, ich y be ls esitive to: : overcharge, aging etc.: : Contact me.: My vehicle runs on 120V, so I would be very interested in this. Thank you. Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-53IA038-000736-B034-362http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/56.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061616 text/html 3633HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:08:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: Mandates - what about it ? CALSTART User Forum Re: Mandates - what about it ? [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by Tom van Dyck on October 09, 1996 at 13:49:24: In Reply to: Mandates posted by Don Devlin on September 04, 1996 at 00:28:34: Hi ! I am a Belgian student, currently writing my thesis about consumer adoption of EVs. To my surprise I read about backing away from the CARB mandates; could somebody tell me exactly what is left of the original mandate (2% ZEV in 1998, 5 % in 2001 ,and 10% in 2003) ? Thanks in advance. Ciao, Tom Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : Hi !: I am a Belgian student, currently writing my: thesis about consumer adoption of EVs.: To my surprise I read about backing away from: the CARB mandates; could somebody tell me: exactly what is left of the original mandate: (2% ZEV in 1998, 5 % in 2001 ,and 10% in 2003) ?: Thanks in advance.: Ciao,: Tom Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-54IA038-000736-B034-277http://www.calstart.org:80/forum/messages/92.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061523 text/html 3397HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART User Forum  -- Re: financial helps for ev buying CALSTART User Forum Re: financial helps for ev buying [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] Posted by webmaster on January 09, 1997 at 11:03:46: In Reply to: financial helps for ev buying posted by luca del bo on September 18, 1996 at 22:13:09: This is a test message, please ignore! : I am collecting information about government helps for people which wont to buy an ev in USA. I mean: tax reduction, money grant etc. Thanks luca Follow Ups: Post a Followup Message Your Name Your E-mail Address Your Message Subject Comments: : This is a test message, please ignore!: : I am collecting information about government helps for people which wont to buy an ev in USA. I mean: tax reduction, money grant etc. Thanks luca Link URL (Optional) Link Title (Optional) Image URL (Optional) [ Follow Ups ] [ Post Followup ] [ CALSTART User Forum ] [ FAQ ] | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-55IA038-000736-B033-306http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0604.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061229 text/html 4931HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Design Optimization and Proof Testing ofSafety Containment Systems for FlywheelEnergy Storage Systems (FESS) Performing Organization: Tribology Systems, Inc. Technical POC: Lewis B. Sibley Phone: (610) 889-9088 Fax: (610) 993-0860 Project Summary: The TSIproprietary FESS safety containment design consists of a computercoordinated system of several simple, lowcost, yet powerful devices, combined in a unique manner,for the safe dissipation of all the flywheel kinetic energy at full FESS design speed. The initial designanalyses are now completed, and the first proof test will be conducted with WFC s commercialstationary FESS containment system using an intentionally defective, 500Wh gross energy, 30,000rpmmaximum design speed flywheel, to simulate the highly unlikely event of a catastrophic composite ringfailure in service. Second and third proof tests are planned on the current project, with designmodifications based on the results of the first test, and including lightweight containment materials. Akey characteristic of our system is a simple, lightweight device that absorbs flywheel energy at an initialcomputed rate greater than a megawatt and is designed to activate in 0.2 millisecond after the rupturedflywheel friction torque on its crash ring starts to rotate the containment housing in its own bearings,designed to survive 1.8 million pounds shock load, twice the maximum possible impact of a rupturedflywheel fragment. The entire FESS for stationary applications is mounted inside a square cabinet on the floor, with aspecial design to provide immediate self centering of the flywheel fragments while they still havesignificant kinetic energy. In this way, the initial impact unbalance will last no more than a millisecond ortwo, and will have no more serious effect on the assembled unit than a Design Optimization and ProofTesting of Safety Containment Systems for Flywheel Energy Storage Systems (FESS) washingmachine walking across the floor in its spindry mode. The contact surfaces of the flywheel on the crashring will have a TSIpatented, zerooutgassing, solidlubrication system to prevent excessive damage andheating of the interface, and to minimize flywheel disintegration. After the flywheel disintegrates into a fluidlike slurry, its maximum possible residual kinetic energy hasbeen computed and converted into a centrifugal pressure inside the containment housing and theresulting loads on the housing capscrews. Analysis shows that the computed maximum stress in thehousing is a factor of four below the ASME boiler code allowable stress and the capscrew loads are afactor of five below their rated breaking strength. Testing will be performed at Oak Ridge NationalLaboratories and will include highresponse recording and highspeed photography of all criticalparameters in the testing of our complete systems, so that we can improve the accuracy of ouranalyses and learn how to simplify and reduce the weight and cost of our system for EV and HEVapplications. Project Deliverables: Final report giving all the results of the analyses and tests, including genericengineering rules for FESS containment designs for both stationary and lightweight vehicularapplications. Project Schedule: The first test will be performed June 1996, the second in September 1996, andthe third test and final report will be completed during December 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-56IA038-000736-B033-319http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0605.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061237 text/html 2607HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Hybrid Electric Bradley Fighting VehicleDemonstrator Performing Organization: United Defense, L.P. Technical POC: Gordon Shafer Phone: (408) 289-2430 Fax: (408) 289-3597 Project Summary: The goal of this project is to design and install a high performance hybrid electricpropulsion system for a Bradley Fighting Vehicle (BFV). The objective is to demonstrate theautomotive and operational advantages of hybrid electric drive for tracked combat vehicles and todevelop high power density electric drive components for heavyduty applications. Activitiesinclude:design and fabrication of propulsion system components (an induction motorbased sprocketdrive system, a 275 kW Auxiliary Power Unit (APU), NiMH batterybased energy storage system,and a networkbased power management controller), installation of the components into a GFEBFVA0 chassis and support to subsequent testing and vehicle demonstrations. Project Deliverables: A running vehicle, demonstrations, final report Project Schedule: The project was initiated in June 1995 and will conclude dynamometer testing inSeptember 1997. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-57IA038-000736-B034-26http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0607.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061250 text/html 2365HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:05:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: All Electric Combat Vehicle Study Performing Organization: Hybrid Electric M113 Demonstrator Technical POC: Alan Loss Phone: (408) 289-3972 Fax: (408) 289-3597 Project Summary: The goal of this project is to upgrade the existing electric drive M113 personnelcarrier to improve performance and space efficiency. Activities include: design and fabrication of anadvanced lead acid batterybased energy storage system, a 55 kW Auxiliary Power Unit (APU), adistributed networkbased vehicle power management system, installation of these components and alow noise band track into the existing electric drive M 113 and support to subsequent testing andvehicle demonstrations. Project Deliverables: A running vehicle, demonstrations, final report Project Schedule: The project was initiated in June 1995 and will complete vehicle assembly inDecember 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-58IA038-000736-B033-293http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0603.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061223 text/html 3390HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Polymer MultiLayer Capacitors and Batteries Performing Organization: Sigma Labs, Inc. Technical POC: Ted Miller Phone: (520) 575-8013 Fax: (520) 742-0975 Project Summary: Sigma Labs' PML technology is progressing toward the production of extremelyhigh performance energy storage devices. PML refers to a production process and type of materialconsisting of multilayers of polymer and metal (typically 1 M/layer). The composition of both thepolymers and the metals can be tailored for specific applications. We are targeting two devices in thisproject; a high energy density electrostatic capacitor, and an ultra thin film lithium battery. Capacitor ML capacitors are constructed with multilayered polymer dielectrics and thin film metal electrodes.The short term energy density goal is 1 Wh/kg. The long term energy density goal is 20 Wh/kg. Thelong term power density goal is 1 MW/kg. By virtue of discharge times on the order of microseconds,we have already achieved 5 MW/kg discharges in lab experiments. Battery Lithium battery electrochemistry is being develCapacitor Poped with thin film polymer andpolymercomposite battery components that are PML compatible. The unique PML processing canexploit thin film geometry on a bulk materials scale that cannot be achieved with any other materialsproduction technique. A direct consequence is extraordinarily high power density. While the projectgoals are 400 W/kg, a much higher power density is expected without loss of energy density. Theproject energy density goal is 200 Wh/kg. Project Deliverables: Deliverables are best effort devices targeting the goals described above. The capacitors will be multilayerdevices. The batteries will be single cell thin film devices made withPML compatible materials. Project Schedule: The project was initiated in June 1995 and will conclude June 1997. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-59IA038-000736-B033-242http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0601.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061201 text/html 2424HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:14 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Utility Electric Vehicle (UEV) Performing Organization: Keystone Consortium Technical POC: Karl J. Holub Phone: (410) 7659005 Fax: (410) 9932532 Project Summary: The Keystone Consortium is actively pursuing the design for a safe and producible composite,electric powered pickup style truck. The composite structure will be primarily a toughened epoxy matrix withcontinuous glass fiber reinforcements. It is envisioned that once in production, filament winding and resin transfer oldingtechniques will be employed for composite fabrication. The vehicle will be front wheel drive and will incorporatestandard automotive safety features and "creature" comforts. Project Deliverables: Final Report including: Top Level UEV Design Manufacturing Plan/Processes Project Schedule: Performance evaluation unit and a "crash buck" to be available by January 1997. Final report due April 1997. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-60IA038-000736-B034-9http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0606.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061244 text/html 2344HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: All Electric Combat Vehicle Study Performing Organization: United Defense, L.P. Technical POC: Alan Loss Phone: (408) 289-3972 Fax: (408) 289-3597 Project Summary: The goal of this project is to prepare a study report for an All Electric CombatVehicle (AECV). Activities include: developing optimum architecture(s) for an allelectric combatvehicle system, defining key system and subsystem requirements for a Future Scout Vehicle (FSV),assessing critical technology areas for Integrated Hybrid Electric Power System (IHEPS), developingall electric combat vehicle and IHEPS concepts, and developing IHEPS critical componentdescriptions and development plans. Project Deliverables: Report documenting technology assessment and vehicle concepts Project Schedule: The project was initiated in June 1995 and will conclude May 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-61IA038-000736-B033-266http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv0602.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061211 text/html 2413HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Innovative Fixed Speed Ratio SYNKdrive Transmission for EV/HEV and EvaluationSupport Performing Organization: Synkinetics, Inc. Technical POC: James E. Maslow Phone: (617) 271-0220 Fax: (617) 271-9362 Project Summary: SYNKdrive technology promises to improve drivetrains for on/off road andamphibious/marine vehicles. The purpose of this project is to demonstrate SYNKdrive aplicability forEV/HEV vehicles in a commercially useful format that addresses military missions and functions. The program is dedicated to parametric evaluation of SYNKdrive technology via exhaustive inhousetesting on dynamometer. Based on test results, SYNKINETICS will design, fabricate, assemble, andanalyze, a 5 HP SYNKdrive transmission. Project Deliverables: 5 HP SYNKdrive transmission and final report. Project Schedule: The project was initiated in September 1995 and will be completed in late 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Mid Atlantic Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-62IA037-000725-B012-350http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0419.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060651 text/html 5700HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:58:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Power2 Power Mgmt, Storage System, & Integrated Traction Drive Performing Organization: SatCon Technology Corporation Technical POC: Monique Faucher, (617) 3490819 Project Summary: The goal of the Power Management and Storage (Power2) program is to develop a standardapproach to hybrid drive control and flywheel energy storage which will allow a selection of heat enginegenerators,traction motors and auxiliaries while providing consistency in achieving high system efficiency and operationalstability. SatCon believes that the Power2 system has wide dual use potential for military and commercialvehicles; thus it forms the heart of SatCon's DualUse, Modular Hybrid Electric Drive Train, which is beingdeveloped for commercialization. Advances in electronic controls, electric power devices and materials have led to a wide spread interest in electricand hybrid electric drive systems that take advantage of the compact, light weight nature of such drives and theirhighly efficient operating characteristics. The benefits for both military and commercial vehicles are plentiful,including improved fuel economy, cleaner operation, and higher power capability in smaller, lighter packages. Withthe thrust towards broad use of electric power for weapons, onboard sensors and survivability systems on militarytactical vehicles, utilization of electric and hybrid electric propulsion offers the synergistic opportunity to optimizepower generation and control and take advantage of these benefits. Through SatCon market research on hybrid drives, it was recognized that the majority of viable hybrid drive trainscould be characterized with some sort of power input from a heat engine/generator, some powermanagement/control and energy storage function, and some type of electric traction motor. It became apparentthat if a standard, reliable approach to the central control and energy storage could be developed, a variety ofapplications could be addressed with a single concept which solves the problem of multiple components workingeffectively together. In addition, by standardizing this system, reliable, crossapplication system control, highefficiency, system stability, and commonality of core components can be achieved. SatCon is well on the way to producing the Power2 system in prototype form for laboratory testing and evaluation.It will consist of a flywheel energy storage unit capable of 1.65 kWhr total stored mechanical energy (1.0 kWhrdeliverable energy), associated power electronics and flywheel controller, a system controller, and a coolingsystem; as shown in Figure 1. It will communicate with four external elements; the vehicle operator, the heatengine/generator, the traction motor, and the auxiliary power loads using the SAE J1850 network protocol. ThePower2 system will have three critical functions: 1) balance the power flow in the drive system by appropriatelycontrolling the flywheel, traction motor and heat engine, 2) use the flywheel to handle power flow transients to allowthe heat engine to operate at steady power, high efficiency state and, 3) control the vehicle in a responsive mannerdesired by the operator. Project Deliverables: Following completion of the prototype development and evaluation program, the prototypewill be available for integration into a vehicle for onboard testing. Although this will not reflect final packaging of thePower2 system, its performance can be evaluated via a vehicle test. The likely vehicle would be a walkin van,retrofitted with a suitable heat enginegenerator and traction motor. Interface control and inverter equipment willalso be required. The vehicle thus fitted would be available for track testing only, unless provisions are made forpackaging and qualification necessary to make it roadworthy. Project Schedule: The preliminary design of the Power2 system components is complete and detail design is60% complete; procurement of materials has begun and will continue into the summer. Each component will betested individually and then integrated into the Power2 system test cell. System integration and test is currentlyscheduled to occur Nov. 96 through May 97. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-63IA037-000725-B012-68http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0407.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060430 text/html 5861HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:56:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Optimization of an Induction Motor and Sensorless Speed Operation Performing Organization: Delphi Energy & Engine Management Systems, Delco Propulsion Systems Technical POC: K. Rajashekara, DelphiE, (317) 5793700 Project Summary: The focus of this project is to develop a highly efficient and reliable motor control system forinduction motors for deployment in electric and hybrid vehicles. Application of this technology to electric vehicles willbe investigated. The feasibility of extending this technology to electric buses and military applications will also beinvestigated. The main objective is to make the motor drive system operate at the highest possible efficiency at any givenoperation condition. This action will take place online. Several technologies will be investigated and the best chosento implement the efficiency optimization schemes. Fuzzy logic and neural network control strategies shown anenormous potential for advancing power electronics control technology. Another part of the project is to investigate the operation of the motor without using a speed sensor. Speedsensorless operation improves the reliability and reduces the cost of the overall drive system. For the advancement of electric vehicle development, the single most important technology, next to the battery, isthe power converter. The power converter control system significantly affects drive characteristics, efficiency, range,and all dynamic characteristics of the electric vehicle. It is necessary to have high efficiency, low weight, andreliable power converters in electric vehicles. Traditionally the efficiency is optimized based on the lookup tables. In slip frequency control schemes, the motor isrun at various slip frequencies for a given speed and motor current. The slip frequencies corresponding to maximumefficiencies for various operating conditions are stored in a lookup table. But this method depends on the motor. Foreach type of motor, this experiment has to be repeated. This is time consuming. In the proposed project, the efficiency is optimized by determining the minimum input power for a given outputpower. The flux is varied online to make the motor operate in the linear region and also to operate at a higherefficiency point. Under steadystate, lightload operation, the drive efficiency will be improved by reducing the fluxfrom the rated value so that, for the same developed torque, a balance is maintained between the motor's core lossand the copper loss. The realtime search method of control using fuzzy logic makes control independent ofmachine parameters and the adaptive control reduces convergence time. Fuzzy logic control enables online changing of the operating modes of the system. This makes it possible tooperate the motor at maximum efficiency under all operating conditions. Because fuzzy logic control provides thisflexibility, it is applicable to a wide range of electric vehicle applications including cars, buses, military tanks, andtrains. Neural network technology will be used for estimation of the rotor flux. The estimated flux will be used for closedloop flux control and it can also be used for direct field orientation control of the induction motor. Elimination of the speed sensor will make the system more reliable, less expensive, and more robust. The speedsensorless operation research work has been going on for the past 20 years. However, there is no practical speedsensorless based induction motor drive system in existence today. There is a lot of progress that has been made inthis area. The main problem is the nonlinear speedtorque characteristics of the motor and its parameter variationwith temperature, current, and frequency. Delphi will work jointly with the Purdue School of Engineering and Technology at Indiana UniversityPurdueUniversity at Indianapolis on a computational intelligence approach to speed sensorless operation that utilizes aneural network/fuzzy logic/evolutionary computation hybrid approach that provides a reliable, robust and inexpensivesolution despite the system nonlinearities and parameter variations. Project Deliverables: Final Project Report on Findings Project Schedule: Expected to begin May 1, 1996 & continue for 2 yrs. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-64IA037-000725-B011-4http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0221.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060127 text/html 4728HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Heavy-Duty Hybrid Electric Buses Performing Organization: Santa Barbara County Air Pollution Control District Technical Contact: Mahesh Talwar (805) 961-8922 Program Description Five hybrid electric buses will be converted or built in this program for use in three separate California locales. The buses will be operated in both commercial and military environments for performance, range, and durability. APS Systems, Inc. has converted one 28-foot and two 40-foot school bus-type transit buses at Vandenberg Air Force Base to a hybrid electric configuration. The buses are driven by twin 50-kilowatt air-cooled APS/Indramat AC power trains, giving the buses a top speed of approximately 50 mph. Power for the electric drive motors is supplied by lead-acid batteries, coupled to an auxiliary power unit (APU). The APUs on these buses are Cummins 4B 3.9-liter naturally aspirated spark ignition engines, operated on compressed natural gas. The buses achieve a range of approximately 180 miles, and their emissions have been tested in the range of 1.0-1.5 grams/brake-horsepower-hour of NOx. APS Systems, Inc. is also developing a purpose-built 40-foot heavy-duty hybrid electric transit bus. This bus will also be driven by APS/Indramat AC motors and controllers, with Saft nickel-cadmium batteries providing the power for the drive train. The APU is a turbocharged Cummins 4B 3.9 liter spark ignition engine, producing 50 kilowatts of electrical power. The engine will operate on natural gas. The curb weight of this bus will be approximately 20,400 pounds, representing a savings of approximately 8,000-9,000 pounds from a standard bus. The structural design of this bus is based on a smaller electric bus being constructed by APS under another CALSTART project. The APS bus will be used in regular transit service in the City of Lompoc. The fifth bus in this program is a conversion of a Gillig Phantom 40-foot transit bus. The bus was originally specified with an FMC motor, but Gillig will now perform the conversion with a Siemens drive train. This bus will also have a Cummins 4B 3.9 liter turbocharged engine running on natural gas for an auxiliary power unit and will include 30 kilowatt-hours of Horizon batteries for energy storage. The bus is designed for a range of approximately 200 miles. It will be used by the Golden Gate Transit District. Program Deliverables This program will produce and put into service five hybrid electric buses of various sizes, as well as the charging and refueling facilities. Detailed operational and performance data will also be collected and summarized through the CALSTART data acquisition effort. Program Schedule The three converted Vandenberg Air Force Base buses were delivered in late 1994. The APS purpose-built bus will be delivered in the summer of 1996, as will the Gillig bus. Participant Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder APS Systems, Inc.  bus developer Gillig Corporation  bus manufacturer Golden Gate Transit District  bus user Lompoc Transit Agency  bus user Santa Barbara County Air Pollution Control District  program manager Vandenberg Air Force Base  bus user Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-65IA037-000725-B010-326http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0217.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060053 text/html 3928HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:06 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: E/HEV Emissions Studies Performing Organization: Natural Resources Defense Council Technical Contact: Veronica Kun (213) 939-6900 Program Description In this program, the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) has led a two-phase effort to analyze and characterize the emissions associated with the operations of electric and hybrid electric vehicles, and the relative emission reduction benefits of using these vehicles instead of gasoline-powered vehicles. In the first phase, completed in June, 1994, NRDC and Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) researchers analyzed six different scenarios of varying electric vehicle sales, vehicle efficiency levels and miles driven, and recharging patterns in California. Under these scenarios, NRDC and EDF compared the tailpipe emissions from a gasoline-powered vehicle meeting ultra-low emission vehicle standards with the emissions from the mix of electrical power generation sources serving Southern California. The report found that electric vehicles (EVs) reduce emissions of reactive organic gases and nitrogen oxides - the main precursors of ozone - by 97-99%, compared to gasoline-powered vehicles. EVs also reduce the emissions of carbon monoxide, a pollutant with significant human health impacts, by similar amounts. EVs were also found to emit 49-66% less carbon dioxide than the 31 miles-per-gallon (mpg) gasoline cars and 21 mpg trucks evaluated. The fuel efficiency of these gasoline-powered vehicles would need to rise to 91 mpg and 41.5 mpg respectively, to match the electric vehicles analyzed. In Phase 2 of this program, the NRDC will analyze the potential emissions benefits of heavy-duty hybrid electric drive-trains for trucks and buses. This study will determine whether hybrid technology can improve the greenhouse gas and criteria pollutant emissions associated with dedicated natural gas and advanced diesel bus and truck engines. The study will quantify the emissions and fuel economy benefits of hybrid engines in their most promising heavy-duty applications, and compare these benefits to dedicated electric battery, natural gas and diesel technologies. Milestones The Phase 1 report was completed in June, 1994. The Phase 2 analysis and report will be completed by the end of 1996. Participants Advanced Research Projects Agency  Co-Funder Environmental Defense Fund  Research Assistance Natural Resources Defense Council  Program Manager Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-66IA037-000725-B013-329http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0516.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061007 text/html 2008HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:02:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Stealth Auxiliary Power Unit Performing Organization: Sustainable Power Systems POINT OF CONTACT: Donald Alessi Telephone: (407) 8634130 Program Summary: Develop a fuel cell power system based on HPower metal platelet technology as a low signature,range extender for an existing pickup truck. Benefits: Three times increase in fuel efficiency over fossil fueled combustion engine vehicle Standalone power source Range extender Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-67IA037-000725-B009-208http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0108.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055548 text/html 4028HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:48:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Electronic Sensors & Systems Division, Vehicle & Energy Programs Performing Organization: Northrop Grumman Corporation P.O. Box 17320MS B 420 Baltimore, MD 21203 Technical POC: Bruce Lenderking Fax: 41 09932532 EMail: lender@evl.bwi.wec.com Project Summary: Management and control of the charging and discharging of theEV battery are critical to achieving acceptable battery safety,battery life, and vehicle performance. The technology requiredto provide this critical function includes an integrated batterymanagement and monitoring system that controls the operation ofthe batteries in the vehicle during driving and charging operations.The battery management unit is intended to be integrated withthe vehicle's battery pack to direct the entire energy transferprocess for all levels of charging, including levels 1, 2, &3. The Society of Automotive Engineers guidelines soon to be givenin SAEJ2293 and SAEJ1772 guidelines for EV Conductive Chargingwill be used in establishing the interface requirements for thisproject. The battery management unit is intended to operate withuniversal charging equipment designed to meet EV industry guidelines. This project's goal is to develop a battery management unit thatwill be readily available to vehicle producers and battery companiesto enable a low cost battery management and monitoring capability.The unit is intended to operate with single or multiple largebattery strings made up of 12 volt modules. The unit will be capableof including multiple battery charging algorithms and handling the interface between the batterypack, the vehicle and the charging equipment. Project Deliverables:  Product Requirement and Specification Document. InstallationDrawing. Five (5) battery management units and associated hardwarefor installation and test with different battery types onboardvehicles.  Test report covering performance and safety test. Project Schedule: Milestone 1 Project Start: 5/1/96  Specifications & Analysis: 5/17/17/96  Milestone 2 (Design review & Product Specification)7/17/96  Develop & Test BEMS 7/1711/30/96  Milestone 3 (Installation Drawing) 10/23/96  Build BEMS 10/15/962/12/97  Integrate & Test 2/124/15/97  Milestone 4 (Start integration & Test) 2/12/97  Install & Check Out 4/154/30/97  Milestone 5 (Final Report) 4/30/97 Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-68IA037-000725-B013-127http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0504.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060813 text/html 3316HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Brush Testing for Magnetically Levitated Trains Performing Organization: American MAGFV Technology, Inc., Parker Kinetic Designs, Inc.; University of Texas at Austin, Center for Electromechanics POC: Tony Morris, Telephone (404) 4282900 Program Summary: The purpose of this project is to design and construct a high speed (300 mph) commutated brushtester using as much existing hardware as possible at UT/CEM Next. we were to measure brush wearrates and characterize brush behavior of a commercial brush material (from Morganite CMIS). ofadvanced fiber brushes (from Dr. Doris Kuhlman-Wilsdorf, University of Virginia), and of homopolarpulsed consolidated copper/graphite brush material (from UT/CEM) under commutated currentconditions and speed similar to predicted operating conditions on a Magler Train. The goal of theproject was to determine what set of brush material and operating conditions should be used as designparameters for future rush commutated Maglev trains to provide acceptable wear life. The potential benefit of conducting this test program, and carrying it further as recommended above, isto enable the advanced cost effective magnetically levitated train concept currently under developmentby American Maglev to come to fruition. Additionally, advances in brush wear behavior resulting fromthis testing program will substantially improve the behavior and efficiency of other brushed electricalmachines such as continuous duty homopolar traction motors for electric vehicle applications. DELIVERABLES: The deliverable for this program is a final report detailing the design, construction, and testing results ofthe high speed commutated brush test system. SCHEDULE: The project is complete as proposed (8/95). Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-69IA037-000725-B009-290http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0112.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055651 text/html 3306HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:49:03 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Alternative Battery Testing Performing Organization: U.S. Electricar 5 Thomas Mellon Circle, Suite 5 San Francisco, CA 94132 Technical POC: Rick Duste Phone: 415-656-2414 Fax: 415-656-2402 EMail: Project Summary: Integration of five different advanced batterytechnologies into the US Electricar S10 pickup trucks poweredby the GM Delco Dolphin 50  drive system. Five technologiesinclude GNB Lead Acid, Optima Spiral Wound Lead Acid, ElectrosourceHorizon Lead Acid, SAFT NiCad, and Powercell Zinc Bromine. Vehicleswill have rapid charging capability with 100 kW Electronic PowerTechnology, Inc. Charger. Structural analysis and 30 mph frontal impact crash analysis tobe performed for each battery type. Working DYNA3D computer modelto be supplied to the University of Hawaii at Manoa. (UH) Installation of full vehicle dynamometerand battery testing equipment in Hawaii. Battery testing and datacollection from onboard Detection Limit Technology acquisitionsystems to be reported to Electric & Hybrid Vehicle NationalData Center at UH. On road testing for 12 months. Project Deliverables: Four S10 pickup trucks equipped with GNB batteries. Four S10 pickup trucks equipped with Optima batteries. Three S10 pickup trucks equipped with Electrosource batteries. Three S10 pickup trucks equipped with SAFT batteries. Three S10 pickup trucks equipped with Powercell batteries.. Dynamometer Battery Test Equipment Structural and crash analysis reports Working DYNA3D model simulating 30 mph frontal crash Project Schedule: Project start date 10/1/95 Project duration 18 months Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-70IA037-000725-B013-64http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0501.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060745 text/html 2622HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:59:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: 31foot Purpose Built Bus and Rapid Charger Performing Organization: Delco Remy/Allison. Georgia Power; Electric Transit Vehicle Institute; Chattanooga Area Regional Transportation Authority POC: John Powell, Telephone (615) 622-3884 Program Summary: A 31ft transit quality electric bus will be developed with a new generation AC drive system; sealed,maintenancefree lead acid batteries; and rapid recharge. It will be demonstrated at Chattanooga's"Living Laboratory" and in Atlanta (Georgia Power/MARTA). Tests will be conducted after breakin andafter 24 months; battery charger performance will be characterized by Georgia Power. Rapid rechargesystem will be developed and located in Chattanooga (see 93 SCAT Project #13 GA). The benefit: The project, in addition to developing a clean public transportation vehicle, will provide aclean understanding of the potential of an advanced AC induction wheel motor and system on a large(16,000 lb.) vehicle. Additionally, the effectiveness of the rapid recharge will be tested which, ifsuccessful, can be easily modified to charge other vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-71IA037-000725-B011-288http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0404.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060355 text/html 2663HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:56:08 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: NYCTA Bus Retrofit & Demonstration Performing Organization: Allison Transmission Division of GMC, Delco Propulsion Systems Technical DOC: Fred Cartwright, ATD, (317) 2420665 Project Summary: This project involves a partnership between Delco Propulsion Systems (DPS), New York CityTransit Authority (NYCTA) and DARPA to demonstrate a series hybrid propulsion system in an existing 40foot RT5bus. The hybrid solution is seen as an alternative to the midlife overhaul of the conventional powertrain, i.e., at the78 year milestone in vehicle life, existing buses could be retrofitted with a clean and efficient hybrid powertrain. DPSwill convert an existing bus to hybrid electric and then deliver it to NYCTA for 6 months of operation. Significant DPStechnology will be applied to this project from the EVI program. Project Deliverables: One (I) DPS single motor series hybrid system installed in a 40foot RT5 bus and demonstrated in NYC. Project Schedule: This project is currently under negotiations. Vehicle will be retrofitted and delivered to NYCTA within 24 months from project goahead. It will then be tested in NYC for 6 months. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-72IA038-000736-B034-194http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0710.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061441 text/html 6262HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:06:54 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Project Sunrise Performing Organization: Solectria Project Goals and Technologies Solectria Corporation is a small electric vehicle and component manufacturer based near Boston, MA.The company has sold over 200 electric vehicles, both 4 passenger sedans called the Force and light dutypick up trucks called E10's. The company in its t year history has produced drive systems with provenreliability for solar and electric racing vehicles, for OEM electric vehicle programs, and for its ground updesign vehicle called the Sunrise. All Solectria vehicles including the Sunrise feature Solectria drivesystems which collectively have logged well over l ,000,000 miles of onroad experience. Sunrisc is a sleek. all composite, monocoque electric vehicle It is a ground up design based on thepremise of creating a safe, affordable, high efficiency, lightweight electric sedan. Its roomy interior offerspassenger space close to the of a Ford Taurus. Its exterior utilizes a very aerodynamic tear drop shapewith a low coefficient of drag. Rite Sunrise's lightweight/cight design and advanced drive system will offer afleet and family electric vehicle with exceptional range at a reasonable cost. Solectria designed the vehicle from initial concepts to working sketches to computer models to claymodels and then mockups before the first body was made. over the first year of the program, mastershapes were developed and initial tooling was made followed by a rolling and then a drivable prototype.The vehicle wave first unveiled at the EVS-12 show at Disneyland in Los Angeles, CA on December It,1994. Since EVS l 2* more bodies and prototype vehicles have been produced. The Sunrise development teats has selected and tested specific composite materials to achieve bothstructural requirements and cost effective manufacturing in low volumes. This proprietary mix of materialsand processes is the core of the body development area of the Sunrise program. Advanced vehicle systems designed specifically for EVs have also been incorporated into the Sunrisedesign. A low costair cooled AC induction drive system, a flexible battery tunnel design, passenger andbattery ventilation systems, and an advanced battery thermal management system are just some of theinnovations that are featured m the vehicle. The Sunrise has proven itself by demonstrating exceptional range both on the road and in dynamometertesting. At the 1995 American Tour de Sol race, the Sunrise equipped with Ovonic Nickel Metal Hydridebatteries traveled over 238 miles on a single charge in mixed city ant highway driving. And in recent SAE 1634 profile testing, the Sunrise with Ovonic Nickel Metal Hydride batteries traveled 199.5 miles on a single charge. The Sunrise safety program has also achieved numerous milestones. Extensive modeling and actual frontend testing has shown consistent, predictable results. In late 1995, an engineering prototype vehicle wassubjected to a full vehicle 30 mph frontal impact test at an accredited facility. All passenger injury scoreswere extremely low significantly less than 50% of the maximum guidelines. Funding for the development of Sunrisc has come through the US Department of Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (ARPA) coordinated by the Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium (NAVC).Sunrise is being developed with the assistance of many key industry and academic partners includingTPI, Textron, Boston Edison Company and the University of Massachusetts-Lowell. The development program is continuing with the current design for manufacturing phase along withcontinuation of the FMVSS test program. Systems are being refined to meet the manufacturable Costgoals while still maintaining aggressive weight targets. Limited production is targeted for 19981999. Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-73IA037-000725-B013-268http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0513.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060935 text/html 2240HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:01:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Pickup Truck Conversions Performing Organization: Westinghouse Electric; Georgia Power, Georgia Tech GNB; Warner Robins AFB POINT OF CONTACT: Randy Webber Telephone: (410) 7653958 Program Summary: Four Dakota pickups will be converted to electric drive Three will be demonstrated at Robins AFB; onewill be used in the Georgia Power Company fleet for test and evaluation The pickups will useWestinghouse drive systems with integration done at Georgia Power. Benefit: Supports Presidential EO for military base AFVs. Schedule: All battery sets have been delivered and installed in vehicles All vehicles have been delivered to Robins and are generating data for NDC. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-74IA038-000736-B034-74http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0703.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061320 text/html 4705HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:05:32 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: The Northern Region Thermal Management Technology Project Performing Organization: Evermont Program Description The Verrnont Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project was awarded a third grant from theDepartment of Defense's Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) and the NortheastAlternative Vehicle Consortium (NAVC) to continue further development of electric vehiclebattery and cabin thermal management systems to address issues of cabin comfort andwinter range. This grant funds the Northern Region Thermal Management TechnologyProject which continues electric vehicle testing and data acquisition and technologydevelopment in Vermont Project Goals The Northern Region Thermal Management Technology Project will focus on five specificareas of electric vehicle technology development. First, battery thermal management for lead-acid and nickel metal hydride batteries will beanalyzed and improved. Improving battery thermal management will contribute to increasedvehicle range and improved performance in cold temperatures. To address this issue, one l9^Solectria Force vehicle will be designed with an advanced battery box to improve batterythermal management and one 1996 Solectria Force will be powered by nickel metalhydride batteries. Second. cold weather technologies will be refined and advanced. The Northeast AdvancedThermal Management Technology Project (NATMTP) selected and integrated fuel firedheaters into Solectria Force sedans and determined that a S kilowatt fuel fired coolantbeater provides optimum cabin comfort. NATMTP also tested tires, low viscositylubricants, healed seats ant steering wheels, a desiccant wheel and thermal windshields.The Northern Region Thermal Management Technology Project will build on thesetechnologies and continue to improve heat conservation and retention. Specifically, a cabinpreheat system will be advanced and adapted for a remote control, a fuel fired heater willhe integrated into an E10 pickup truck and vehicle insulation will be improved. Third, the Northern Region Thermal Management Technology Project will develop alightweight air conditioning system to integrate with heating systems in electric vehicles.Lightweight air conditioners will decrease vehicle weight thereby increasing efficiency andvehicle performance. Furthermore, the integration of heating and air conditioning increasesconsumer acceptance and marketability of electric vehicles. Fourth, a thermal energy management control system will he investigated. Through thisinvestigation it will be determined whether a single control system should coordinatebattery and cabin heating. A coordinated system may be able to maximize the use ofwaste heat for cabin heating. Fifth, the potential utility and desirability of an auxiliary power unit (APU) will beinvestigated. An APV could provide additional power to recharge and increase vehiclerange. Its waste heat could be utilized to increase cabin healing. While an APU mayimprove vehicle range, its adaption into electric vehicles must also be evaluated to avoidcompromising the current lack of noise and air pollution achieved by electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-75IA037-000725-B011-153http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0307.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060253 text/html 3942HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:55:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Neighborhood Electric Vehicle Project Performing Organization: Pacific Electric Vehicles Technical POC: William Warf (707) 4855799 Project Summary: The objective of this project is to provide a low cost compositematerials based two passenger neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) suitable forregional American markets. An initial project task was the purchase and evaluation of 3wheel CityE1 NEVsthrough use in representative fleets and privatedriver programs. Through the end of1995, these demonstration NEVs have logged nearly 60,000 miles. This initial evaluation program helped characterize driving patterns and reinforcedthat an NEV can effectively meet transportation needs in many industrial, urban andsuburban environments where low performance (speed and range) is acceptable. The initial evaluation also helped identify design changes that would enhance theacceptance of NEVs across a broader market. These include modification to a4wheel layout (to improve stability), and better driver protection (improvedcrashworthiness). A completely new, ground up NEV, called the Peregrin, was developed with thesechanges in mind. The design is a monocoque construction capable of >40 mph more than adequate for surface street use. The design uses conventional fibermatrix materials and processes to keep costsdown, yet the objective of satisfying Federal Safety Standards has been retained inthe design process making this the safest NEV now under development. NEVs have the potential for greatly increased efficiency over traditional vehicles.Although not targeted at the ambitious performance objectives of the PNGV, manycommon areas of interest are involved in the Peregrin design. This purposebuiltNEV can be used for design configuration and subsystem evaluation, setting thestage for higher performance versions. Project Deliverables: The primary objective of this project is production of aprototype NEV, the Peregrin, to be used in design development testing, marketstudy, and funding development. Completed activities include field testing of 40+NEVs in public street and private industrial service. Redesign of thermoplasticcanopy tops for improved failure mode, as well as charger, battery and componenttesting has been completed. Project Schedule: The Peregrin prototype will be complete in May of 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-76IA037-000725-B012-277http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0416.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060609 text/html 3230HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:58:20 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Infrastructure & Energy EndUse Metering Performing Organization: PSI Energy, Indianapolis Power & Light Technical POC: Madelyn Harwood, PSI Energy, (317) 8381518 Jim Wittman, IPL, (317) 2618214 Project Summary: PSI Energy and Indianapolis Power & Light have provided or will be providing the properinfrastructure to support the operation of the Electricore electric pickup trucks and hybrid electric buses at theusersites. This support includes outlet and circuit installation for each vehicle and ongoing technical support. Electricore, EPRI, and PSI Energy are working in consortium with others to analyze performance parameters ofEV. PSI Energy is adding their enduse metering expertise to quantify the battery charging system. Vehicles beingtested have an onboard charging system  when the batteries approach depletion, the operator plugs the car intoany 220volt outlet and the batteries reach full charge in a matter of hours. PSI teamed with ABB to use their Alphaelectric utility reserve meter for EV charging analysis. The Alpha is an electronic meter capable of kW, kVA, andkVAR metering. It is designed to handle a variety of voltages. A compact, redesigned meter called the PortableAlpha emerged. It is enclosed in a tough plastic case and can meter consumption of various voltage levels. Inanalyzing EV charging, the meter allows the time and date to be stored, along with the consumption during a15minute time interval. Months of data can be stored in the meter. Data is retrieved via an optical port. Project Deliverables: Infrastructure support and data acquisition support for electric pickup demonstration. Project Schedule: Ongoing & concurrently with electric pickup/bus demonstration. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-77IA037-000725-B013-195http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0509.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060844 text/html 2242HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:57 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Efficient LED Lighting Performing Organization: Florida Solar Energy Center POC: Bill Young, Telephone (407) 7830300 ext. 137 Program Summary: FSEC will evaluate, design, build and test vehicle light fixtures using LEDs as the light source. Thedesign will maximize energy efficiency and minimize cost while maintaining the safety standards ofexisting automotive fights. The vehicle for testing will be a Patrick AFB electric vehicle. The benefits: LEDs use less energy than incandescent bulbs by about 80 percent Greater visibility is obtained with LEDs Life of a LED is ten times that of most other bulbs Heat signature is much less than incandescent Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-78IA038-000736-B034-127http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0706.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061404 text/html 2927HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:06:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: High Performance DCDC Converter Performing Organization: Solectria Project Goals and Technologies Utilize Supercapacitors Or battery load levelling. Extend range and life of bakeries. Develop microprocessor controlled DCDC converter to interface supercapacitor to battery. Develop new algorithm to fully utilize supercapacitor. Secondary goal is to be able to use this DCDC converter to boost a low voltage battery (or perhaps fuel cell power supply) up to necessary high voltage for new motor controllers. Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-79IA037-000725-B009-155http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0105.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055521 text/html 3414HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:47:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: 40 Ft Hybrid Electric Transit Bus Performing Organization: Kaman Electromagnetics Corporation 2 Fox Road Hudson, MA 01749 Technical POC: David Mikoryak Phone: 508-562-2933 Fax: 508-562-6830 EMail: emlO32kec1@kaman.com Project Summary: Kaman Electromagnetics Corporation (Kaman) has converted a 40ft transit bus from a diesel engine based power pack to a hybridelectric propulsion system configuration. Kaman was the prime contractor in the development, installation, check out, and testof the hybrid electric propulsion system. The bus is powered bya propane fueled rotary engine generator set and a NiCd batterypack that feeds a Kaman PA44 drive motor and power electronics.The motor drives the existing bus rear differential allowing foreasier vehicle conversion. The complete system provides full fourquadrant operation to permit regenerative braking as well as propulsionin both forward and reverse. Kaman was responsible for the complete propulsion system on thehybrid electric bus. Engineers developed a top level system designto fit the hybrid electric propulsion system into the existingbus without altering passenger capacity or vehicle structure.The operation and performance of the hybrid electric system aresimilar to the operation of a conventional diesel powered bus.Kaman developed the specifications for the system software, batteries,battery regulator, vehicle control system, generator set, anddrive motoripower electronics. The system software is realtimemultitasking that was originally developed in accordance withthe DOD MILSTD 2167A and MIL STD 2168 software development standards,resulting in a high level of maintainability and flexibility. Project Deliverables: One prototype 40 ft transit bus witha hybrid electric propulsion system. Project Schedule: The bus will be in Hawaii on or aboutMay 1, 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-80IA037-000725-B010-103http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0205.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055845 text/html 3137HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:50:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Running Chassis Performing Organization: Amerigon Incorporated Technical Contact: Kevin Gunning (818) 932-1200 Program Description Building upon our Running Chassis I modular EV platform, this program carries forward the development of two new cars: the advanced EV4 prototype and the Basic Electric Vehicle (BEV). EV4 is an aluminum framed 4-passenger sedan intended for industrialized countries, while BEV is a small, simple, 2+2 sedan suitable for export to developing countries. These vehicles realize the promise of our ARPA-funded R&D by demonstrating commercial acceptability of EVs for a variety of missions. The project is also creating a new export market for the U.S. through production of complete vehicle kits, related electronics and low cost plastic body panels. EV4 BEV Wheelbase (m) 2.48 1.65 Curb weight (kg) 1470 310 Maximum speed (kph) 120 65 Range (km) 100-150 60-80 Milestones November 1995 - complete BEV operational, January 1996 - EV4 running chassis operational, March 1996 - EV4 running chassis operational, March 1996 - chassis structure exported, April 1996 - complete BEV operational. Participants Advanced Research Projects Agency  Program funder Amerigon Incorporated  Program manager and prime contractor California Energy Commission  Program funder Hughes Electronics  Provider of AC Drive system Trojan Battery Co.  Provided chassis lead-acid battery pack Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-81IA037-000725-B014-34http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0520.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061102 text/html 4210HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:03:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Electromechanical Active Vehicle Suspension Program Performing Organization: University of Texas, Center for Electromechanics State of Texas, State Match Pool POINT OF CONTACT: Joe Beno The University of Texas at Austin, Center for Electromechanics Telephone: (512) 4714496 Program Summary: The Center for Electromechanics at the University of Texas (UTCEM) has an ongoing program todevelop vehicle active electromechanical suspension (EMS) systems. The program began with fundingfrom the National Automotive Center at the U. S. Army Tank and Automotive Command to perform afullscale, proofofprinciple demonstration of an EMS system for an M1 tank. The demonstrationconsisted of a single wheel station (equivalent to quarter car model for a convential four wheeledvehicle), with the vehicle mass simulated by a 5 ton concrete block (the weight supported by one M1roadwheel station). Vertical terrain displacements were simulated with a hydraulic ram. in the courseof the project, UTCEM developed a new approach to active suspension control, referred to as a NearConstant Force Suspension, that allows simplified control strategies; does not require advanced terrainknowledge (lookahead); and has demonstrated fourfold cross country speed increases withsimultaneous sixfold reductions in sprung mass accelerations (compared to existing M1performance)) over very rough offroad terrain. Performance plots for the existing M1 tank wheel stationwith passive suspension components (shown on left) and EMS active suspension (right) are comparedbelow for severe 500 foot terrain input track. In our current followon project, funded by ARPA, UTCEM is adapting the concept from M1 tanktrailing arm configuration to dual Aarm configurations, as is found in commercial and military wheeledvehicles Control strategies are being expanded to a four wheel laboratory test platform.. Experimentalresults are showing similar performance benefits to the single wheel test rig The final (future) phase ofthe military program would apply the results of the first two projects to a military offroad vehicle, suchas the HMMWV UTCEM has been selected for a joint TACOMARPA project to develop advancedlinear actuators that will be required for this application. In a related effort, Houston Metropolitan Transit Authority (HMTA) has indicated a desire to apply theEMS concepts to a transit bus, under the auspices of their "Next Generation Bus!' program LotusEngineering, with their successful experience in active suspension systems for onroad, wheeledvehicles, is a major subcontractor in the HMTA effort This effort is schedule to start on April 1,1996. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-82IA037-000725-B010-244http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0214.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055953 text/html 3474HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:52:06 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: High-Efficiency HVAC System for EVs Performing Organization: Glacier Bay Technical Contact: Kevin Alston (415) 578-0871 Program Description Glacier Bay, the leading manufacturer of high-performance marine cooling systems, is bringing its innovative design concepts to the electric and hybrid electric vehicle market. Glacier Bay has developed and is currently marketing an HFC-134a cooling system which has been rated by a marine products independent testing agency as the most energy efficient on the market. In this program, Glacier Bay will adapt their patented high-efficiency temperature control systems to electric and hybrid electric vehicles. The Glacier Bay technology will produce a 50% reduction of energy consumption by the heating and air conditioning system, compared to today's most efficient prototypes; a 50% reduction in the size and weight of the system; increased heat output in cold climates (operating down to -14 C); and reduced maintenance, as a result of the hermetically sealed design. The Glacier Bay system is expected to provide an energy efficiency rating of 11.22 under severe driving conditions, with an average rating of 15 under normal operations. This compares to a rating of 6.17 for the most efficient prototype available today, as recently tested by the Electric Power Research Institute. The Glacier Bay system will also be designed to accommodate a range of operating voltages, obviating the need for a separate battery pack for the heating and cooling system. Milestones During the first twelve months of the project, Glacier Bay will design and bench test the prototype system. By the end of the 18-month project period, Glacier Bay will test the production version in two electric vehicles. Participants Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Glacier Bay  program manager MFM Technology  motor production PIVCO  test vehicle supplier Tannehill Engineering  power control electronics Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-83IA037-000725-B011-42http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0302.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060144 text/html 5450HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:57 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Electrosource Maximizer Charge Management System Performing Organization: Electrosource, Inc. Technical POC: Rick Blanyer (512) 4456606 Project Summary: The Electrosource Maximizer Charge Management System(MAX CMS) was developed in 1995 to ensure longer life for advanced batteries a necessary and significant advance in EV/HEV technology. The project objective isto bring the system from its present breadboard form to a road worthy state forvehicle applications. Benefits Extends the life of valve regulated leadacid (VRLA) and other advanced batteries. Prevents overcharging, and monitors overdischarging. Optimizes performance by balancing the capacity of each battery within the pack. Performs diagnostics for troubleshooting. Records voltage and temperature excursions. Improves range and battery life permitting substantial cost savings for PNGV vehicles. Project Deliverables: Build a printed circuit board based version of the master controller using discrete components. Incorporate the necessary communication links for control, diagnostics and displays. Design the vehicle CMS installation, install the CMS, data logger and display. Perform a system validation test. Fabricate, test and install the MAX CMS in an electric vehicle operating under normal conditions. Features . Designed with a sensing/balancing node located on and powered by the batterymodule itself. Nodes continuously monitor battery voltage and temperature, recordsextremes, and time stamp these as they occur.  Master controller processes this information and manages battery charging via apulse width modulated (PWM) signal circuit, allowing the bulk and finishing chargecurrents to be tailored for each individual battery module. Status . The MAX CMS has been tested in its breadboard form and has successfullydemonstrated its charge control and data monitoring and storage features on packsof up to twentyseven batteries. Project Schedule: This sevenmonth project will provide an economical and reliable ChargeManagement System that optimizes both the performance and useful life of sealed,maintenancefree batteries. Through temperature compensation and controlled charge/discharge cycles for eachbattery, uniform capacity is maintained and life is extended by minimizingovercharge and overdischarge conditions within the battery pack. Without BMS: Typical battery charging systems and discharge meters tend to treatbattery packs as if they were a single battery. This, however, can be very costly. Dueto both manufacturing tolerances and temperature differences across the pack, theactual state of charge can vary substantially. After multiple cycles, this can result inovercharging individual batteries causing thermal degradation of the electrolyte.Similarly, individual batteries can be overdischarged resulting in prematureelectrode corrosion. In both cases, battery life is needlessly shortened, and range willbe limited by the unbalanced battery pack. WITH BMS: A Battery Management System (BMS) can extend the life of a batterypack by treating each battery individually. The BMS measures the temperature ofeach battery and tailors the charge profile delivered to each battery accordingly.Similarly, the state of charge is measured for each battery, ensuring that no singlemodule is unknowingly overdischarged. By keeping the pack "balanced", andminimizing both over charge and overdischarge conditions, the overall performanceof the battery pack is improved (up to 20% greater capacity) and life is enhanced. Asthe battery pack is a high cost element of an EV, the use of a BMS can lead tosubstantial savings over the life cycle. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-84IA037-000725-B010-61http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0202.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055803 text/html 2946HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:50:16 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Testing and Analysis of High Risk Components for Hybrid Reconnaissance Vehicles Performing Organization: AeroVironment Inc Technical Contact: Catherine Anderson, AeroVironment (818) 357-9983 John La Plant, Rod Millen Motorsport (714) 847-2111 Program Description AeroVironment (A/V) and Rod Millen Motorsports are evaluating and testing a wide range of high risk components for the second generation Advanced Hybrid Electric Reconnaissance Vehicle (AHERV). The areas of focus will be upon technologies that would greatly enhance the success of these future vehicles. Among those technology areas are: hybrid electric drive trains, traction motors, advanced suspension systems, batteries, battery management systems, low EMI power electronics, EMI/EMP hardened control electronics, low acoustic signature transmissions, two-speed electrically shifted transmissions, electric pumps and peripherals, high power bi-directional DC- DC converters, active ride height and roll angle control, active damping control, lightweight central tire inflation systems, platform stabilization systems, and high performance differential development. A/V seeks to develop and test these technologies on the existing Joint Tactical Electric Vehicle. Milestone A comprehensive study and analysis of components mentioned above will be completed over a 24 month period. Participants AeroVironment - Propulsion System Developer Rod Millen Motorsport - Vehicle Developer Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-85IA037-000725-B012-158http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0411.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060517 text/html 6400HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:57:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Virtual Proving Grounds Performing Organization: The University of Iowa Technical POC: Prof. Edward J. Haug, (319) 3355726 Project Summary: A high fidelity virtual proving ground is being developed for prototyping family sizedautomobiles with hybridelectric drives. Upon implementation, such vehicles will be simulated in the vehicle virtualproving ground being developed by the University of Iowa, using validated electric powertrain subsystem modelsand data provided by the PNGV Systems Analysis Team. The goal of the project is to (1) create a proving ground design that includes high fidelity models of a family sizepassenger vehicle for which conventional powertrain data are available, (2) implement in subsequent projects aspectrum of hybridelectric powertrain models in driving simulator dynamics software with data that have beenvalidated by industry partners, and (3) to subsequently test and demonstrate differences between performance andderivability of the validated conventionally powered vehicle and hybridelectric powered vehicle systems using thedriving simulatorbased proving ground. For a typical hybridelectric vehicle model, the virtual proving ground will support the following capabilities: (1) Ahigh fidelity multibody mechanical dynamics simulation program; (2) A state space modeling capability for generalalgebraic and differential equations; (3) A mathematical library that includes linear algebra, optimization andnumerical integration functions; (4) Specific technical libraries for modeling control algorithms and electric circuits;(5) Specific technical libraries for modeling mechanical force modules; (6) A numerical library for datarepresentation and reporting; and (7) A model animation tool. Even though models could be built using a high level computer language, such as C or FORTRAN, in order todesign an effective virtual proving ground for hybridelectric vehicles, computer packages that have been designedspecifically for simulation of general dynamic systems that are currently being used in the engineering communityrepresent a better choice. MATLAB will be used as the simulation environment for the virtual proving ground. Dueto the complexity of vehicle models and the availability of vehicle models with different degrees of fidelity, DADS ischosen as the multibody dynamics simulation program. DADS version 8.0 includes the interface necessary tointeract with MATLAB. Within the MATLAB environment, a hybridelectric power system model is constructedusing the SIMULINK graphic simulation language, built in numerical functions, and application specific ' libraries(toolboxes). If the degree of complexity of the core mechanical vehicle model is anything but simplified, then amodel within the DADS 8.0 environment will be linked to the model in MATLAB. Parallel technology developments being carried out by the University of Iowa are implementing and validatingselected components of the virtual proving ground. The driving simulation environment created undercomplementary DoD and DOT projects using the Iowa Driving Simulator (IDS), and ultimately the NationalAdvanced Driving simulator (NADS) whose development is proceeding under funding of $47 million from the DOTand State of Iowa, is enabling this project to focus on unique aspects of hybridelectric vehicles. A modularstructure for simulation of drivetrain and control subsystems that are typical of electric and hybridelectric vehiclesis being designed to be compatible with subsystem models being developed under complementary ARPA andDOT support. Using this design, high fidelity models of electric and hybridelectric vehicle subsystems developedby a number of organizations can be integrated into realtime software that is operational on the Iowa DrivingSimulator. This fundamentally new capability will also be implemented in a nonrealtime computer aidedengineering (CAE) environment, for use by DoD, coalition partners, and the PNGV. Project Deliverables: The design of a high fidelity hybridelectric vehicle virtual proving ground will be delivered toguide work in subsequent application projects for (1) creating highly realistic hybridelectric vehicle models thatcan be used for subsystem testing and development in a broadly applicable hybridelectric vehicle virtual provingground, (2) integrating vehicle models and data that are based on extensively tested contemporary hybridelectricpowertrain subsystems, (3) supporting test and validation or vehicle electric power subsystem models that arebeing developed under the ARPA hybrid-electric combat vehicle program, and (4) providing a unique new capabilityfor PNGV to carryout tradeoff studies involving vehicle handling and derivability. Project Schedule: Virtual proving ground design will be completed by October, 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-86IA037-000725-B012-371http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0420.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060712 text/html 3259HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:59:21 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title:Battery Thermal Management Performing Organization: Shape Energy Resources Technical POC: Dr. Alexander Rafalovich, (800) 2864753 Project Summary: The purpose of this project is to establish a field trial of aPhase Change Material (PCM) based battery thermal management system for electric vehicles. The benefits of this battery thermal management approach have been quantified in a mathematical model, which has been validatedthrough lab tests conducted by Hawker Energy. In addition, some limited vehicle testing has been accomplishedthrough Hawker's Oldham France division, as well as through their joint EV development program with Rover.However, a much more comprehensive field test is required beyond these initial steps, preferably conducted in amore severe climate. Such data will be collected in this trial to provide the facts necessary to better establish theprecise quantifiable impacts of battery thermal management on overall battery life, reliability, and operating range. Project Deliverables: Nine key elements including: 1) PCM selection & testing; 2) encapsulation materialscompatibility testing; 3) encapsulation system design; 4) control system design & test; 5) prototype production; 6)field test plan; 7) field test vehicle prototype installation; 8) field test; 9) field test results analysis and validation Project Schedule: Six key milestones have been established and include the following completion dates: system design 3131196; selection of test platform and field trial site visit; test vehicle system prototype installation 10/01/96; proof of concept field cycle 12/31/96; expanded field trial given positive proof of concept 3/15/97; final project report 8/15/97 Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-87IA037-000725-B009-67http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0102.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055402 text/html 6582HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:45:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Data Acquisition Systems, Powertrain Monitors, Controller and Battery Management System Performing Organization: Detection Limit Technology (DLT) c/o 531 Cooke Street Honolulu, Hi 96813 Technical POC: Dr. Christian Schoen Phone: 3077420555 Fax: 3077420168 EMail: cschoen@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu Project Summary: Detection Limit Technology (DLT) provides data acquisition services for all vehiclesunder HEVDP's '93 and '94 programs. These services include: data acquisition systems,sensors, powertrain monitors, electric vehicle local controller and battery managementsystems; and data logger replacements for electric vehicles. Data Acquisition Systems (DAS) The DAS consists of an expandable 12 bit analog to digital sensor controller (SC) whichdigitizes the analog signals from the sensors. The SC is also equipped with a frequencycounter to accept signals from the speedometer/odometer. The computing and loggingfunctions are performed by a 386SX based embedded PC (EPC). For driver interaction,it uses a handheld keyboard with a 32 character, 8 line LCD display. The SC isconnected to the EPC via a RS232 serial port. IDLMS100 is the application software thatcontrols the system. It logs data, provides useful data for the driver in an easy to readformat, simple single key operation, intelligent switching from drive mode to charge modeand back, checks for low stateofcharge and alarm levels, and real time data analysis tokeep track of stateofcharge, mileage, and min./max. values of parameters. The systemalso has an automatic powerup/powerdown option. This allows the system to be a fullyautomatic "turnkey" system. The sensors were designed especially for the noisyenvironment of an electric vehicle, utilizing temperature compensated halleffects thatmakes the sensors completely isolated from the parameters being measured . Thesignals are conditioned and filtered for clean and accurate data. DH sensors measureDC voltage, DC current, and temperature. WAV sensors measure true RMS AC voltage,true RMS AC current, true power, and temperature. AT sensors measure altitude, tilt, andtemperature. DB sensors measure accessories' on/off. Payload Sensors for the '94program are in the design stages. These sensors will incorporate Linear VoltageDisplacement Transducer (LVDT) technology which conveys vehicle payload to the DASwhen hooked to the coil or leaf springs. Input AC power sensors will also be installedunder the '94 program. Powertrain Monitors Powertrain Monitors for the '94 program are in the design stages. They will monitor thetrue RMS AC voltage, true RMS AC current, and true power between the motor andcontroller. The biggest obstacle is accessing the cables of interest. DLT has beenworking with Hughes Power Control Systems to resolve this problem. Controller and Battery Management Systems Electric vehicle local controller and battery management systems (BMS) for the '94program are also in the design stages. The local controller will provide range estimation,speedometer/odometer, input and output for control, and output ports for data logging.The BMS will level voltage of batteries, determine stateofcharge, and provide aprogrammable platform for fast and regular charging methods. Project Deliverables:Data Acquisition Systems DLT has designed and built ten complete DAS. Six have been installed in electricvehicles in the 93 program. Installation of the other four DAS await delivery of vehicles.Auto powerup/powerdown option has been built and installed in three of ten vehicles inthe '94 program. Sensors have been installed in 27 of the 35 vehicles in the '93 program;the remaining eight will be installed during component retrofits operations by the vehiclemanufacturer. One of 30 input AC power sensors in the '94 program have been installed.Five vehicles will be equipped with payload sensors. One of 30 AC infest Dower sensorshas been installed. Powertrain Monitors Five vehicles will be equipped with powertrain monitors. Controller and Battery Management Systems Twenty vehicles will be equipped with the BMS system for the '94 program. Project Schedule: Data Acquisition Systems Six of ten DAS systems have been installed. Three systems will be installed by March 31,1996. One awaits delivery of the vehicle by the manufacturer. Six autopowerup/powerdown options will be installed by March 31, 1996. The remaining oneawaits delivery of the vehicle; tentative date is May 1996. Sensors have been installed in27 vehicles; the remaining eight sensor packages should be installed by July 31, 1996.Payload Sensor fabrication should begin in August 1996. Twentynine AC input powersensors will be installed over the next 12 months. Powertrain Monitors Fabrication should begin in June 1996. Controller and Battery Management Systems Fabrication should begin in October 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-88IA037-000725-B010-204http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0211.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055931 text/html 2520HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:44 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Low Cost Power Relays and Circuit Breakers Performing Organization: Coriolis Corporation Technical Contact: Art Iverson (408) 354-7972 (phone/fax) Program Description A small start-up firm, Coriolis Corporation has proof-of-principle demonstrated a potentially low-cost high-voltage circuit breaker that could be used as a battery pack safety switch - with particularly strong applications to high powered vehicles. The Coriolis technology employs a new, inexpensive method for extinguishing arc which can be adapted to low cost molded case switchgear, such as contactors, relays and circuit breakers. It provides a low cost alternative to vacuum circuit breakers. The technology can be adapted to the distribution voltage range, potentially up to 15kv, for Utility and facility use. It addresses the underdeveloped market for transfer switches for use in UPS, ASD, process control and other critical applications. Milestones A demonstration circuit breaker will be produced in 18 months. Participants Coriolis - Program Manager Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-89IA037-000725-B011-229http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0401.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060330 text/html 5156HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:55:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Electric Variable Transmission Performing Organization: Allison Transmission Division of GMC, Delco Propulsion Systems Technical POC: Jim Rancourt, ATD, (317) 2423633 Project Summary: The EVT is a unique parallel hybrid electric drive system which merges the advantages of electricaland mechanical power transfer, offering cost and emissions benefits to both commercial and military markets. The EVTsystem uses both mechanical (internal combustion engine) and electrical (high voltage battery energy storage) inputpower in parallel to deliver optimum performance and fuel economy to the vehicle. An input split gear scheme providesvariation in transmission output speed  and therefore vehicle speed  while maintaining constant engine speed, allowingthe engine to operate on the optimum BSFC curve for any power condition. This unique concept in speed and torquecontrol is made possible through the use of two highly efficient electrical machines. The electrical machines canfunction as either a motor or generator depending on vehicle power requirements and operating conditions. The engine can be significantly reduced in size based on average vehicle duty cycle power requirements allowing forhigher efficiency, especially in constant speed portions of the duty cycle where most power is transferred mechanically.Several modes of operation are possible with energy input from either the downsized engine and/or the energy storagedevice depending on the specific mode of operation. Both engine and batteries are used for maximum acceleration, theengine only for cruising at near constant speed, or battery only for emissionfree electric operation. A novel accessorydrive scheme allows the EVT to drive conventional accessories and POT's in either the normal hybrid mode or theelectric only mode without the addition of a separate accessory drive motor. The EVT technology is scaleable over a wide range of vehicles from automotive through heavy military vehicles. Thesynchronous shift gearing can be modified to add or delete transmission operating modes (rings). Additionaltransmission modes reduce the requirements placed on the power conditioning electronics and the twomotor/generators, thereby increasing power density and transmission speed/torque without significantly increasingperformance requirements of the electrical components . This project will demonstrate: (1) concept feasibility of a hybrid power train system for commercial heavy duty cargotrucks and military and tactical combat vehicles; (2) system performance levels equal to or exceeding that for theconventional engine/transmission power trains; and (3) a minimum 16 percent improvement in fuel economy overconventional powertrains. Project Deliverables: Deliverables for the EVT program include procurement, build and lab testing of one EVT systemincluding the transmission, two motor/generators, two inverters, two 17.5 kWHr battery packs and required controlsystems and algorithms. In addition, a "virtual prototyping" vehicle simulation using the EVT power train will bedeveloped by the University of Iowa for evaluation on the Iowa Driving Simulator. Also, Indiana University, PurdueUniversity at Indianapolis (IUPUI) will develop an optimizing energy management strategy for both parallel and serieshybrid propulsion schemes. Project Schedule: December 1, 1996 Detail Drawings Complete July 1, 1997 Transmission Assembly Complete December 1, 1997 Lab Steady State Performance Testing Compl. June 1, 1998 Lab Duty Cycle Operation Complete Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-90IA037-000725-B013-212http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0510.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060852 text/html 2761HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:01:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Electric/Hybrid Vehicle Virtual Testbed Performing Organization: Georgia Institute of Technology POINT OF CONTACT: Dr. Robert A. Cassanova Director GTRI Aerospace Sciences Lab Phone: (404)5287826 FAX: (404)5287019 Program Summary: Georgia Tech is developing the "Electric/Hybrid Vehicle Virtual Testbed" to be an interactive modelingand simulation tool that will predict the performance of complex hybrid electric power systems as theyare applied in both commercial and military vehicles Models are being developed for inductiontypetractions motors. motor controllers. permanent magnet generators, rectifiers, leadacid batteries. fuelcells and pulse charging systems. A comprehensive model of the thermal management of an EV isbeing developed which can predict the EV thermal loads as a function of time and initial conditions foroptimized control of the EV's total available energy. DELIVERABLES: An integrated computer simulation model, using MATLAB and Simulink, of the HVAC, inductiontypetractions motors. motor controllers, permanent magnet generators, rectifiers, leadacid batteries, fuelcells and pulse charging systems. SCHEDULE: Completion date December 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-91IA037-000725-B009-327http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0114.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055709 text/html 3376HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:49:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: High Torque Drive Train Performing Organization: Sportech International P. O. Box 2501 Ewa Beach, Hi 96706 Technical POC: Larry O'Donnell Phone: 808-677-6559 Fax: 808-681-4010 EMail: Project Summary: Technology Study Conduct research and design of high technologyand high energy electric vehicle components, including stateoftheartenergy management systems, advanced motor controllers, drive trains,regenerative braking, and high energy batteries. Identify an electricdrive system design which optimizes torque, speed, and power ofat least 200 kW. Drive Train Systems Fabrication and Installation Fabricatetwo high power, high torque, electric vehicle drive train systems.Mount and install one drive train system, with real time dataacquisition, energy management, and vehicle instrumentation appropriateto verify vehicle performance, in a vehicle provided by Sportech.Design the modifications necessary to install a drive system intoan electric Gvan furnished by Hawaiian Electric Company. Prepareand conduct preliminary design reviews of proposed modifications,to include design details and system specification. System Demonstration and Testing Conduct demonstrationand evaluation of instrumented vehicles Verify performance specifications. Project Deliverables: Technical Report recommending and detailingthe optimum electric drive system. Test results from system verification testing. Converted van. Project Schedule: Complete Technical Report of optimum electric drive system. Complete drive system installation in contractor vehicle. Conduct PRD for van. Convert van. Conduct system verification testing. Delivery of van and final report. Qtr 4 Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-92IA037-000725-B011-84http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0304.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060208 text/html 4144HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:54:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Thermal Evaluation of Electrosource Horizon Battery Performing Organization: Electrosource, Inc. Technical POC: Steve Addington (512) 4456606 Project Summary: It is known that heat flux and thermal gradients during charging and discharging under various ambient conditions affect battery capacity. Controlled sources of external heating or cooling can create more uniform temperatures within a battery pack, leading to more consistently available capacity. A thermal evaluation of the Electrosource Horizon battery will be conducted to identify the parameters which need to be considered when designing a thermalmanagement system. The project goal is to better characterize and quantify these parameters, through empirical measurements and evaluation, to aid the development of thermal management systems which will optimize performance and battery life at a reasonable cost. Project Deliverables: Battery Calorimeter To quantify thermal design parameters, precise measurements of temperature difference must be made. The first task of the project will: design, build, calibrate and demonstrate a battery calorimeter capable of measuring heat released or absorbed by batteries under charge and discharge conditions at different test temperatures. Data Collection on Test Batteries  Battery modules will be temperature soaked prior to testing at a reference temperature and at three different test temperatures. Data to include: internal and external temperatures of the battery; heat transfer under charging; heat transfer under fixed current discharging. Resistive Heating Evaluation: a heating element will be chosen and positioned under the test battery based on the results of earlier testing. the battery calorimeter will be utilized to simulate an insulated vehicle battery tray of known heat transfer characteristics. testing will be performed at two charge rates and two discharge rates to assess heating element impact on temperature uniformity. Final Recommendations Report  A final report will be generated at the conclusion of this task to describe the tests, discuss the results, and provide recommendations for design of thermal management systems. A resistive heating design will be implemented in conjunction with the battery pack testing being performed at the Sacramento Consortium Battery Test Facility. Project Schedule: This tenmonth project will provide and quantitative thermalparameters to aid the development of thermal management systems. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-93IA037-000725-B012-196http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0413.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060536 text/html 2366HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:57:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: NonInvasive Battery Measurement & Commercial Application Performing Organization: Premium Power Systems, Delphi Energy & Engine Management Systems Technical POC: Bill Laletin, Premium, (504) 6461121 Project Summary: This project is developing a new noninvasive technique to measure battery stateofcharge. "Time Domain Spectroscopy" uses a multidimensional correlation to establish the quantitative form of the battery's transfer functions. This technology has potential applications in all areas ofelectrochemistry including military electrochemical storage units, quality control in battery manufacturing, accurateonboard EV "fuel" gauge, and many others. Project Deliverables: Laboratory proven circuit board stateofcharge indicator Project Schedule: Began September 1995 for completion in 1997. Commercial applications to continue until May1998. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-94IA037-000725-B014-79http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0522.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061122 text/html 2963HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:03:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Federal Railroad Administration Next Generation High Speed Rail Program Performing Organization: The University of Texas at Austin, Center for Electromechanics POINT OF CONTACT: John H. Price The University of Texas at Austin, Center for Electromechanics Telephone: (5l5) 4714496 Program Summary: The objective of this project is to demonstrate the feasibility of operation a hybrid locomotive propulsionsystem consisting of a gas turbine and a flywheel energy storage system in a railroad locomotive. Theultimate goal of the program is to develop a fossilfuel locomotive capable of sustained speeds of150mph on existing rail infrastructure, with acceleration comparable to that of an electric locomotive. Additional goals are to develop a system that is reliable, fuel efficient, and in compliance withapplicable noise and air emission requirements. ALPS includes a 3MW turbinealternator to maintain acruising speed of 150 mph, and a 600 MJ (165 kWhr) flywheel energy storage system capable ofdelivering an additional 3 MW for rapid acceleration, speed maintenance on grades, and recovery ofbraking energy. Program Phase I is structured to demonstrate a fullscale flywheel energy storagesystem in the laboratory. Program Phase II is planned to provide a rolling demonstration of thetechnology in a General Motors ElectroMotive Division locomotive. Phase I is cost shared by thedevelopment team members. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-95IA037-000725-B010-129http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0207.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055858 text/html 3288HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: San Francisco Bay Area Station Car Program Performing Organization: Bay Area Rapid Transit District Technical Contact: Victoria Nerenberg (510) 869-2416 Program Description The Electric Station Car program creates the nation's first and largest fleet of "station cars," multi-user electric vehicles dedicated for use commuting to or from a transit station, such as a rail stop. Station cars provide multimodal flexibility to transit, while encouraging ridership and providing a clean door-to-door commute. Station cars also provide an early market for EVs. A total of 40 station cars will operate out of several BART stations. Two-passenger, purpose-built electric cars, designed to be manufactured in the United States starting in 1997, will be used in this project. The initial delivery of 12 vehicles in 1995 will have a range of approximately 65 miles and a top speed of 55 mph. The balance of 28 purpose-built vehicles will be upgraded for a top speed of 65 mph and a range of 70-90 miles. These cars are designed around a lightweight aluminum space frame, with a fully recyclable thermoplastic body. The cars will be powered by an AC drive train and either lead-acid or nickel-cadmium batteries. Milestones A multiple-vehicle charging kiosk has been installed. Eight station cars were delivered in October 1995, with four additional cars supplied to the program in January 1996. The remaining 28 vehicles will be delivered to BART in the late summer of 1996. Participants Bay Area Air Quality Management District  co-funder Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART)  program manager California Energy Commission  co-funder Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Green Motorworks  vehicle lessor/operations Pacific Gas & Electric  co-funder Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-96IA038-000736-B034-226http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0712.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061458 text/html 4337HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Flywheel Surge Power Unit Performing Organization: United Technologies Flywheel Development Project Goals and Technologies United Technologies is developing a flywheel surge power unit for automotive hybrid vehicle applicationsand has tested three prototype units over the past two years, one under the ARPA / NAVC program.UTC's efforts have concentrated on a passenger car Flywheel Surge Power Unit (FSPU) having a ratedpower of 25 to 50 kW and an energy storage capability of 800 Wh at 35,000 RPI\/I. Flywheel units arealso being designed for electric utility energy storage and power quality applications under separatefunding. UTC's current FSPU system consists of an outer vacuum containment vessel an inner containment ring,a rotating composite rotor/hub/back-iron/ assembly, a watercooled motor/generator, and a magneticbearing system. The flywheel rotor consists of the composite wheel, the hub, and the cylinder whichcontains the backiron of the motor/generator and magnetic bearings. Major factors which determine thedesign include energy storage capacity, cost, number of spinup and spindown cycles, and sizeconstraints. The use of a conical section hub to attach the wheel to the backiron shaft is standard gasturbine technology. It provides an axisymmetric attachment to the wheel and can be tailored to isolatethe deflection of the flywheel from the deflection of the shaft.. The primary bearing support systemconsists of two radial and one axial permanent magnet-based magnetic bearings. This controller containsthe algorithm used to adjust the force and damping properties of the bearings as a function of rotor speed.The motor/generator is a permanent magnet design having a watercooled stator. The vacuum/containment vessel is designed for ease of assembly / disassembly of prototype units and istherefore fairly large compared to a production version. A steel containment ring structure is locatedaround the rotor for containment of the rotating mass. A light weight containment system is envisioned ina final design. Tests of 30 cm diameter subscale wheels have resulted in "shredded wheat" type materialafter intentional burst Several tests have been performed to fail the 12.3 kg, 40 cm diameter full scalecomposite flywheel. Attempts to fail the wheel itself in this configuration at or below maximum operatingspeed by intentionally weakening the composite have so far been unsuccessful. Tests which simulatedfailure of the bearing system were performed by intentionally dropping the wheel at speed onto thecontainment structure The wheel simply rotated until it came to a stop, apparently bouncing off the sidesand wearing off the side surfaces, indicating a robust design. Intentional failure mode testing of a complete system is planned in the near future. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-97IA037-000725-B013-148http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0506.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060821 text/html 2039HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Hybrid Electric - CNG Pickup Conversion Performing Organization: Florida Power & Light; FACT; Saminco; Solar Car Corporation, Fisher Electric Motor Technology POC: Bob Suggs, Telephone (305) 5224133 Program Summary: A 1994 Chevy S10 electric pickup (for commercial use) will be converted using CNG to fuel the hybridmotor as well as advanced A/C drive systems and climate control system Training and O & M manualswill be provided The benefit derived will be range extension while also increasing fuel efficiency Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-98IA037-000725-B010-356http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0219.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060107 text/html 3277HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:20 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Engineering Improvements for Purpose-built Electric Vehicles Performing Organization: PIVCO A/S Technical Contact: Christophe Malaterre (818) 565-5600 Program Description PIVCO has developed a lightweight, efficient and inexpensive two-passenger urban electric vehicle, which is currently in beta prototype testing in Europe and the United States. This car, which is projected be available for $10,000 in low volumes of production, is currently being upgraded to meet U.S. highway speeds (65 mph), as well as acceleration and driving range capabilities for the U.S. commuter market. This program will provide critical engineering design improvements and durability testing for the PIVCO CITI vehicle. Specifically, this program will consist of additional safety and crashworthiness testing (side impact and rollover requirements); durability testing of the power train; fit and finish design improvements; and additional sourcing support to identify and incorporate more U.S.-made components into the production vehicle. This program is part of a larger engineering design and compliance program at PIVCO which is leading to development of the final production-ready model of the CITI vehicle. PIVCO's goal is to begin production of these vehicles in the U.S. in the first 3-6 months of 1997, initially at 10,000 vehicles per year, but increasing quickly thereafter. Milestones During the first two months of the project, PIVCO will complete most of the safety testing and the durability testing. By the ninth month of the project, the design improvements will be complete. Sourcing and final crashworthiness testing will be completed by the end of the 12-month program period. Participants Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder PIVCO  program manager Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-99IA037-000725-B012-111http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0409.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060456 text/html 3056HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:57:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Electric Vehicle Mosaic Information System Development Performing Organization: Indiana UniversityPurdue University at Indianapolis Technical POC: Dr. Russell Eberhart Ph.D. Project Summary: Indiana UniversityPurdue University at Indianapolis (IUPUI) will be responsible for makinginformation about electric and hybrid vehicle research available to anyone connected to the Internet. The primaryarea of focus would be product information but also includes electric and hybrid vehicle safety issues and FormulaLightning electric car racing. The method for distributing this information would be the World Wide Web. these pages would incorporatedescriptions, specs, and pictures, as well as contact information where appropriate. Electricore would also havepages which would enable them to make further information available via the Internet. Secondary goals include providing training for Electricore consortium members in the use of the Internet, designing a system on the World Wide Web for data collection and analysis, and identifying and implementing costmodeling tools. Project Deliverables: World Wide Web pages including: Electric and hybrid vehicle product information Electric and hybrid vehicle safety information Formula Lightning electric racing information Internet training for Electricore consortium members Data collection and analysis tools Cost modeling tools Project Schedule: Being revised Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-100IA037-000725-B013-371http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0518.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061043 text/html 4205HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:02:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Homopolar EV Traction Motor Development for Improved Safety and Reduced Cost Performing Organization:The University of Texas, Center for Electromechanics POINT OF CONTACT: Joe Beno The University of Texas at Austin, Center for Electromechanics Telephone: (512) 4714496 Program Summary: Homopolar motors are an attractive alternative to conventional DC and induction machines for hybridand allelectric vehicles both civilian and military Known for their high current capability, this inherentcharacteristic allows high power levels to be achieved from a low voltage power supply of 50 volts Fiftyvolt EV drivetrains of which several advantages include: Improved safety (50 volts represents a safety threshold; electrical codes require no special safety provisions for systems below 50 volts); Controllers lend themselves to the use of high efficiency MOSFET switching devices; Hybrid drivetrains are possible with as few as 5 standard EV lead acid batteries (high voltage systems require strings of batteries to produce system voltage); Long strings of batteries, which tend to experience lifetime problems, can be avoided; and Reduced system cost appear feasible, primarily due to controller simplicity. Work on this project began in May 1995, and a prototype motor design has been completed, sized at100 kW for a small transit bus. This design uses a fourpass armature and operates at a peak currentof 5,000 Amps from a 48voit battery pack. Brush testing is in progress to address efficiency improvements, document wear rates, and confirmoperation of several new lowcost and compact brush actuater designs. Test data obtained so farshows excellent operation of a constant force springactuated brush and brush holder design.Brush wear rates at normal driving conditions appear to be far less than those obtained from worstcase speed and current loading conditions cited in previous studies. This is very encouragingconsidering the typical duty cycle of the bus. To regulate power flow to the motor, CEM is investigating a highcurrent pulse width modulator (WPM)controller based on a highly parallel array of MOSFET switching devices For low voltage systems,MOSFETs are an ideal choice given their low on state resistance, high switching frequency, lowswitching losses, and ease of parallel operation A 300 Amp prototype has been assembled, andtesting is under way to confirm operation with a low impedance load. In conjunction with the motor design and fabrication effort, UTCEM is addressing system integrationissues, with special emphasis on hybrid drivetrains. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-101IA038-000736-B034-166http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0708.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061426 text/html 3063HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:06:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Low Cost Sensorless Drive Performing Organization: Solectria Project Goals and Technologies Motor drive for low power auxiliary motors in a vehicle to let them operate without a position/speed sensor. {motors used for air conditioning, power brakes, etc..) Develop algorithms to estimate rotor parameters (position, time constant) for optimum efficiency operation. Enables use of high efficiency & reliability, low cost AC motors instead of brush DC motors. Parts and labor costs reduced becaus there is no sensor required. Eventual goal Is to transfer knowledge to controller for the vehicle's main motor, if it can be made to feel sufficiently smooth. Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-102IA037-000725-B012-30http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0406.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060413 text/html 2987HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:56:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: 5Phase Synchronous Reluctance Motor Performing Organization: Delphi Energy & Engine Management Systems, Delco Propulsion Systems Technical POC: Ahmed ElAntably, DelphiE, (317) 5793696 Project Summary: The 5phase synchronous reluctance motorsystem is an outgrowth of an ongoingsynchronous reluctance motor system development program. It will have improved performance over the 3phasesynchronous reluctance motor system in all six categories listed below. It is predicted that this machine will havewide applications for many military and commercial applications under 40,000 pounds GVW. higher efficiency and high power density (10%20%) lower rotor losses, permitting simpler cooling system better utilization of silicon, allowing lower rated devices simpler to control, can use a cheaper controller than the induction motor can be operated without sensors, this increases the reliability and reduces cost provides higher reliability than 3phase induction or synchronous reluctance machines This new design will achieve superior efficiency due to better iron and copper utilization and enhanced magneticcharacteristics of the rotor by maximizing the rotor saliency ratio. Project Deliverables: Final report based on development and test results of 5phase synchronous reluctancemotor on a dynamometer. Project Schedule: Two year project beginning February 1, 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-103IA038-000736-B034-182http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0709.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061434 text/html 2992HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:06:47 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Softswitched/lowloss IGBT AC motor controller Performing Organization: Solectria Project Goals and Technologies The goal of this project is to design a low cost, love loss IGBTbased motor controller which can run at sufficient power levels while using air cooling, as opposed to liquid cooling. We currently have an operational aircooled IGBTbased UNIOC motor controller. To date. it has undergone over 80hours of dynamometer testing and over 100 miles of road use. On the dynamometer. wehave tested the IGBT UNIOC up to 43 kW under load and up to 65 kVA (210 A at 312V)with no load. Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-104IA037-000725-B009-17http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0101.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055325 text/html 3757HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:45:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Advanced Hybrid Vehicle Technology Performing Organization: Battery Automated Transportation (BAT) 3601 Empire Avenue Burbank, CA 91505 Technical POC: Bill Wason Phone: 818-565-5555 Fax: 818-565-5559 EMail: Project Summary: BAT has recently initiated research on an advanced engine concept that will beincorporated in both superefficient and hybrid electric vehicles. The engine conceptinvolves a combination of two different technologies detailed below that result in anultralean burn, ultrahigh compression that is very clean, has very high fuel efficiency andincreases power output. This is a major breakthrough, since in the past efficiency hasbeen gained only with a loss of power which has affected marketability. Giese Engine Technoloqv involves use of a redesigned head that incorporates changes in the air intake and exhaust valve mechanisms. This results in cleaner intake air and allows timing processes to be adjusted. Propulsion Technologies is working with BAT to develop an ultrahigh compression, ultralean burning combustion technology that will be coupled with Giese Engine Technology to achieve high power output, improved fuel efficiency and ULEV emission levels. Propulsion Technologies engine modifications involve changes that result in an instantaneous method to reform gasoline for use in ultrahigh compression ultraburn engines. Project Deliverables: Both engine concepts will be combined in production engines that are used either in astandard four door sedan chassis for a super efficient vehicle or installed on a smallengine that is used for an auxiliary power unit (APU) for a hybrid electric vehicle. TheAPU will then be installed in a Ford Ranger Pickup Truck that has been modified to runon electricity using BAT's standard MaxiTorque drive train package and Optimabatteries. The truck is expected to have better acceleration than the standard FordRanger truck, very high fuel efficiency (60 mpg), and very low emissions. Project Schedule: Pending finalization of contract, the hybrid electric Ford RangerPickup Truck should be built and undergoing evaluation by September 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-105IA037-000725-B010-184http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0210.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055924 text/html 2636HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Advanced Catalytic Combustor For Gas Powered Turbines Performing Organization: Capstone Turbine Technical Contact: Paul Craig (818) 774-9600 (voice) (818) 774-0228 (fax) Program Description Capstone Turbine will develop a compact, lightweight advanced turbine for use in hybrid electric vehicles. The turbogenerator will provide electric vehicles with the equivalent range of conventional autos along with amenities such as air conditioning and heating combined with dramatic improvements in performance, energy efficiency, and emissions. The project goals are to prove the 24kW turbogenerator as a viable auxiliary power unit (APU) for medium and heavy-duty vehicles, to obtain a performance comparison between a gas turbine-driven APU and a reciprocating engine-driven APU, and to reduce tailpipe emissions through the development of a catalytic combustor. The turbine with a conventional combustor will be installed on a suitable test vehicle in 1996. Milestones Testing will be completed by the end of 1996 or early 1997. Participants Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency - Co-funder Capstone Turbine - Program Manager Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-106IA037-000725-B013-181http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0508.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060837 text/html 2138HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Onboard Data Acquisition Systems for EVs Performing Organization: Florida Solar Energy POC: Bob Suggs, Telephone (305) 5224133 Program Summary: A data acquisition system will be designed for onboard monitoring of vehicle and componentperformance for two types of EVs They will be installed on the pickups at Patrick AFB (SCAT Project#1 FE) and utility vans (SCAT Project # 5FE) The design and performance data will be computeranalyzed and transmitted electronically to the National Data Center. The benefit will be realtime transfer of design and performance data, which can also be used for troubleshooting. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-107IA038-000736-B033-223http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0524.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061154 text/html 2577HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:04:06 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Electric Shuttle Bus for Georgia Tech Performing Organization: Westinghouse Electric Blue Bird; Georgia Tech: Georgia Power GNB POINT OF CONTACT Randy Webber Telephone: (410) 7653G58 Program Summary: This project involves the development and evaluation of a 32ft electric shuttle bus. It will beADAcertified with electric accessories including wheel chair lift and air conditioning. It will be based onthe Blue Bird QBus chassis design. The bus will be demonstrated on the Georgia Tech campus. Benefit: Large market interest in both school and transit buses Schedule: The bus is complete. The 130kW rapid charge station is complete. It has been installed on the Georgia Tech campus and isbeing operated by Georgia Power Company. The bus was returned to Westinghouse for hybrid tests and for a drivetrain upgrade The bus isscheduled to return to Atlanta for operation throughout the Olympic games. Georgia Tech hasextended their participation to allow the operation during the Olympics. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-108IA037-000725-B009-264http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0111.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055639 text/html 2938HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:48:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Simulation & Modeling Performing Organization: National Data Center, University of Hawaii atManoa (UH/NDC) 2540 Dole Street, Holmes Hall # 246 Honolulu, Hi 96822 Technical POC: Dr. Vasillis Syrmos Phone: 808-956-3432 Fax: 808-956-3427 EMail: hellas@ wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu Project Summary: This effort reflects expanded capabilities of the EHV NDC. Inthis project we will stuc the Power Management System (PMS) moduleand the control used to achieve maximum efficiency under differentdrive powertrain and mission priorities. To solve this problemwe propose the construction of a PMS module and a Control System(CS) module to be integral with the advanced EHV Simulator thatalready exists. Such module construction has two major advantages;one is the overall improvement of the EHV series configuration;the other the study of efficiency of an existing controller schemeunder different powertrains, and mission objectives. Project Deliverables: Design the Power Management System module. Design the Controller System module. Project Schedule: Projected Start Date: July 1997 Define the Power Management Strategy. Q1 Design the Power Management System module. Q3 Define the set of controllers to be used. Q1 Design the Controller System module. Q3 Integrate with the existing simulator. Q4 Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-109IA037-000725-B011-18http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0301.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060135 text/html 2889HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:47 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: AFS Electromechanical Flywheel Battery Performing Organization: American Flywheel Systems, Inc. (AFS) Technical POC: AFS: Ed Furia (206) 4541818 Project Summary: The ARPAsupported AFS Program has the primary objectiveto fabricate and test and engineering development unit (EDU) of itselectromechanical flywheel battery (EMFB). The EDU will be the basis fordeveloping a system prototype and preproduction versions of its EMFB suitable fordeployment in electric vehicles. To complete the ARPAsupported EDU program successfully, AFS has beenassisted by several highlyqualified specialists and widely acknowledged expertsfrom Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the University of Virginia, and otherorganizations through the program to date. To overcome the remaining challenges offabricating an energy-storage system for electric vehicle applications, AFS hassecured and will continue to acquire the services of experts in highspeed flywheelrotors, magnetic bearings and motor generators, and other key subsystems. Project Deliverables: The primary deliverable under the ARPAsupported EDUprogram is the demonstration by AFS that a highspeed, high specific energy EMFBis technically feasible. Project Schedule: AFS currently intends to have the composite flywheel rotoravailable by mid1996 with testing to commence thereafter. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-110IA037-000725-B010-375http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0220.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060114 text/html 3192HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Reliability and Containment System Testing for Flywheels Performing Organization: Rocketdyne/Rockwell Corporation Technical Contact: Terry Lorier (818) 586-1129 Program Description Rocketdyne/Rockwell has developed a low-cost titanium flywheel, with a unique rotor design which allows the flywheel to fail in a very safe mode. This project will conduct safety and containment testing on this flywheel, to determine the reliability of the containment structure, designed to safely manage the dissipation of the flywheel's kinetic energy during failure. The Rocketdyne flywheel design incorporates some unique safety features into a 1.0 kWh unit. The principal advantage is that the rotational inertia of the flywheel is fractured in a very predictable manner, with minimal energy release. The Rocketdyne design allows only the rim mass energy to be released upon failure, with this energy absorbed by the containment ring structure made of ultra-strong steel alloys which minimizes the cost of the flywheel system. In this program, Rocketdyne will build a scaled containment ring and housing, will install it on the flywheel unit, and will conduct fully-instrumented destruction testing to verify the predicted failure mode and containment. The flywheel rotor and system will then be rebuilt to its original configuration at the end of this test project. Milestones This program is just beginning, and will last for twelve months. The flywheel containment ring will be designed and fabricated by the sixth month of the project, with full speed testing beginning in month 9. Participants Rocketdyne/Rockwell, Intl.  program manager Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-111IA037-000725-B012-132http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0410.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060506 text/html 3574HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:57:17 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: IUPUI Race Car & NiMH Battery  Data Collection Performing Organization: Indiana University  Purdue University at Indianapolis Technical POC: Gary Burkart, (317) 2781665 Project Summary: The high current application required in racing will provide an excellent method of testing thebatteries and benchmarking NiMH performance versus PbA batteries. Under high current conditions, it isanticipated that the NiMH batteries will significantly out perform the PbA. A major chassis and battery packengineering challenge will be to define a satisfactory thermal management system that is able to keep thebatteries within specified operating temperature. The objective of the project is to compare the performance of the NiMH battery versus the current PbA batteryused in the race car. The race car will be instrumented and a data acquisition system will monitor race car andbattery pack performance. Data will be uploaded to the Electric/Hybrid Vehicle National Data Center establishedby ARPA at the University of Hawaii. The following advantages are anticipated when PbA batteries are replaced with NiMH batteries: 10% less battery weight per battery pack, 8% increase in dc voltage per battery pack, equivalent battery pack power, and 100% increase in battery pack energy availability. The EV race car will likely experience more that twice the range with NiMH batteries versus PbA batteries. Thisprovides a substantial advantage and a winning race strategy. Production processes for the NiMH battery are currently being developed by GM Ovonic. The battery may beoffered for electric/hybrid vehicles and other applications during 1997/98. Currently, prototype batteries areavailable for evaluation in appropriate applications. GM Ovonic is particularly interested in high current demandapplications. The race car represents such an application. Project deliverables: DAS Results and Final Report of Findings Project Schedule: Expected to begin May 1, 1996 & continue for 2 yrs. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-112IA037-000725-B010-91http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0204.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055836 text/html 3217HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:50:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Rotary Engine for Hybrid Transit Bus Performing Organization: APS Systems, Inc. Technical Contact: Ed Atelian (805) 984-0300 Program Description APS Systems is developing a purpose-built full-size transit bus, for demonstration by two major California transit districts. This bus will incorporate advanced composite materials in its frame and body, to reduce the vehicle's weight and its energy requirements. The drive train for the bus consists of two Rexroth Indramat 100 kW AC motors, powered by Saft nickel-cadmium batteries. This bus will incorporate many of the novel design features of APS' recently-delivered 35-foot electric transit bus, now in service with the Santa Barbara Metropolitan Transit District. A unique feature of this bus is that it incorporates a new auxiliary power unit from Alturdyne, Inc. This 40 kW generator set, to be used for range extension on the electric transit bus, uses a high-efficiency, low-emission, multi-fuel rotary engine under development by Alturdyne. The APU is a two-rotor engine, coupled to an electric generator capable of producing a nominal voltage of 300 V. Milestones This program will produce and put integrate hybrid electric bus, incorporating a rotary engine auxiliary power unit. Detailed operational and performance data will also be collected and summarized through the CALSTART data acquisition effort. The bus will be placed into service in July, 1996, for an 18 month demonstration period. Participant AC Transit - bus user Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Alturdyne, Inc.  rotary engine developer APS Systems, Inc.  bus developer Federal Transit Administration  co-funder Orange County Transportation Agency  bus user Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-113IA037-000725-B013-105http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0503.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060803 text/html 2924HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Lightweight Electric Bus Manufacturing and Design Performing Organization: Advanced Vehicle Systems, C. S. Draper Laboratory, Electric Transit Vehicle Institute POC: John Powell, Telephone (615) 6223884 Program Summary: The overall objective of this project is to improve the costeffectiveness and performance of electricbuses by streamlining the manufacturing process and introducing loadbearing composite structures.The vehicles to be considered for this effort are manufactured by Advanced Vehicle Systems (AVS) inChattanooga, Tennessee. The specific goals of this project include: Optimize the manufacturing process for the current steel frame design, so as to be cost effective for future projected production rates. Modify the existing steel frame design, which carries a nonload bearing composite shell, to accommodate loadbearing composite panels fulfilling appearance, insulation, and structural requirements simultaneously. Develop conceptual designs of at least two types for buses having the entire primary structure fabricate from composite materials Obtain realistic revenue service data on an AVS bus modified to accept load bearing composite panels. Benefit: While the project will focus on development of the already effective AVS designs, the findingswill be applicable to other electric buses of similar size Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-114IA037-000725-B013-42http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0422.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060737 text/html 3733HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:59:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: SmartCoolTM Air Conditioning System  S10 Electric Pickup Performing Organization: Smart Power Systems Technical POC: Gregg Peterson, (810) 6820203 Project Summary: The project objective is to develop a highefficiency, lightweight air conditioning system forelectric passenger vehicles. The system is based on a new twostage centrifugal compressor with an integral DCbrushless permanent magnet motor designed by Smart Power Systems. The system uses a low pressureenvironmentally friendly refrigerant; system pressures are typically 15 psi to 30 psi. The nominal design output is18,000 BTU/hr; the maximum design capacity is 21,000 BTU/hr. The theoretical compressor input power at 18,000BTU/hr capacity is less than 1,400 watts at the ASHRAE highefficiency rating point. Input power is substantiallyreduced as a function of ambient conditions. As an example, modeling the system at the ASHRAE SEER ratingpoint yields an output of over 8,000 BTU/hr using less than 400 watts of compressor input power. The SmartCool centrifugal compressor weights under 10 pounds and is 30% smaller than similar capacity electricR134a compressors. A microprocessor continuously monitors and controls all system parameters with millisecond response times andensures that the compressor is operating at its highest efficiency at all times. Computercontrolled functionsinclude compressor motor speed, condenser fan speed, and expansion valve setting. The compressor will bemounted in the vehicle motor compartment; the refrigerant lines will be routed through the front of dash. Theexisting HVAC module will be updated with a SmartCool compatible evaporator and condenser. The evaporatorblower and condenser fan will be production Chevrolet units. The system will utilize production HVAC controls andrelated hardware wherever possible. Project Deliverables: A 240 VDC SmartCool compressor, related electronics, and heat exchangers will beinstalled on a Solectria E10 pickup and evaluated starting this September. The objective is to improve the vehiclerange. Project Schedule: QTR3 1996 installation target  performance evaluations and engineering enhancements tocontinue through the end of the contract. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-115IA037-000725-B009-196http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0107.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055540 text/html 4167HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:47:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Advanced Rapid Battery Charger Development, Electronic Sensors & Systems Division, Vehicle & EnergyPrograms Performing Organization: Northrop Grumman Corporation P.O. Box 1 7320MS B 420 Baltimore, MD 21203 Technical POC: Bruce Lenderking Phone: 410-765-0620 Fax: 410-993-2532 EMail: lender@evl. bwi .wec. corn Project Summary: Rapid Charging of batteries extends the travel distance of electricvehicles (EVs) well beyond the range allowed by onboard or overnightcharging systems currently available. This type of infrastructurewill play a significant role in making EVs convenient to operateand a positive experience for users, thereby contributing to theproliferation of EVs operating on roadways throughout the country.This in turn, reduces harmful NMOG tailpipe emissions and improvesair quality in the region. This project's goal is to produce a universal rapid charger thatwill charge electric vehicles meeting the evolving industry guidelinesfor level 3 conductive charging. At issue is the need to providea charging unit capable of charging multiple types of vehiclesand batteries in a way that is safe, efficient, and effective.This project takes into account the operator interface, vehicleinterface, battery requirements, and the interface to the utilitygrid with emphasis on power quality. The Advanced Rapid Chargerwill be capable of providing charging current and voltage formultiple charging regimes using constant current and/or constantvoltage, pulse charging and pulse charging/pulse discharge typesof algorithms. Project Deliverables:  Product Requirement and Specification Document.  Power System and Power Quality Analysis Report.  Installation Drawings.  Test Plan for Underwriters Laboratory Testing and EMI Testing.  Two Advanced Charging Units: one for Hawaii; one for Florida.. Final Report. Project Schedule:  Milestone 0 Project Start: 5/1/96  Product Requirements: 5/16/1/96  Milestone 1 (Product Requirements and ICD) 7/3/96  Package Design 6/110/23/96  Milestone 2 (Installation Drawings) 10/23/96  Electrical Design 6/110/23/96  Milestone 3 (Pwr SyslPwr Qual Anal Rpt & DesignRev) 6/27/96  Build Charger 1 & 2 10/1512/1/96  Integrate and Test 11/15/963/1/97  Milestone 4 (Unit 1 ReadyforTesting) 11/14/96  EMI Test 3/14/15/97  UL Test Plan 8/19/15196  Installation & checkout 4/155/15/97  Milestone 5 (Final Report) 5/15/97 Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-116IA038-000736-B033-208http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0523.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061145 text/html 4725HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:03:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Efficient Inductive Battery Charging Performing Organization: Virginia Power, Electronic Power Technology, Inc. (EPTI); GNB Technologies, Power Control Systems (PCS) POINT OF CONTACT: Kevin Curtis Telephone (804) 771 6358 Program Summary: The first technical objective of this project is to develop a method of combining an existing and efficientpulse charging algorithm with an existing highly efficient inductive charger for a largenet increase incharging efficiency. Secondly, the project also proposes to evaluate the performance of this advancedcharging system in an electric vehicle To do so, we will evaluate the performance of the algorithmrelative to inductive charging, validate its compatibility with inductive chargers, and study its effects onthe battery pack in an electric vehicle. The pulse charging strategy is expected to enhance theperformance and cycle life of the pack. EPTI suggests that the algorithm is more efficient whether overnight or fast charging and can lead toimproved battery pack cycle life and performance. DELCO Power Control Systems has a highlyefficient inductive charger (MagneChargeTM) and is interested in advancing the device's capability tobe compatible with pulse charging algorithms such as the EPTI charging strategy Such chargestrategies have not been integrated with inductive charging systems before. Virginia Power, as a utilitythat is active in research for EV infrastructure, has a capability to perform invehicle testing of EVbattery packs provided by GNB, Gates, and possibly others. This project Will be coordinated with aproject seeking to evaluate the pulse charging algorithm itself. The team will jointly develop and test the capability to combine two efficient technologies todemonstrate that their combined efficiency is higher that other existing techniques. The payoff of asuccessful development will ultimately be lower "fueling costs" for consumers through more efficientbattery charging and extended battery life. The continued advancement of a highly efficient batterycharging infrastructure is essential to the EV transportation industry; therefore, successfuldevelopment of this combination of products will have a pervasive impact on EV use in both civilian andmilitary applications. This technical team recognizes the potential commercialization benefits to boththe sales potential of each company as well as to EV consumers world wide. Efficient rapid charging of batteries is essential to hybrid operation of military vehicles where spacelimitations constrain energy storage and power demands are high. The technology developed in thisproject can be configured for use as rapid, high power charging by auxiliary power units in suchmilitary hybrid vehicles. Likewise, it can be useful for high power, rapidcharging offboard chargers aswell for other types of military vehicles Successful advancement of this technology will benefit futuredualuse applications. Benefit: A highly efficient battery charging system that is inherently safe, maximizes and improves theoverall efficiency of the charging process, and enhances battery pack life and performance. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-117IA037-000725-B010-300http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0216.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060033 text/html 3413HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:52:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Hybrid Electric Vehicle with Rotapower APU Performing Organization: Moller International Technical Contact: Paul Moller (916) 756-5086 Program Description In this project, Moller International will develop a very low-emission rotary engine, and will integrate it into a hybrid electric vehicle. This vehicle will then be tested under laboratory and field conditions, to determine if the target goals of more than 70 mpg and equivalent zero-emission vehicle emissions are met. Moller International has developed a very powerful and small rotary engine, which produces 15 hp on a continuous basis and a maximum of 30 hp, and which is less than one cubic foot in size -- minus the exhaust system. This engine will be integrated into an electric Geo Metro (the Solectria Force), and the existing battery pack will be replaced with a high-rate hybrid battery system, designed to provide peak power requirements. This design allows the battery pack to be reduced by 500 lbs., lowering the vehicle weight from 2390 lbs. to approximately 1900 lbs. (similar to the original Geo Metro). These modifications will allow performance to significantly improve, giving acceleration rates of 0-60 mph in 12 seconds and a range of over 250 miles. The project will provide a comparison between the performance characteristics of three different vehicles, all built on the same platform, but using different energy sources. Milestones This program is just beginning, and will last for twelve months. The APU will be designed and fabricated by the sixth month of the project, and will be fully integrated into the hybrid vehicle by month nine. Three months of laboratory and road testing will then complete the project. Participants Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Moller International  program manager UC Davis, Institute for Transportation Studies  electrical and battery systems management Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-118IA037-000725-B012-11http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0405.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060405 text/html 2848HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:56:17 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: 3Phase Synchronous Reluctance Motor Performing Organization: Allison Transmission Division of GMC, Delco Propulsion Systems Technical POC: Ahmed ElAntably, DelphiE, (317) 5793696 Project Summary: A 3phase synchronous reluctance motorsystem represents a new motor design which will use a novel manufacturing process to mass produce these motors at a lower cost and weight than a similar induction motor. A complementary part of the program is to develop and bring on line a process for manufacturing a composite powder/polymer metal for rotors and stators which will optimize their mechanical properties and enhance manufacturability. Development of a new control strategy will optimize total system efficiency, simplify operation, allow better packaging due to reduced cooling requirements, and minimize thedrive controller complexity and cost. These motors are suitable for electric/hybrid electric (EV/HEV) cars, buses,and drives for military applications. Testing of a semioptimized synchronous reluctance motor and controller haveshown promising results and finite element analysis will be used to optimize the system. Project Deliverables: Synchronous reluctance motor system integrated in hybrid electric bus and tested on a dynamometer. Project Schedule: Project continues through May 1995 till April 1997. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-119IA037-000725-B013-309http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0515.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060958 text/html 1818HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:02:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Fuel Cell Study Performing Organization: Sustainable Power Systems POINT OF CONTACT: Donald Alessi Telephone: (407) 8634130 Program Summary: High efficiency APU design of a fuel cell. Precursor to RA9424 effort (See SCAT RA94 Project FLE7). Schedule: Project is complete Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-120IA038-000736-B034-104http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0705.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061351 text/html 2951HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:05:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Development of a High Efficiency Light Truck Rear Drive Axle Performing Organization: Solectria Program Description Goal Create a high efficiency rear axle that can be used in Solectria E10 truck as well as other vehicles usinga solid rear drive axle with differential. Result Testing and SidebySide Comparison with Chevy OE hypoid axle. Increased vehicle efficiency up to 20%. Noticeable but acceptable increase in gear noise. Placed into production for E10 pickup truck Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-121IA037-000725-B011-195http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0309.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060314 text/html 5019HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:55:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Battery and Battery Management System Test Project Performing Organization: Sacramento Municipal Utility District Technical POC: Mike Wirsch (916) 7326754 Project Summary: The Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium is creating aworld class battery test facility at McClellan AFB in Sacramento. This facility will be usedto test electric and hybrid electric vehicle battery packs, and to evaluate the ability of battery management systems (BMS)to preserve capacity and life of advanced batteries. Testing will be performed usingstateoftheart AeroVironment ABC150 Power Systems designed for advanced batterytesting and accurate simulation of hybrid electric vehicle drive cycles  especiallyapplicable to the PNGV effort. Project Goals: Evaluate the ability of state of the art battery management systems (designed to monitor individual battery modules) to prevent overcharging batteries in an EV application. Validate accuracy of temperature compensated stateofcharge gauge (designed to provide the driver with information that will prevent battery overdischarge). Validate effectiveness of equalization charging method provided by many battery management systems to maximize capacity on each discharge. Evaluate the overall benefits of battery management systems and provide feedback to manufacturer's to assist in the creation of "smart" battery systems. Project Deliverables: Establish Battery Test Facility AeroVironment ABC150 Advanced Battery Cycler Test Systems will be used: designed specifically for testing electric and hybridelectric vehicle battery packs 125 kW available for cycling two battery packs simultaneously on independently programmed cycling programs provides high power quality to the batteries and feeds power back to the grid the only battery cycler capable of duplicating hybrid EV cycles Establish Test Procedures AeroVironment is assisting in development of appropriate test strategies suited for electric and hybrid electric vehicles. Evaluate Battery Management Systems. At least six battery management systems will be evaluated for userfriendliness, accuracy and adaptability: Firing Circuits Batlog Micro AeroVironment SmartGuard(D Electrosource Maximizer AC Propulsion Charge Management System Drake Associates Badicheq HPower Battery Sentinel Pack Testing And Field Testing At least four battery management systems will receive sidebyside testing. Two identical packs will be wired in series, one equipped with a battery management system and one without (the control pack). Simultaneous cycling of both packs will be performed by the ABC150 while monitoring the packs via data acquisition systems. The same systems tested on the bench will be installed in working electric vehicles for field testing. Data analysis will be performed using battery pack throughput records and periodic capacity measurements. Project Schedule: This two year effort will allow life cycle testing of four sets of battery packs equipped with four different battery management systems for up to 600 cycles each. Simultaneous testing of the same systems in vehicles will allow an evaluation of the systems by users and will prove the system's roadworthiness. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-122IA037-000725-B012-325http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0418.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060637 text/html 4440HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:58:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Design and Fabrication of SiC Rectifiers Performing Organization: Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey Technical POC: Professor Jian Zhao, (908) 4455240 Project Summary: While SiC rectifiers with over 1,000 V capability have been reported they are all based onvertical structures which make them severely limited in achieving high total current capabilities. At present and inthe near future, these rectifiers may not be practical applications because of the presence of the vertical,"deviceshorting" micropipes in SiC. The demonstrated high voltage rectifiers were typically reported with currentsin the milliampere range because a larger current rectifier would require a larger diode area which inevitably willinclude some micropipes, resulting in, not only, a substantially reduced switch voltage, but also unacceptableuniformity and catastrophic damages. Besides the lack of good control in both epilayer thickness and dopingconcentration in the mid 1015 cm3 range and the maximum 101lm epilayers commercially available make itimpossible, at present time, to fabricate the conventional vertical power rectifiers near 1,000 V with a high currentcapability and acceptable uniformity. In this project, we propose to develop planar SiC pn rectifiers using our recent invention in p+ and n+ SiC formationby ion implantation. In this twoyear project, our goal is to demonstrate the feasibility of the planar rectifiers and todevelop a fabrication technology suitable for commercial production of SiC power rectifiers with a few tens ofamperes total current and up to 2,400 V capabilities needed for electric vehicles and many other applications. Contrary to the many ongoing aggressive efforts on developing SiC or Si based IGBTs and MCTs, little effort hasbeen made to dramatically improve, in comparison to the currently used Si pIn diodes, the performance andreliability of power rectifiers which are needed for each and every kind of power electronic system. This projectaims at a breakthrough by a factor of 10 to 100 in power semiconductor rectifier performance urgently needed, notjust for immediate use, together with Sibased IGBTs and MCTs, for electric vehicles, but also for the merging hightemperature SiC technologies for future advanced electric vehicles. At the end of this twoyear project, 600 V planar rectifiers with up to a 3A total current will be developed for 300Coperation. Preliminary 1,000 V rectifiers, with up to lA total current, will also be developed. The most important contribution of this project, if successful, is the demonstration of the feasibility and thedevelopment of the planar SiC rectifier technology which will have widespread applications in almost every kind ofpower electronic system. Project deliverables: Planar SiC power rectifier of 600 to 1,000 V Project Schedule: Expected to begin May 1, 1996 & continue for 2 yrs. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-123IA037-000725-B010-148http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0208.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055907 text/html 3510HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:18 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: CALSTART Data Acquisition System (CDAS) Performing Organization: CALSTART Technical Contact: Tai Nuyen (818) 565-5600 (phone) (818) 565-5610 (fax) Program Description CALSTART designed and developed its first generation DAS in 1993 and installed it on a number of heavy electric vehicles. These systems were designed to use a computer to collect and synthesize data recovered from distributed monitoring points. While quite robust and capable of handling significant volumes of data, the first generation DAS was larger and more costly than acceptable for the general EV/HEV market. The CALSTART Data Acquisition System (CDAS) is currently being redesigned as a low cost, on-board data acquisition for EVs and HEVs. This second generation system will allow users to evaluate the performance of their EVs and HEVs by monitoring all of the various systems, subsystems and components on the vehicle. CALSTART's first generation system allows the capability to monitor up to 64 differential signals and 64 single-ended signals. CALSTART is now working on a new version of this system which will be able to monitor the above signals as well as up to 256 individual batteries. During charging, the CDAS will also allow for limited battery equalization. CALSTART's second generation DAS will be based on a PC Card hard drive for data storage, which has a much smaller profile than the current hard drive being used. As a result, power consumption for the new design has been significantly reduced and operator inputs have been virtually eliminated. CALSTART also has plans to incorporate the use of a radio-frequency (RF) unit for the battery monitoring system. Milestones A prototype is expected in May of 1996, with installation in a variety of EVs and HEVs in 1996. Full commercialization is planned by late 1996. Participants CALSTART - System Developer Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  Co-Funder California Energy commission - Co-Funder Federal Transit Administration  Co-Funder Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-124IA037-000725-B012-223http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0414.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060548 text/html 3117HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:57:57 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Teach the Technology & Vehicle Demonstration Performing Organization: PSI Energy, Indianapolis Power & Light, Delphi Energy & Engine Management Systems Technical POC: Madelyn Harwood, PSI Energy, (317) 8381518 Project Summary: School age children in grades 5  12 are learning about the latest electric vehicle technologythrough the program "Teach the Technology", developed by Electricore along with Delphi Energy & EngineManagement Systems, PSI Energy, Indianapolis Power and Light and the Brownsburg, Indiana, Public SchoolSystem. Successfully piloted in 1991, the basic program partners practicing engineers and students. The volunteerinstructors focus on: Electric vehicles and related technologies, both current and future; Multiple purposes and advantages of the electric vehicle; Career opportunities in companies that manufacture or service electric vehicles and other advanced technologies; Educational prerequisites to enter technologyintensive careers. Each class is typically 45 minutes long and includes the use of an electric vehicle for demonstration and display. Electricore is actively involved with vehicle demonstration activities throughout the MidAmerican states andelsewhere as appropriate. Currently, Electricore has participated in over 50 vehicle demonstrations during its firsttwo years. Other activities include Electricore's participation in the Global Electric Auto News (GLEAN) trademagazine. Project Deliverables: Teach the Technology Manual and VDM Events Project Schedule: Ongoing Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-125IA037-000725-B009-92http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0103.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055419 text/html 4896HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:46:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: High Efficiency Heavy Duty Design Performing Organization: E Noa Corporation 1141 Waimanu Street, Suite 151 Honolulu, Hi 96814 Technical POC: John Brizdle Phone: 8085938076, ext. 302 Fax: 8085938752 EMail: Project Summary: This project will provide technology that will extend the range, lower the cost, and improvethe safety of electric vehicles.  Phase I The basic work plan begins with the fabrication of the baseline technology demonstrator.In this case, the vehicle will be an electric Trolley operating in Waikiki, Hawaii along afixed route. The vehicle will be approximately 26,000 lb. gvw with a Delco Power ControlSystems 120 kW AC propulsion system. The batteries for this project will be SAFTNiCads. The Trolley will be commercially operated in a competitive internationalenvironment. There is an existing Trolley business along the same route. Therefore, thereis readily available existing data to compare to the electric Trolley when it is introduced tothe market.  Phase I I The second phase of the project is to enhance the software capabilities of the motorcontroller. The specific goals are 1) to improve range by a minimum of 2% up to 15% bydeveloping software that minimizes the impact of inefficient driver behavior; 2) to moreefficiently capture regenerative braking power; 3.) to optimize the cruise control function;4) to reduce cost by adding field programmability to the motor controller software; and 5)to improve safety by developing an automatic hill hold capability. These improvements will be designed and tested at the Delco facilities in California.When the improvements are certified by Delco, the new software will be loaded into theelectric Trolley in Honolulu for real world testing. The data that is collected will becompared to the initial data generated by the older software. This project combines high technology improvements in motor controller software with areal world test for medium to heavy vehicles. The military and transit applications areunlimited . Project Deliverables: Electric Trolley will be manufactured by Classic Trolleys, Inc. InTalent, Oregon. The trolley will be powered by a Delco 120 kW motorwith SAFT NiCadbatteries. The electric Trolley will be operated by E Noa Corporation in Honolulu along the "OldTown Honolulu Trolley Tour". Currently, there are 11 Trolleys operating on this tour, thatcarry 325,000 passengers per year. Data from the Trolley operation will be collected and sent to the Electric and HybridVehicle National Data Center (EHV NDC) at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. Delco Power Control Systems will complete the software improvements at their plant inCalifornia. The new software improvements will be field tested in Honolulu on the electric Trolleys. The data from the improved software will be sent to the EHV NDC. Project Schedule: July 1995 Project Begins September 1995 Electric Trolley chassis under construction. Software improvements under development. June 1996 ElectricTrolley delivered to Honolulu, Hawaii. June 1997 Software improvements ready for testing in Honolulu, Hawaii. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-126IA037-000725-B011-110http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0305.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060219 text/html 3852HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:54:29 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Multifuel Reformer/ Fuel Cell Hybrid Bus Performing Organization: H Power Systems Corporation Technical POC: Richard Johnson (916) 864-4980 Project Summary: This program will develop a compact multi-fuel fuel processorand combine it with a PEM fuel cell stack scaled up from the precursor light duty fuelcell vehicle project also headed by H Power. This scaled up system will bedemonstrated on JP8 (high grade jet fuel), or other medium distillate hydrocarbonfuel, in a hybrid electric bus taking advantage of H Power's experience from ourDOE sponsored methanol powered fuel cell hybrid buses. This type of bus propulsion offers the following key advantages: Greatly reduced emissions compared with conventional diesel engines. Lower fuel costs through higher energy efficiency. Lower projected operating and maintenance costs. Use of logistical fuels for military and widespread commercial applications. Competitive projected system power density and cost. Project Deliverables: This project will result in the development of a 50 to 70 kilowatt PEM fuel cell systemthat operates on JP8 fuel, integrated into a hybrid electric bus for test,demonstration, and further development. Project Schedule: Fuel processor development and testing will be complete in Spring of 1997. Designand testing of the fuel cell power system will be complete in Fall of 1997, leading tofull integration into the demonstration bus by early 1998. A reforming fuel processor will be used that can run on logistic fuels, includinggasoline, diesel and JP8. The fuel processor will provide for sulfur removal and COreduction to a level compatible with PEM fuel cell operation. A closed loop waterrecovery system will collect fuel cell product water for the fuel processor. This project deals with the PNGV recognized challenges of: thinner and lighter weight separator plates of metal and other base materials; polymer membrane optimization; and mass production platelet fabrication methods with the potential for very low cost separator plate designs. Our performance objectives include matching the power density of internalcombustion diesel propulsion systems in 2001. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-127IA038-000736-B034-31http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0701.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061257 text/html 5696HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:05:10 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: High Voltage Variable Speed AC to AC Motor Drive (traction drive inverter demonstration) Performing Organization: D.C. Transformation Program Description D.C. Transformation, Inc. (DCT) has an innovative inverter topology that can be readily adapted to meet the power conditioningrequirements of a traction drive vehicle. A high power inverter that can accept variable frequency AC input voltage and produce avariable frequency AC output at high efficiency can be achieved using DCT's Power Conditioning System (PCs). Preliminarydiscussions with motor generator manufacturers have pointed out that a matched motor generator pair operators at an optimumvoltage of approximately 3kV can achieve an efficiency in excess of 98.5%. The PCS technology is well suited for operation at orabove the 3kV point with power levels ruing into the megawatts. A prototype system is being built in a laboratory environment for proof of principle purposes and for validation of the analyticalmodel. In the current configuration, facility power of 580 VAC will now through a 300kva three phase fullwave bridge rectifier tobe converted to 4OOVDC. The 144kW inverter will transform the 400 VDC to 440 VAC. The output voltage will be adjustablefrom a minimum of 17S VAC to a maximum of 440vAC. The output frequency will be variable from DC to 80Hz. The conversionrate, which directly affects the output voltage, will vary from approximately 200Hz to 2880Hz. The inverter is comprised of threehomogeneous two-stage modules. Each rnodule has two complimentary stages operating 180 degrees out of phase at afrequency of 1440 Hz. The output waveform is therefore reconstructed at a frequency of 2880 Hz. The higher Inversion ratesignificantly reduces the filter requirements and improves the output power quality. The inversion process is composed of three cycles, sequentialresonant charging, inverse and discharge. Each cycle is currentlyconfigured to occur in series. The charging cycle draws energy from the source and resonantly charges a set of capacitors. Theinversion cycle complements the purity d a one or two of the charging capacitors, depending on the AC output phase angle. Thedischarge cycle then delivers the energy to the load through a output LC filter. For this demonstration a unity power factor loadwill be used. This innovative circuit uses a moderate frequency softswitching technique which continuous y draws power form the AC source.The smooth and continuous flowv of current ensures this inverter will meet the IEEE519 standard regarding the production ofharmonics on the AC input line. The output voltage is conditioned with a 200Hz low pass filter which provides an AC Waveformwith a very low ripple content. The OCT inverter topology is significantly less noisy than an equivalent IGBT based system. The electrically quiet nature of thiscircuit leads to greater efficiency. The advantage comes from the provident use of thyristors. These devices are used inconfiguration that incorporates self commutation. Meaning they are typically turned off under zero current conditions, therebyeliminating the need for lossy snubber circuits. Integral to the 144kW inverter is the digital control system. The hybrid system combines the computational capability of amicroprocessor With the speed and dependable of programmable logic. A digital Canal processor (DSP) handles data flow contraby interfacing to a variety IIO modules. A microcontroller generates adaptive pulse trains Rich are fed to an erasableprogrammable logic device (EPLD). This device supplies triggering signals to the solid state switches. The PCS device is instrumented with a variety of sensors to ensure failsafe operation and internal fault detection. Sensors areplaced at cortical locations to monitor the operating voltage and current. The controller samples these signals to determine thehealth and status of the device under test. This system can be regulated The output power is calculated on a pulse to pulse basisand compared to a desired setpoint. The pulse repetition rate, consequently the power throughput, is adjusted to bring the systeminto specification. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-128IA037-000725-B010-41http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0201.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055753 text/html 3108HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:50:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Electric Vehicle Range Extending Generator Performing Organization: AC Propulsion Technical Contact: Alan Cocconi (909) 592-5399 Program Description AC Propulsion will build on their strong experience in developing advanced power control systems for electric vehicles in this program by developing the first of a family of high-efficiency, high-output range-extending generators for hybrid electric vehicles. The auxiliary power unit to be developed in this program will produce up to 20 kW of power continuously at a range of 300-400 V, with a weight of under 35 kg. This generator will be integrated with a Moller International rotary engine, which produces 30 hp continuously at 5000 rpm. Additionally, the Moller rotary engine will be designed to be very low emission, approaching the equivalent of emission levels of zero-emission vehicles. Once designed and integrated, the auxiliary power unit will be tested on a fully outfitted test stand, to measure power output, and thermal, electrical and overall efficiency. The APU will also be tested in a battery charging application, using AC Propulsion electric vehicle batteries. Milestones During the first six months of the project, AC Propulsion will design and build the alternator and charging system. By the ninth month of the project, the alternator will be integrated with the rotary engine and the stand tests will be underway. Final reports will be completed in the 10th or 11th month of the project. Participants AC Propulsion  program manager Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Moller International  engine supplier Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-129IA037-000725-B011-215http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0310.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060323 text/html 5435HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:55:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Electric & Hybrid Vehicle Data Collection Project Performing Organization: Sacramento Municipal Utility District Technical POC: SMUD: Craig Childers (916) 7326350, cchilde@smud.org Project Summary: The Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium Data CollectionProject is collecting data to study how well SETC Electric and Hybrid vehicles performunder a variety of controlled test and reallive fleet driving conditions. Accurate monitoringof vehicle performance is a necessary part of SETC EV/Hybrid development projects,infrastructure development, utility power planning, and fleet operations planning. Data Collection Project Objectives: To quantify performance characteristics of Sacramento Consortium Electric Vehicles,Hybrid EVs, battery packs, and electric drive system components, Utilize this data to evaluate progress and provide feedback for SacramentoConsortium EV development efforts, and To share performance data and measurement developments with other ARPAConsortia and the EV community. The SETC EV/ Hybrid Data Collection Project consists of several subprojects: Monthly EV Energy Use Logging: All SMUD EVs are presently being equipped withAC kwhr meters. Upgrades to be made in l 9961997 will include addition of hour metersand development/ installation of totalizing DC kwhr meters on selected vehicles. Thesesystems are manually read once a month, and recorded values are entered into SMUD'svehicle database. Sensor Harness Development: A standardized set of sensors is under developmentthat will allow use with a variety of data recording systems, including both the Manual andAutomatic ARPA systems described below. REV E installations include current probesfor battery pack and aux. system, battery pack and aux. power voltage, 6 temperatureprobes, 2 accelerometers, tiltmeter, and odometer/speedometer. Future revisions willinclude motor power measurements, altitude/pressure, vehicle heading or location fromGPS system, hybrid current, and multiple accessory on/off status. Manually Operated ARPA TimeSeries Data Acquisition Systems: These data systems are manually operated by EV program personnel during periodic vehicle testing,standardized test trips, and routine trips. Systems setups are flexible,laptopcomputerbased, and can display a variety of realtime parameters for vehicleoperators. Data recording is done on laptop PC drives, and is archived and analyzedlater to provide feedback on vehicle performance to SETC programs for battery, drivesystem, hybrid power source, or vehicle development. Data is also converted to ARPAElectric Vehicle National Data Center (EVNDC) format and downloaded to the EVNDCdata base at the University of Hawaii for further analysis and data sharing amongstconsortia. Automatic Recording ARPA TimeSeries Data Acquisition Systems: These systems will provide much of the same TimeSeries data as Manual systems for the same purposes, but will allow data collection in vehicles issued to routine users. Systems will run automatically with no effort on the part of the vehicle operator, and data will be stored in largecapacity drives, transmitted over radio link, or communicated through thecharging station connection. Project Schedule: The overall EV data collection effort will continue throughout the deployment of EVs inSacramento. Near term milestones include: Monthly EV Logging Instrument Upgrades 6/96 6/97 Manual ARPA TimeSeries DAS Improvements 2/96 6/97 Additional Manual ARPA TimeSeries DAS Deployment 5/95 3/98 Automatic ARPA TimeSeries DAS Development 21976197 Automatic ARPA TimeSeries DAS Deployment 61973198 Vehicle qualification and periodic performance testing ONGOING Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-130IA037-000725-B009-134http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0104.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055452 text/html 3202HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:46:56 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Rapid Charging Unit (RCU) Evaluation Performing Organization: Hawaiian Electric Company (HECO) P. O. Box 2750 Honolulu, Hi 968400001 Technical POC: David G. Waller Phone: 808-543-4794 Fax: 808-543-4747 EMail: dwaller@hei.com Project Summary: Three RCU units will be installed, monitored and compared. HEVDP is providing 73vehicles to the military, state and local governments, and commercial businesses. Arepresentative fleet will be modified to allow rapid charging. The rest of the vehicles willform a control group. The RCUs to be compared are: Electronic Power Technology, Inc. (EPTI) 100 kW unit Northrop Grumman Corporation 100 kW unit Norvik Technologies 150 kW unit Project Deliverables: Three operational rapid charging units. Fleet of vehicles equipped to use RCU. Final Report on use of RCU and effect on batteries. Project Schedule: (Time frame is based on time after contract signature.) Contract Negotiation and Signing Project Start Order Norvik Equipment Q1 Study locations forRCU installation Q1 Inspect EPTI Charger and develop operating spec. Q1 Evaluate sedans Q2 Evaluate pickups Q2 Evaluate buses Q3 Install Infrastructure for Northrop Grumman RCU Q3 Install Northrop Grumman RCU Q3 Select and modify vehicles for rapid charging Q3 Test Northrop Grumman RCU Q4 Install Norvik RCU Q5 Test Norvik RCU Q5 Develop operating parameters and usage history Q6 Final Report Q7 Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-131IA037-000725-B010-230http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0213.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055946 text/html 3260HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Distributed Energy Management System Development and Demonstration Performing Organization: Delco Electronics Power Control Systems Technical Contact: Chris Lawler (310) 517-6915 (phone) (310) 517-6721 (fax) Program Description Heavy duty electric vehicles, such as buses, contain multiple strings of Description parallel battery packs that charge at different rates due to inherent imbalances between the individual battery modules. High power charging is also becoming a prevalent need by heavy-duty electric vehicle which compounds the charging problem. To address the problem associated with charging multiple battery packs comprised of batteries of varying capacity and temperature, Delco Electronics Power Control Systems (DEPCS) will develop, test, and demonstrate an effective multi-pack, energy management system. To properly compensate for all the variation within a pack and between multiple packs requires a system that monitors individual battery module temperature and voltage, and compensates for the capacity variations through charging equalization. The proposed DEPCS Distributed Energy management System (DEMS) will incorporate individual battery voltage and temperature monitoring and equalization capability using a system of interconnected distributive modules. The distributive modules are managed through a battery pack controller, which provides total system control. Westinghouse, Bluebird, and GNB will all be active participants in this program with DEPCS. Milestones Delco Electronics Power Control Systems will develop, fabricate, and field test a prototype DEMS hardware over a 12 month period. Participants Delco - Program Manager Bluebird - Vehicle Integrator GNB - Battery Supplier Northrop Grumman - Inverter Supplier Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-132IA037-000725-B011-266http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0403.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060348 text/html 2590HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:56:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Hybrid Electric Bus Development & Demonstration Performing Organization: Delphi Energy & Engine Management Systems, Allison Transmission Division of GMC, Delco Propulsion Systems Technical POC: Dick VanderKolk, DelphiE, (317) 5794971 Jim Ordo, ATD, (317) 2425660 Project Summary: The goal is to push the series hybrid electric drive propulsion system closer to production byadvancing component, subsystem, and system technologies. This was accomplished, in part, by leveraging workalready done on prior programs such as the GM Impact and the "Indy Shuttle" bus program. This technologyadvancement will be demonstrated by placing buses in regular service at sites in Chattanooga and Indianapolis. A thirdbus will be retained by the Allison/Delphi team for further development work. Project Deliverables: Integrate purpose built hybrid, electric drive propulsion systems into three 22foot shuttle buses, test, and operate at customer sites Project Schedule: Testing of busses at GM Proving Grounds and customer sites in Chattanooga and Indianapolis through 12/3196. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-133IA037-000725-B009-369http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0116.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055733 text/html 2623HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:49:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Next Generation Zero Emissions Utility Vehicle Performing Organization: RapidTech, Inc. 95 South Market Street. Suite 220 San Jose, CA 95113 Technical POC: Gloria Rose Ott Phone: 408-298-5027 Fax: 408-298-3585 EMail: go@livewire.com Project Summary: The RapidTech Team is comprised of TaylorDunnof Anaheim, California, Detroit Center Tool (DCT) of Detroit,Michigan, and RapidTech based in Silicon Valley in San Jose, California. DARPA EV 94 funded the team to design and revolutionizethe manufacturing process of an electric utility vehicle. Theelectric vehicle Industry has suffered in its inability to producein volume and this project addresses many of the obstacles thathave prevented manufacturing productivity and innovation. Project Deliverables: RapidTech will deliver a "right from thebox"  kit as well as a manufacturing plan to the Stateof Hawaii. Project Schedule: This project was launched on December 9, 1994and will conclude on July 31, 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-134IA037-000725-B013-241http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0512.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060922 text/html 2947HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:01:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Hybrid Electric HMMWV Program Performing Organization: Pentastar Electronics, inc. POINT OF CONTACT: Ken Winters Manager. Power Systems Phone: 2058952370 Program Summary: The Hybrid Electric HMMWXI Program objective is the development of an advanced high performancehybrid electric power train for use in a modified High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV)tactical and support vehicle for the U.S. Army. This vehicle is being designed to outperform theconventional diesel powered stock vehicle in many areas including acceleration, top speed,gradeability, and fuel economy while adding capabilities for stealth operations mobile electrical powerdelivery and robotic operations. Through the use of an advanced, low emission, diesel motor driving apermanent magnet generator operating in tandem with an advanced high energy density lead acidbattery, this vehicle will achieve acceleration from 0 to 60 mph in 11 seconds typically, a maximumspeed of 80 mph, and a gradeability of 60%with a payload of up to 3400 pounds. Fully independentfour wheel drive using no mechanical differentials will afford increased traction control and mobility fromthat of the standard vehicle. No compromises will be made to the interior of the vehicle so thatpassenger space and comfort will be the same. Nor will the payload area be changed in any way sothat standard HMMWV payload packages can still be accommodated. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-135IA038-000736-B034-62http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0702.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061312 text/html 4351HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:05:17 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: The Northeast Advanced Thermal Management Technology Project Performing Organization: Evermont Program Description The Vermont Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project received a grant from the AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (ARPA) and the Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium(NAVC) Or the Northeast A>Jvane:cd Thermal Management Technology Project(NATMTP). NA1~MTP identifies, develops and tests electric vehicle technologies with thegoal of optimizing battery box thermal management, cabin comfort ant vehicle range intemperatures down to 20 degree F. Project Activities Data is collected on five 1995 Solectria Force sedans. Four of these vehicles have beenoutfitted with electronic data acquisition systems to provide information on vehicle andbattery temperature and performance Data is also collected through manual driver logs;test course nuns; static heat tests and special studies using temporary data loggers. Thisdata has been collected, analyzed and displayed in graphs depicting relationshipsbetween temperature and performance. The Northeast Advanced Thermal Management Technology Project tests and evaluatesthe performance of a number of fuel fired heater designs. Fuel fired heaters provide anefficient use of fossil fuels and eliminate an additional drain on the batteries from having toheat the vehicle cabins. The Vermont Electric Vehicle demonstration Project invested infour different fuelfired heaters to discover the one with optimum performance. An electricheatpump was also designed and demonstrated. The Vermont Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project worked with the U+S. Array Corps ofEngineers Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory (CRREL) to develop acabin thermal model and a battery enclosure model. Results from these tests indicate thatbattery thermal management systems appear to substantially overcome adverse effects ofcold weather on leadacid batteries although opportunities exist for optimization throughrefinements and energy efficiency improvements. CRREL also conducted controlled tests on EVermont's electric vehicles to identify frictionand thermal losses. These studies indicate that increased frictional resistance to vehiclemotion accounts for a major reduction in vehicle operating range during winter months.Some of the increase in friction can be abated by lowviscosity lubricants. Low rollingresistance tires can also increase range in all weather conditions although they may notprovide adequate traction for winter environments. The Northcast Advanced Thermal Management Technology Project is also investigatinghow heat conservation might be used to heat d vehicle and how to decrease heat lossthrough thermal pane installation. targeted cabin heating is being addressed throughheated seats and heated steering wheels. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-136IA037-000725-B011-127http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0306.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060240 text/html 4004HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:54:39 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Fuel Cell Hybrid Electric Vehicle Project Performing Organization: H Power Systems Corporation Technical POC: Richard Johnson (916) 8644980 Project Summary: A compact, low cost, massproducible design for protonexchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells is the focus of this project This advancementis made possible through technology for thin metal fuel cell separators withIntegrated Fluid Management Technology (IFMT), the fluid equivalent of theintegrated circuit. These separators combine the functions of thermal management, watermanagement, manifolding, and reactant distribution into a single leakfree structure0.1 inch thick, resulting in stack power densities three times higher than conventionalgraphite designs for a given MEA current density. H Power has developed high-performance, repeatable MEAs optimized for ambientpressure air operation using DuPont Nafion 115 and 105 membranes formaximum fuel cell system efficiency. H Power's MEAs feature very low catalystloadings and are fabricated using technologies that are easily scaleable to low costmass production. H Power is working with Hydrogen Burner Technology, Inc. (HBTI) to optimize HBTI'spatented underoxidized burner (UOB). The resulting reformer and associated fuelprocessor components convert conventional hydrocarbon fuels such as gasoline,diesel, and natural gas into hydrogen and CO-with only trace amounts of pollutants(at least a factor of 10 reduction over combustion power sources). The use of alogistically available liquid fuel such as diesel or gasoline allows widespread use offuel cell powered vehicles without the tremendous cost of a new fuel production,storage and distribution infrastructure. This project is a step toward medium and heavy duty hybrid electric vehicle systems which will be cost competitive with comparable diesel engine systems before 1999,and offer equivalent power density shortly thereafter. Project Deliverables: This project will result in the development of a 10 kilowatt fuel cell system which will be integrated into a light duty composite chassis pickup truck for demonstrations. It will also result in the bench test of a compact reformer that can operate on either natural gas or liquid hydrocarbon fuels. Project Schedule: Fuel cell stack and reformer testing will be complete in mid1996. The fuel cellsystem will then be integrated into the test and demonstration vehicle by mid1997. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-137IA037-000725-B012-253http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0415.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060559 text/html 4765HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:58:08 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Consumer Demographics Performing Organization: PSI Energy, Indianapolis Power & Light Technical POC: Madelyn Harwood, PSI Energy, (317) 8381518 Jim Wittman, IPL, (317) 2618214 Project Summary: Project objective is to determine baseline attitudes and perceptions of electric vehicles. Electricore commissioned a survey of people living in the Indianapolis Power and Light, PublicService Indiana, Southern Indiana Gas and Electric, Northern Indiana Public Service Company, andIndianaMichigan Power service areas, Chattanooga, Tennessee, and Cincinnati, Ohio. The results of the study of consumer attitudes showed that over half of those surveyed considered themselvesfamiliar with electric cars, and almost half said they would consider purchasing an electric vehicle. The study,which consisted of telephone surveys and the interviewing of focus groups, was concluded in November 1994. When asked how likely they were to consider purchasing an electric vehicle, 10 percent of those surveyed statedthey would be very likely to do so, while another 36 percent said they would be somewhat likely. Very unlikely wasthe choice of 29 percent of the respondents. "Among those whose attitude was unlikely, the reasons centeredupon their development and familiarity," the report continued. "A total of 31 percent of the unlikely segment statedthey will wait until the technology is perfected with an additional 14 percent stating they simply were not familiarenough with the cars at this time." Respondents cited the perceived range and speed of electric cars as anegative, according to the report, adding that those with a negative attitude toward an electric car purchase were"style or performance consumers." Other barriers in the consideration of an electric car were income and singlecar households. Among the report's findings: 23 percent of respondents in IPL's service area, and 25 percent in PSI's service area, were either aware of EV usage in their area or had seen or used an EV. Fiftyfour percent of those surveyed in Chattanooga made the same claim. (Chattanooga is using electric busses as part of its public transportation system.) The survey showed that the group most interested in an electric vehicle were better educated males with middleincome white collar jobs. Likelihood of purchasing an EV or interest in an EV varies directly with familiarity, according to the report, pointing out that more than twice as many of those who are very familiar with electric cars are very likely to consider them. This would seem to suggest that building familiarity and interest go hand in hand. The report recommended that electric cars should be positioned as an alternative vehicle and not as a direct competitor to internal combustion vehicles. It also concluded that advertising and demonstrations of electric vehicles should be used to increase the public's familiarity with EVs. Project Deliverables: Electric Vehicle Attitudes Research Report Study Project Schedule: Although a follow up study is scheduled for this fall, the requirements of this project andoriginal objectives have been met. Project completed. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-138IA037-000725-B013-227http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0511.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060859 text/html 4432HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:01:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Improved Cost and Performance Electric Vehicle Powertrains Performing Organization: General Electric; Analog Devices; IXYS; VPEC POINT OF CONTACT: Jim Crowgey Phone: (540) 3875760 Program Summary: "The Virginia South Team is developing a low cost advanced technology inverter for on road and offroad vehicles, exploring the advantages of soft switching, and leveraging the advantages of singleCMOS chip motor/vector microcontroller and integrated IGBT/gate control modules" Virginia South Team Members  Primary Responsibilities GE  Inverter design, traction drive integration, and test Analog Devices  IC chip microcontroller design IXYS  "Smart" IGBT module design VPEC  Inverter soft switching topology/PWM algorithm selection, and inverter test Inverter General Description Control platform suitable for multiple applications On road vehicle traction drive 300 VDC battery supply Off road vehicle traction drive 72 VDC battery supply Liquid, convection, or conduction cooling options 50% reduction in cost and size Reduction in switching losses/reduced capacitor bank Single mother/daughter PWB, single IC chip microcontroller "Smart" IGBT modules integrating gating and protection circuits Minimum use of connectors Optimized heat sink design Smooth torque control Smooth torque through low speed range Smooth transition motoring to regeneration Reduced switching and conduction losses Space vector modulation to reduce switching losses Soft switching option to further reduce switching losses (where cost effective) IGBTs selected to minimize conduction losses and thermal impedance Control Description Single mother/daughter PWB Single IC chip microcontroller (ADMC300) containing: A/D converters PWM control Tach interface Drive differentiation through software Power Device Description Dual 300 A/600 V IGBT modules (initial product) Integrated gate driver and protection circuits Reduced thermal losses and thermal impedance Benefit: Cost is a primary determinant in design decisions for traction drive inverters, since the ACtraction drive must be cost competitive with internal combustion and DC electric traction drives Thedesign goal of this program is to develop inverters for on road vehicle (320 VDC battery system) whichcan be marketed for less than $2500. The ultimate benefit from this RA94 program is the developmentof improved new technology reduced cost and size inverters to promote growth of the electric vehicleindustry Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-139IA037-000725-B010-163http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0209.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055914 text/html 2534HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Internet Web Site Project for Advanced Transportation Performing Organization: CALSTART Technical Contact: Dave Sotero (818) 565-5600 (voice) (818) 565-5610 (fax) Program Description This program includes developing and operating an Internet based communication and information network for advanced transportation and clean fuel vehicle technologies. This network will include daily news summaries, on-line access to technical reports and other important data, discussion groups and electronic mail capabilities, summaries of legislative and regulatory developments, and other critical information. Milestones By the end of 1995, CALSTART and the American Environmental Institute will design the Internet network and establish functionality and features, set up an configure the hardware and software, load the content onto network server, conduct initial testing, and create and initially operate the CALSTART Internet network. Participants CALSTART - Program Manager, Editing American Environmental Institute - Research, Programming Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-140IA037-000725-B012-297http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0417.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060624 text/html 3082HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:58:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: SiC MOSgated Thyristor Performing Organization: Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey Technical POC: Professor Jian Zhao, (908) 4455240 Project Summary: The objective of this project is to design and fabricate a SiC MOS gated thyristor (MGT) whichwill find immediate applications in electric vehicles. This MGT will not suffer from the stumbling blocks anddevastating problems against the development of SiCbased power devices including the Ushaped groovedMOSFETs (UMOS), the Insulated Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBTs) and the MOSControlled Thyristors (MCTs).Concentration will be focused on (i) growth and characterization of SiO2 on SiC UShaped walls etched by theadvanced low damage and residual free high density plasma technique, (ii) ion implantation to form ptype SiC, and(iii) ohmic contracts to the etched and implanted ptype 6HSiC. These three issues represent the critical barriersfor achieving 600V power MGTs with 1000 A/cm2 and 300 C capability for electric vehicle applications. At the end of the first year, 400V thyristors capable of 600 A/cm2 at 300C without MOSgate will be developed.Three power MGTs capable of 600V, 1000A/cm2 and 300 operation will be delivered for independent evaluation atthe end of the second year. Project deliverables: 600V SiC MOSgated thyristors capable of 1000A/cm2 at 3.5V for 300 operation Project Schedule: 06 Months: 100V MOSFET Demonstrated; 612 Months: 400V Thyristor Fabricated; 1218Months: 400V MOSgated Thyristor Demonstrated; 1824 Months: 600V MOSgated Thyristor Achieved. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-141IA037-000725-B014-52http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0521.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061111 text/html 1981HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:03:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Vehicle Data Acquisition System & Processing Performing Organization: University of South Florida POINT OF CONTACT: George Moore Telephone: (813) 9744771 Program Summary: The University of South Florida will develop the software/information systems and a processing facilityfor SCAT vehicle O & M data will be transmitted to the National Data Center. Benefit: Process data from SCAT vehicles to provide operating and development information. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-142IA037-000725-B009-347http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0115.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055721 text/html 3124HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:49:30 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Electric and Hybrid Vehicle National Data Center (EHV NDC) Performing Organization: National Data Center, University of Hawaii atManoa (UH/NDC) 2540 Dole Street, Holmes Hall # 246 Honolulu, Hi 96822 Technical POC: Dr. Bor Yann Liaw Phone: 808-956-2339 Fax: 808-956-2336 EMail: liaw@ wiliki . eng . hawaii . edu Project Summary: Provide online information services to DARPA's EHV programto facilitate and support cooperative EHV design and developmentand rapid dissemination of this technology to the program participants.  Collect, manage, and protect shared EHV design and developmentdata using an advanced clientserver database across the Internet.  Provide advanced tools and training for users to access,understand, and utilize data, particularly through simulationand modeling capabilities on the network. Produce useful technicalreports and summaries accessible online via Web Browsers or clientsoftware.  Provide advanced computing capabilities and services centralto EHV development and marketing . Project Deliverables: Data acquisition capabilities access the Internet. OnLine report and summary generation. Timeseries and statistical data analyses Advanced simulation capabilities. Composite materials and structures modeling capabilities. Crash simulation. Project Schedule: The center was established in 1993, and the current funding willallow it to operate for the next two years, to provide services to the DARPA program participants. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-143IA037-000725-B014-20http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0519.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061052 text/html 4841HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:03:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Small Flywheel Battery Systems for Vehicle Power Management Performing Organization:Advanced Technology Program State of Texas, State Match Pool, Allied-Signal Aerospace, AvconControls Inc., Central and Southwest Utilities POINT OF CONTACT: Joe Beno The University of Texas at Austin, Center for Electromechanics Telephone: (512) 4714496 Program Summary: UTCEM is exploiting its high performance composite rotor technology, developed with over S20M ofDOD funding, to develop a stand alone flywheel battery system, complete with power electronics, forvehicular applications. The flywheel will store 2kWh of energy, and produce 100150 kW of power andwill be field tested on a transit bus in the future Other members of the team, AVCON and Allied SignalAerospace Company, will provide complementing magnetic bearing and motor/generator expertiserespectively. The primary objective of the project is to develop dualuse stand alone flywheel battery systems, formilitary and commercial applications Future military requirements for power averaging are moredemanding than commercial applications, and will demand the advanced rotor technology beingapplied in this project. This becomes even more critical with the next generation of combat vehicles,employing EM guns, EM suspensions and EM countermeasures. Until now, flywheel battery systemshave either been low risk and low performance devices or expensive, high risk, moderate performancedesigns. Under this ARPA program, UTCEM will provide the advanced composite rotor technology,developed in DOD programs, for the most demanding high performance flywheels. AdditionallyUTCEM will develop techniques to reduce costs for the high performance rotor to be as low as orlower than conventional wet wound filament technology. This project, top fabricate a moderatecost high performance composite flywheel battery system,capitalizes on an alliance of mass transit providers, university technology developers, and commercialmanufacturing entities. For this reason, the program structure encompasses the elements necessaryto develop the required production technology, formulate component manufacturing plans which areguided by customer-driven system designs, and introduce the technology to the marketplace. Eachmember of the alliance has a vested interest in producing these systems in large numbers and isinvesting considerable resources to insure the success of the program with the ultimate goal of producing a commercially viable unit. Commercial viability will also be enhanced by the composite rotor manufacturing tasks to reduce fabrication costs in the project. In a companion project, UTCEM is leading an effort to develop safety and containment technology toenable future vehicle integration and field demonstration. This effort is being conducted by a team ofthe leading U.S. Flywheel battery developers, DOE National Laboratories, and the leading U.S spintest facility. The program schedule will have preliminary testing of the UTCEM flywheel battery in early summer1996; final flywheel battery testing and cyclical duty cycle testing in Fall 1996; containment andflywheel ring burst testing from April 1996May 1997; integration into a transit bus in early 1997; andfield testing in midlate 1997. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-144IA037-000725-B011-251http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0402.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060339 text/html 3238HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:55:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Data Acquisition Performing Organization: B & W Engineering Enterprises, Inc., Delphi Energy & Engine Management Systems, Allison Transmission Division of GMC, Indiana University  Purdue University at Indianapolis Technical POC: Hamp Barnett, B & W. (423) 2387279 Bob Bridgewater, DelphiE, (317) 5794988 Project Summary: Independent research and testing conducted by B & W Engineering Enterprises was preformed to validate performance, functionality, and power quality of both the hybrid electric buses, electric pickups, and their charging systems. B & W was utilized as an expert consultant on several technical issues. Feedback to the manufacturer was provided as testing was completed. Three electric E10 pickup truck conversions and three 22 foot hybrid electric shuttle buses are equipped with onboarddata acquisition systems (DAS). The intention of the system is for vehicle performancerelated data to be recorded atregular intervals and saved in a format required by and transferred to the Electric Vehicle National Data Center (EVNDC). The DAS is composed of sensors throughout the vehicle, an AeroVironment data acquisition unit, aseriallyconnected Macintosh PowerBook 180 computer, and custom software running on the PowerBook. The DAScontinuously monitors all input sensor channels and serially outputs a format. A driver information log is to bemaintained and its data manually entered and then ready to be sent to the EV NDC. Project Deliverables: Report on test results and analysis as well as power quality. Installation of DAS in three electricpickups and three hybrid shuttle buses. Data collection, transfer, and usersite support. Project Schedule: December 1993 December 1996 Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-145IA037-000725-B010-217http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0212.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055938 text/html 2969HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Energy Management Controller Performing Organization: Delco Electronics Technical Contact: Dr. Larry Wnuk, (310) 517-5748 Program Description Delco Electronics, based in Torrance California, will develop and Energy Management Controller (EMC) for electric and hybrid electric vehicles (E/HEV) including buses. The overall goal of the effort is to significantly increase the efficiency of energy use in an E/HEV through system level control. The EMC will perform as a system controller, able to monitor status signals and provide control signals to E/HEV subsystems such as auxiliary power unit (APU), battery pack monitor/battery management devices, traction motor controller and drive unit, high and low voltage distribution boxes as well as chargeport. Performance gains and efficiency gains are expected from improved control of power sources and loads. Improved control is expected to reduce stresses on the battery resulting in extended cycle life and lower operating costs. Ultimately, the development and implementation of algorithms is expected to reduce net emissions for HEVs through improved control of the APU. Milestones By mid-1996, Delco Electronics will design the prototype energy management controller. By year's end, Delco Electronics will test the controller on a CALSTART hybrid electric bus. Participants Delco Electronics - Program Manager Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency - Co-funder California Trade and Commerce Agency - Co-funder Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-146IA037-000725-B013-163http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0507.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060828 text/html 2312HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Station Cars for Dade County Metro Performing Organization: Florida Power and Light, MetroDate Transit Agency POC: Bob Suggs, Telephone (305) 5224133 Program Summary: Ten EV station cars will be leased and used at selected station along Dade County s MetroRailSystem for use as the flexible portion of the commuter s trip and throughout the day. Supportinginfrastructure needs will be researched and implemented Training and O & M manuals will be provided. Benefit: Rapidly growing fleets of station cars, adjacent to a large number of mass transit stations willallow transit to become a truedoortodoor transportation service for any type of trip. SCHEDULE: Ten vehicles have been received. Target day for startup is April 15, 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-147IA038-000736-B034-210http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0711.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061450 text/html 3045HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:02 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: UMOC Motor Low Cost AC Induction Controller Performing Organization: Solectria Project Goals and Technologies Goal To develop and test a low cost, universal motor controller that: can drive AC induction anal brushless PM motors can use different rotary sensors, can be easily programmed for different uses Result Several alpha and beta test units running with AC induction motors inside and outside Solectria. Successfully tested with brushless PM motors Correct operation with two types of rotary sensors Entering production July 31, 1995 Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-148IA037-000725-B010-343http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0218.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060100 text/html 3304HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:53:14 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Rapid Charge System with Flywheel Energy Storage Performing Organization: Northrop Grumman Technical Contact: Bruce Lenderking (410) 765-0620 Program Description Northrop Grumman and Trinity Flywheels are combining talents in this program to provide a rapid charging system for electric vehicles with an integrated energy storage system, to reduce the impact of the system on the utility power supply grid. The flywheel energy storage system will be designed to reduce the peak power demand of the charging system by 50%, thereby dramatically reducing the costs of supplying energy to electric vehicles during rapid charging. Northrop Grumman (formerly Westinghouse Electric Corporation) has developed a prototype rapid charging system for electric vehicles, with a rated capacity of 130 kW. For a typical light-duty electric vehicle, this system will provide a rapid recharge in 15-20 minutes. This program will integrate with this charging unit a Trinity Flywheel energy storage system of 25 kWh capacity, designed to operate at 60-70 kW, to provide up to 50% of the power requirement. After a charging cycle, the flywheel system is planned to be recharged at less than 50 kW, to reduce peak power demands. The Northrop/Trinity unit will be designed and developed for light-duty fleet applications. The prototype unit will be tested under controlled conditions at the Northrop Grumman facility in Maryland. Milestones During the first twelve months of the project, the flywheel system and the rapid charging unit will be designed and fabricated. During months 12-17, the flywheel and charging systems will be integrated and tested. Participants Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Northrop Grumman  program manager Trinity Flywheels  energy storage system developer Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-149IA037-000725-B012-85http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0408.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060436 text/html 5451HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:56:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: EV Safety Issues and the Safety & Liability Roadmap Performing Organization: Hudson Institute, Northwest Diversified Services Technical POC: Dr. Jim Wheeler, Hudson, (317) 5451537 Mike Beebe, NDS, (419) 6215512 Project Summary: Electric Vehicle development has been accelerated in the past few years due to mandates inseveral states. The use of electric vehicles is expected to be the greatest since the turn of the century. Since manymore electric vehicles will be present on the highways, the changes of accidents will increase with these additionalmiles driven. These vehicles will have a greater probability of interacting with the existing vehicle fleet andinfrastructure. This concern has caused many different groups to look at possible voids in current standards andregulations. Currently, the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), Electricore Power Research Institute's (EPRI)Health and Safety committee, Department of Energy's (DOE) Battery Readiness Committee European standardscommittees, and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) have begun to review, test, anddevelop draft standards. Besides the groups reviewing design and infrastructure issues of electric vehicles,insurance companies will need to know what the cost of repair and safety durability will be for these new vehicles.Therefore, each vehicle developed in the DARPA program will need to be kept aware of all these issues to maximizethe market potential for the vehicle being developed. Electric vehicle safety issues have become one of the major issues which could inhibit the emergence of a viableelectric vehicle industry. New standards and recommended practices are currently being developed by the majormanufacturers and suppliers. The vehicles developed for the DARPA consortia have not had the ongoing capacitiesof attending or being a part of each of these committees. It is important that each vehicle development team in theDARPA consortia understand and are current on each of the new draft safety requirements from these committees.If these items are not designed into their vehicles in the early stages of development, thousands, or millions, ofdollars may be required to redesign the vehicles later. This could cost these new vehicle manufacturers marketshare or eliminate them all together from consideration. It has been recognized by Electricore that each DARPA consortia should have guidance concerning vehicle safetyissues during the development of electric vehicles. As a result, Electricore has taken on the effort of crash testingone of their own electric conversions and sharing the information, creating a safety course for electric vehicle andhybrid users, and is currently compiling a study concerning the safety, environmental, and liability challenges facingthe introduction of electric and hybrid vehicles into the marketplace. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE),Department of Energy's (DOE) Battery Readiness Committee, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration(NHTSA), and the Electric Power Research Institute's (EPRI) Health and Safety Committee, are currently working onelectric vehicle safety standards and recommendations. This project is intended to coordinate all the current safetyefforts within the DARPA consortia. The project will consist of three parts with principal investigator, Michael S.Beebe from NDS, Inc., responsible for attending SAFE, DOE Battery Readiness Committee meetings, etc., andreporting a summary to the DARPA consortia; coordination of all safety testing for each DARPA consortia; to assistDARPA consortia members on electric vehicle development issues as they pertain to safety. Visits to eachconsortia will be done as required. Project Deliverables: Safety & liability roadmap study report, safety issues summary report Project Schedule: Phase I of III completed. Project completion scheduled for Oct 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-150IA037-000725-B010-286http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0215.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060015 text/html 3365HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:52:25 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Programmable DC Controller Performing Organization: Jefferson Programmed Power, LLC Technical Contact: Lee Ackerson (510) 865-0672 (voice) (510) 865-0673 (fax) Program Description Jefferson Programmed Power is a new firm developing and manufacturing programmable, low-cost OEM DC controllers for electric vehicle use. Through the use of microprocessors and sophisticated software, these controllers will help to improve the performance and extend the range of electric vehicles with DC drive trains. In particular, the controller should be able to make greater use of energy created through regenerative braking. The company's goals will be to design controllers for ease of use, high-volume manufacturability, applicability, and low cost. The controllers will have a variety of parameters that can be selected and scaled by OEMs for customization, including throttle responsiveness, turbo or passing gear current limits, temperature compensated current limits, and electronically controlled braking. This new firm, Jefferson Programmed Power (JPP), will launch its operations at the CALSTART business incubator at the Alameda Naval Air Station in Northern California. Aware of the need for such a product, a number of small electric vehicle manufacturers have agreed to test this new controller in their vehicles. Milestones The laboratory version was developed in late 1995. Several pre-production beta units will be developed and tested in vehicles in mid-1996. A Limited production line is to established in 1996. Participants Jefferson Programmed Power program manager Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency program funder Renaissance Cars technical support and testing Battery Automated Transportation technical support and testing Suntera technical support and testing Electric Power Research Institute technical support and testing Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-151IA037-000725-B011-171http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0308.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060303 text/html 4355HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:55:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Advanced Lead-acid Battery Test Project Performing Organization: Sacramento Municipal Utility District Technical POC: Mike Wirsch (916) 7326754 Project Summary: Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium has been fieldtesting advanced lead acid batteries in its fleet of electric vehicles for two years.Field testing prototype or production batteries in vehicles is the real proving groundfor energy storage technology and is key to development of advanced batterysystems. Electrosource Horizon Batteries have been chosen for this test to validate: 27% higher specific gravity  45 win/kg 3.5 times specific power  300w/kg at 80% depth of discharge 2.5 times longer cycle life  400+ cycles short recharge time sealed maintenancefree battery expected low cost of production battery Electrosource's first Horizon Battery (Model #12N95) has been installed in six vehicles operating in the fleet at SMUD and McClellan AFB: 1 Solectria Force 2 composite pickup trucks 1 composite sports car 2 GVans Results of the project have been: Success stemming from proper integration of all the components of a successfulbattery system, including charger and charge management system Monitoring charge and discharge of each module by a cellrelated battery management system has allowed us to accurately observe the dynamics of a batterypack in the field. Testing on a closed loop test track has validated the range and efficiency of the battery pack. Efficiency of the battery system has been 15% better than with previous battery systems. Improvement in calendar life and consistency of the Electrosource Horizon battery has been observed over its first two years of production. Project Deliverables: Batteries were purchased for vehicles  six installations have been completed to date. Charging equipment was modified to accommodate the Badicheq Battery Management System which serves to manage the charge, equalize the batteries, and collect historic data on all discharge and charge cycles. Laboratory testing was performed at the University of California Davis on battery modules prior to their installation in vehicles, and insitu capacity tests of the battery were performed to validate the module capacity. Operational and lifecycle data has been recorded and reported quarterly and will be summarized in the final project report. Project Schedule: This twoyear effort, started in the forth quarter of 1994, will continue through mid1996. The tracking of capacity and life of the batteries will continue as part of theexpanded battery management system evaluation project. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-152IA038-000736-B034-243http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0713.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061506 text/html 3597HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:07:18 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: EMI measurement & Mitigation Testing Through CT EVS Performing Organization: U.S. Naval Undersea Warfare Center Project Summary Project: RA95 Task 20 Submitted by: U.S. Naval Undersea Warfare Center Connecticut Municipal Electric Energy Cooperative Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) is an unintentional form of Electromagnetic Energythat can often effect both the performance of the system creating the interference as wellas external systems. An extreme example of EMI is the case of electric vehicles causingthe inadvertent activation of bomb release mechanisms on aircraft. EMI typicallymanifests itself as a loss of performance in systems that are exposed to the interference,e.g., communication range is reduced, computers malfunction, or monitoring systemsfail. For this task, the Electric Vehicle (EV) will be used to evaluate the potentialemissions of the EV when used in today's hostile commercial EM environment. Ourapproach will asses these risks including the possibility of the EV creating undesirableEMI emissions that can effect others systems. The EV may also be susceptible to EMIfrom the environment however the emphasis in this proposal will be directed towardidentification of EMI emissions from electric vehicles. In addition, we will seek to identifyappropriate EMI abatement techniques. When the responsible party has implementedthe recommended corrective measures, we will retest the particular vehicle orcomponent to ensure desired performance. Electric vehicles can have military as well as civilian applications. On the battle spacestealth is of fundamental importance. Vehicles can therefore gain a degree of stealth byconverting to electric drive vice internal combustion engine. As such, this proposal Willidentify the critical EMI issues that effect military electric vehicles on the battle space.The measurement of electromagnetic emissions from both military as well as civilianvehicles will be useful in creating an EV emission data base. This data base will then beused to identify those EMI emissions issues that effect EV performance. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-153IA037-000725-B009-304http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0113.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055658 text/html 2494HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:49:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Electric Vehicle Conversion Performing Organization: U.S. Electricar 5 Thomas Mellon Circle, Suite 5 San Francisco, CA 94132 Technical POC: Rick Duste Phone: 415-656-2414 Fax: 415-656-2402 EMail: Project Summary: Integrate GM Delco Dolphin 50 AC electric drive system and Hawker Genesis lead acid batteries into 11 Geo Prizm sedans and 17 S10 pickups. Vehiclesassembled in Hawaii. Detection Limit Technology data acquisition systems installedto collect data for reporting to the Electric and Hybrid Vehicle National Data Center at the Universityof Hawaii at Manoa. Project Deliverables: 11 electric Geo Prizm sedans. 17 electric Chevy S10 pickup trucks with Hawker batteries. 1 electric Chevy S10 pickup truck with long range batterypack. Project Schedule: 28 vehicles delivered and in service. Long range pickup under construction. Data collection in process. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-154IA037-000725-B010-261http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0222.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060003 text/html 3118HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:52:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Lifecycle Testing of Composite Flywheel Energy Storage Systems Performing Organization: U.S. Flywheel Systems, Inc. Technical Contact: Mahesh Talwar (805) 961-8922 Program Description U.S. Flywheel Systems has developed a high-energy density composite rotor flywheel energy storage system, with a projected capability of enduring 10,000 charge/discharge cycles (the equivalent of approximately 27 years of normal operations). This project will test a sample of four flywheel modules under controlled accelerated cycling regimes, to determine the actual durability and failure modes of these energy storage systems. The flywheel modules developed by U.S. Flywheel Systems (USFS) have the following characteristics: Specific Power 2000 W/kg Specific Energy 150 W-hr/kg Energy Density 4.4 k Wh Recharge Time 10-20 minutes In this year-long program, USFS will use a proprietary state-of-the-art data acquisition system, using 125 sensors and data channels per flywheel, to measure 3-dimensional strain profiles under repeated cyclic testing, and to attempt to predict material yield prior to system failure. Milestones The modules will be tested intensively until failure or five months of consecutive cycling are accomplished. Participants Ashman Technology, Inc.  flywheel motors AVCON, Inc.  magnetic bearings Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency  co-funder Power R&D  power electronics U.S. Flywheel Systems  program manager Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-155IA037-000725-B011-55http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0303.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060151 text/html 5192HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:54:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium (SETC) Project Title: Electrosource Sfold Battery for Hybrid EVs Performing Organization: Electrosource, Inc. Technical POC: Steve Addington (512) 4456606 Project Summary: Development of a high voltage and high specific power batteryconfiguration that is necessary for a PNGV serial hybrid electric vehicle design todeliver comparable performance to an ICE vehicle. The S-fold battery for hybrid EVswill outstrip all competitive technologies by providing: round trip energy efficiency approaching 90% short, low impedance current paths  excellent conductance predicted 750 to 1000 watts/kg specific power  excellent for hybrid applications will maintain 50 win/kg specific energy battery design using the basic components of the proven Electrosource Horizon batteries which should permit faster development of Sfold battery use of standard Horizon(D lead acid plates allowing low target cost of $150/kwh By optimizing the already proven power characteristics of the Horizon battery, aneven higher specific power can be achieved without sacrificing energy density. Thisis done by stacking the folded plates interleaved with separators. The capacity of theSfold configuration is determined by the area of the grid, five (5) amperehours, forthis project. Other capacities are possible with different grid sizes. This geometryprovides high voltage in a compact package. By using the same raw materials in the two configurations below, early realization ofa useful battery will permit faster development of the other systems required formarketable fuel cell and other hybrid vehicles. This graph shows how the SFoldbattery compares with other energy storage devices: How Standard Horizon Battery and SFold Battery Configurations Differ: Thestandard plates consist of a positive and negative pasted grid approximately 4"square which are placed in a different geometry for the standard Horizon battery andthe Sfold battery. Plates are stacked horizontally, positive grid of the plate in the first layer overlappedby the negative grid in the second layer with an electrolyte separator placed betweenthe grids. Folded plates are stacked in a column, interleaved with electrolyte bearing separatormaterial. SFold Battery for Hybrid Vehicle The Standard Horizon Design 12 volt batteries  24 or 50 volt batteries 85 or 95 amphour capacity  5 amphour capacity 6 stacks of grid pairs in series  17  12 or 25 grid pairs, or 19 grid pairs per stack  specific power of 750 to 1000 w/kg specific power of 220 to 280 w/kg  5.5" wide x 5.5" long x 3.5" or 7" high 5.5" wide x 30" long x 5.5" high  for hybrid EVs, portable equipment, electric  for long range pure electric vehicles bicycles, etc. Project Deliverables: Two designs will be constructed and tested as part of this project: 24 volt modules will be constructed in the "Sfold" configuration and a performance benchmark for this geometry will be established. 50 volt modules will be constructed and tested. Results will be used to define chemistry changes and plate configuration modifications needed to optimize the design for performance and production. Project Schedule: This fifteen month project will provide the threestep development of the optimized"Sfold" battery for hybrid applications. Once the battery configuration is optimized,the next step of design and tooling for the production battery can be completed in sixto nine months. Return to the Table of Contents for the Sacramento Electric Transportation Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-156IA037-000725-B012-179http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0412.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060529 text/html 2904HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:57:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: Driver Certification & Crash, Fire, and Rescue Training Performing Organization: Naval Surface Warfare Center, Crane Division Technical POC: John Inman, (812) 8542161 Project Summary: RA93 Crash, Fire and Rescue Training Course: Course was intended to provide guidance tooperators and rescue personnel in the event of an accident. A draft of the course has been completed. Finalproduction is currently on hold as more information is gathered. The crash testing of one Electricore electric pickupwas documented with the intent of using this information in this course. Other crash and safety test resultsconsortiawide will also be included. Driver certification was conducted at each user site so as to insure properoperation of the vehicles. These training sessions were conducted in the summer of 1995 for the electric pickuptrucks. Further training will be provided as Electricore's hybrid electric buses are fielded. Driver certification andtraining is done in conjunction with the perspective vehicle manufacturer. Project Deliverables: Driver Certification Training Course and Manuals Crash, Fire, and Rescue Training Video Project Schedule: Driver certification on electric trucks complete. Driver certification on electric buses scheduledfor June 1996 at user sites. Crash, Fire, and Rescue Training Video currently on hold. Completion exceptedDecember 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-157IA037-000725-B010-118http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0206.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055851 text/html 3784HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:51:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Flywheel Magnetic Bearing Improvements Performing Organization: AVCON Technical Contact: Graham Jones, Avcon (818) 865-0250 voice mail, (818) 865-0206 fax email: AVCON@IX.NETCOM..COM Program Description AVCON has manufactured nine magnetic bearings for two different flywheel system designs and is currently under contract to manufacture magnetic bearings for four more flywheel projects. The technology is now well established, and delivered systems are performing well. There is a strong future for these type of bearings in flywheel applications. For all flywheel applications the minimization of losses in the bearing is essential to achieve energy efficiency and cost effectiveness with the overall units. The two main sources of power loss are the drag torque and the rotor heating which result from the eddy currents induced in the magnetic bearing rotor. The drag torque is a continuous drain on the flywheel stored energy, and the rotor heating, inside the vacuum chamber, has to be removed by a cooling system. During prototype testing the eddy current effect has not been shown to be significant. For production units, however, it will be important to achieve the absolute minimum levels of eddy current losses. This project will provide the data against which developing design tools can be correlated. Currently there are no reliable design tools for accurate determination of these losses or for design optimization for minimum losses. AVCON plans, therefore to develop such tools to improve the performance of high-speed magnetic bearing systems. The program will begin with the analysis and optimization of magnetic bearing design, using computerized magnetic analysis and finite element analysis tools to select the most promising hardware configurations. A full 5-axis active magnetic levitation system will then be fabricated, along with the necessary test rig, to measure and compare that rotor losses of the optimized system to an existing design. This program will focus on minimizing or eliminating hysteresis effects and eddy-current generation, particularly at high rotational speeds. Milestones AVCON will design, fabricate, test and optimized magnetic bearing energy storage flywheel in 12 months. Participants Avcon - Program Manager Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-158IA037-000725-B013-354http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0517.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061019 text/html 1994HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:02:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Advanced Electric Tow Tractor Performing Organization:TUG Manufacturing Corporation, GNB Battery Technologies, Electronic Power Technology Inc., Delco Electronics POINT OF CONTACT: Alan Clark Telephone: (404) 4227230 Program Summary: Design and develop two advanced drivetrain electric tow tractors featuring fast charge capabilities andimproved performance Deliverables: Advanced Drivetrain electric tow tractor for military and commercial uses. Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-159IA037-000725-B013-292http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0514.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060950 text/html 2059HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:02:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Utility Van Conversions Performing Organization: Solar Car; Fisher Motors; Florida Power and Light, U.S. Electricar POINT OF CONTACT: Bob Suggs Telephone: (305) 5224133 Program Summary: Two utility vans manufactured by Utilimaster will be converted to electric for demonstration using theFisher/Saminco advanced electric drive packages. The vehicles will be placed in service in FloridaPower and Light's fleet. Training and O&M manuals will be provided The Benefit: Short haul military and urban cargo transport Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-160IA037-000725-B009-228http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0109.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055607 text/html 5445HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:48:10 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: High Voltage and High Power Ultracapacitor for EHV Applications Performing Organization: Pinnacle Research Institute, Inc. (PRI) 141 Albright Way Los Gatos, CA 95030 Technical POC: Mark Goodwin Phone: 408-379-1900 Fax: 408-379-1974 EMail: Project Summary: PRI and HEVDP have crafted a three phased plan to evaluate highvoltage power, ceramic based ultracapacitors for EHV application. In Phase I, Demonstration, Feasibility and Projected DesignCharacteristics, PRI plans to provide on loan to HEVDP three(3) PRI Ultracapacitor devices each rated at 100 VDC, 1 F. Thesedevices were produced under contract to the California EnergyCommission and are to be evaluated for core performance consistingof capacitance, energy storage, ESR, etc. PRI will work with HEVDPto facilitate test protocol, procedure, and interpretation ofresults. Additionally, PRI will extend testing of devices in ahybrid test bed configuration with advanced batteries to be decidedby HEVDP. PRI will work with HEVDP to establish preliminary designcriteria and perform feasibility analyses leading to full vehicledemonstration. In Phase II, System Sized Ultracapacitor Fabrication, asystem sized demonstration device will be produced by PRI andincorporated into an S10 pickup with advanced batteries as partof the FY 94 Advanced Battery Testing Program. Preliminary specificationsconsist of a 320 VDC, 250 kJ device in modular form for full flexibilityof testing. In Phase III, Next Generation Research and Development,PRI will expand and accelerate ongoing development and demonstrationof energy storage materials which meet the cost and high performancecriteria consistent with PNGV goals. Engineering analysis dictatesmaterial cost, specific capacitance, electronic conductivity,and cell geometry to accomplish these objectives. Project Deliverables: Phase I Demonstration, Feasibility and ProjectedDesign Characteristics Deliver three 100 V, 1 F prototype ultracapacitor unitsmade by PRI for evaluation. Report on test results of the lead acid battery and capacitorhybrid. Deliver a feasibility study report and preliminary designto incorporate a 320 V, 250 kJ ultracapacitor bank into an S10pickup for DARPA review. Phase II - System Sized UltracaPacitor Fabrication Deliver a 320 V, kJ ultracapacitor. Deliver test report and analysis. Deliver a feasibility study report and final design forlow cost advanced ultracapacitor into an S10 pickup. Phase III Next Generation Research and Development Complete and report on Advanced Development Program. Task 1 RMaterial Costs. Task 2 Energy Storage MaterialProcesses. Task 3 Improved Substrate. Task 4 Electrode Formation Processes Task 5 Systems/Package Improvement. Prepare hardware deliverables which may meet PNGV. Actualspecifications to be determined . Incorporate into S10 pickup for DARPA evaluation. Deliver hardware test report and analysis. Project Schedule: Projected start date: 7/1/96 Phase I Demonstration, Feasibility and Proiected Desian Characteristics Deliver Hardware Qtr 1Qtr2 Report hybrid test results Qtr 2Qtr 5 Feasibility and Design Qtr 5Qtr 7 Phase II System Sized UltracaPacitor Fabrication Deliver 320 V, 320 kJ, install S10 Qtr 4Qtr 8 Test report, analysis Qtr 7Qtr 9 Feasibility final design Qtr 9Qtr 11 Phase lil Next Generation Research and Development Advanced Development Program Qtr 5Qtr 10 Prepare Hardware Qtr9Qtr 11 Install into S10 Qtr 11Qtr 12 Final Report Qtr 12 Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-161IA038-000736-B034-145http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0707.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061412 text/html 2838HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:06:25 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Integrated Motor Gearbox Differential Performing Organization: Solectria Project Goals and Technologies Goal To develop a low cost, high efficiency, motorgearbox package with differential to work with Solectriaelectric cars as well as other cars and lightweight vehicles. Result Several working prototypes in various cars Placed into production for Force and outside customers Solectria Electronics Solectria has been developing advanced, high efficiency, lightweight electric vehicledrive systems and components since 1989. These components have been placed in actualonroad applications for well over 1,000,000 miles in over 200 vehicles built by Solectria. Inaddtion, vehicles built by other large and small companies, as well as university teams etc.have successfully put electric and hybrid electric vehicles on the road almost exclusivelyusing Solectria components. ARPA's support has allowed Solectria to concentrate on innovative, low cost driven EVelectronics and drive system products to the point where they are ready forcommercialization. These component projects have been selected and executed becausethey represent a significant contribution to Me technological and economic feasibility ofelectnc and hybrid electric vehicles. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-162IA038-000736-B034-87http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0704.html 207.104.9.100 19970210061328 text/html 2706HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:05:40 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium Project Title: Phase 2 Massachusetts Electric Vehicle Demonstration Program Performing Organization: Mass DOER Program Description Under phase 2 of the Massachusetts Electric Vehicle Demonstration Program 16 vehicleswill be added to the Comonwealth's existing EV Beet of 20. The original 20 have been inoperation under his program for 2 years. This program is unique because the state leasesHe vehicles to commuters for every day use. Of the aforementioned 16 vehicles/6 will be equipped with Nickel Metal Hydride Batteriesfunded through ARPA. Like in Phase 1 these vehicles mull be leased to commuters. It isexpected these vehicles will travel 100 miles between charges. The Massachusetts Division of Energy Resources, issued an RFP for these vehicles inApril, they hope to have them on the road by August. In addition to funding from APRA, the Massachusetts Electric Vehicles Program is funded through The Massachusetts Division of Energy Resources, Federal Highway Adm.,Massachusetts Highway Dept., Boston Edison company Commonweal Electric andMassachusetts Electric. For additional information contact Jack Bevelaqua, Director of Programs, MassachusettsDivision of Energy Resources at (617)7274732. Return to the Table of Contents for Northeast Alternative Vehicle Consortium | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-163IA037-000725-B013-84http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0502.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060754 text/html 3358HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:00:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) Project Title: Fast Charger / Charging Station Performing Organization: Electronic Power Technology, Westinghouse; Georgia Power; Georgia Tech, Blue Bird; GNE POC: John Wilson, Telephone (404) 5267228 Program Summary: A rapid charger and charging station will be developed with a bus recharge of 112 hour (see 93 SCATProject # 12 GA). The station will be installed at Georgia Tech. Benefit: Extended EV range. increase battery life, and reduce battery maintenance. Features of the Hybrid Electric HMMWV: All Electric or Full Hybrid Operation High Vehicle Performance / Low Observable Signatures 300 Miles Range in Hybrid /20 Miles Range in Electric Mode Up to 360 Horsepower available at the wheel drive shaft Electronic Transmission (Not Mechanical) 80 MPH Top Speed 0  60 MPH in 11 Seconds with 3400 pound payload Regenerative Braking Power Steering and Brakes 90 Amp 24 volt electrical system Internal and External Diagnostics Mobile Energy source with 250 Kwatts of Peak Power Available Drivetrain Concepts Scaleable/Transportable to a wide variety of Vehicles and applications Vehicle operation is transparent to Hybrid Energy Source which can be gasoline, diesel, natural gas or advanced power sources such as fuel cells, free pistons, rotary engines can be used and even interchanged. The integrated battery tray and its batteries can be changed in less than 10 minutes to a new pack or a new type of battery to adapt to new applications or requirements DELIVERABLES: One fully modified Hybrid Electric HMMWV Prototype Vehicle One OffboardMaintenance Unit SCHEDULE: Delivery to the U.S. Army by December 1996 Return to the Table of Contents for the Southern Coalition for Advanced Transportation (SCAT) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-164IA037-000725-B009-248http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0110.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055627 text/html 2543HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:48:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: 30 Ft Hybrid Electric Transit Buses Performing Organization: Soderholm Sales & Leasing 20 Ala Kimo Drive Honolulu, Hi 96817 Technical POC: Erik Soderholm Phone: 808834 1417 Fax: 808834 1070 EMail: Project Summary: Develop and manufacture two 30 ft hybrid electric buses; one forrevenue service in transit operations, the other for shuttle serviceat USAF base. El Dorado National provided the body and chassis,Hughes Power Control Systems provided two 50 kW AC motors andcontrollers for each bus; APS provided the APU, powered by propane,and assisted with the integration; Trojan Battery Company providedthe batteries. Project Deliverables: Two 1994 El Dorado National Corporation RE29E Hybrid/ElectricBuses; One for operation by Honolulu Public Transit Authority One for operation at Hickam Air Force Base. Project Schedule: Buses arrived in Honolulu on 1/14/96. Demonstration and Evaluation of buses continues throughJuly 1996. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-165IA037-000725-B010-76http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0203.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055821 text/html 2996HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:50:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects CALSTART Project Title: Dual-Use Turbogenerator Development Performing Organization: AlliedSignal Aerospace Technical Contact: Charles Weinstein (310) 512-4127 Program Description AlliedSignal Aerospace is developing and will deploy a 50-kw turbogenerator in dual-use applications. The turbogenerator was placed into an M-1 A-1 tank and will be placed into an electric bus operated by Delco Electronics. Advances in this turbogenerator include the use of air bearings, which eliminate the need for oil or other lubricants. the generator is built into the shaft and rotates at the same speed as the shaft, so there is no gearbox, which eliminates a considerable number of moving parts. The unit was designed to be low cost, compact, and quiet. This turbogenerator could contribute to the development of a hybrid electric vehicle capable of exceeding the mileage goal of the Partnership for a Next Generation Vehicle (PNGV). AlliedSignal is a company with $14 billion in sales. The Garrett Automotive Group within AlliedSignal is the World's largest manufacturer of automotive turbo-machinery. AlliedSignal is also the World's largest supplier of small gas turbines. Milestones The turbogenerator will be developed and installed in the Delco Electronics test bus in 1996. Participants AlliedSignal Aerospace - Program Manager Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency - Co-Funder Delco Electronics - Demonstration Systems Integrator Technology Reinvestment Project/Department of Energy - Co-Funder Return to the Table of Contents for CALSTART | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-166IA037-000725-B009-174http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0106.html 207.104.9.100 19970210055530 text/html 2847HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:47:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Hawii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP) Project Title: Electric Propulsion System for Pacific Marine Midfoil Hull Design Performing Organization: Kaman Electromagnetics Corporation 2 Fox Road Hudson, MA 01749 Technical POC: David Mortimer Phone: 508-562-2933 Fax: 508-562-6830 EMail: emlO80kec1@kaman.com Project Summary:  Conduct a system design of a marine propulsion system thatwill verify the operating characteristics and performance estimatesof a Midfoil ship design.  Based upon the system design, generate a detailed design,fabricate and integrate the hardware and conduct factory testing.Install and conduct dockside and atsea testing in the Midfoilcraft. Project Deliverables:  System Design Report.  Design and Test Report.  Electric System Marine Propulsion Components. . Assist in installation and Test.  Final Report. Project Schedule: The project schedule is closely tied to the development of theMidfoil hull design and subsequent hull fabrication. Those tasks are being conducted outsideof the DARPA Electric and Hybrid Electric Vehicle Technology Program as part of a DARPAand CEROS marine initiative. The current schedule is to install the propulsionequipment in the Midfoil in the Fall/Winter 1996 time frame and start testing in Hawaiian watersin early 1997. Return to the Table of Contents for (HEVDP) | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-167IA037-000725-B013-24http://www.calstart.org:80/about/pngv/pngv-0421.html 207.104.9.100 19970210060728 text/html 3684HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:59:38 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html CALSTART -- DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects DARPA Consortia EV and Hybrid EV Technology Projects Electricore Project Title: SmartCoolTM Air Condition System  Electric Bus Performing Organization: Smart Power Systems Technical POC: Gregg Peterson, (810) 6820203 Project Summary: The project objective is to develop a highefficiency, lightweight air conditioning system forelectric buses. The system is based on a new twostage centrifugal compressor with an integral DC brushlesspermanent magnet motor designed by Smart Power Systems. The system uses a low pressure environmentallyfriendly refrigerant; system pressures are typically 15 psi to 30 pSI. The nominal design output is 18,000 BTU/hr;the maximum design capacity is 21,000 BTU/hr. The theoretical compressor input power at 18,000 BTU/hr is lessthan 1,400 watts at the ASHRAE highefficiency rating point. Input power is substantially reduced as a function ofambient conditions. As an example, modeling the system at the ASHRAE SEER rating point yields an output ofover 8,000 BTU/hr using less than 400 watts of compressor input power. The SmartCool centrifugal compressor weighs under 10 pounds and is 30% smaller than similar capacity electricR134a compressors. A microprocessor continuously monitors and controls all system parameters with millisecond response times andensures that the compressor is operating at its highest efficiency at all times. Computercontroller functionsinclude compressor motor speed, condenser fan speed, evaporator fan speed, and expansion valve setting . In addition to the centrifugal compressor and the control electronics, the module incorporates highefficiency airmoving devices, plate fin heat exchangers, an electronic expansion valve and condensate reclamation to furtherenhance performance. Composite materials are used throughout the module to minimize weight . Project Deliverables: Three roofmounted 324 VDC SmartCool modules will be installed on an AVS electric busand evaluated this summer. The objective is to improve the a/c operational efficiency and reduce the a/c systemweight by 400 pounds. Project Schedule: QTR2 1966 installation target  performance evaluations and engineering enhancements tocontinue through the end of the contract (2/97). Return to the Table of Contents for Electricore | HOME | SEARCH | NEWS | PARTICIPANTS ONLY | FEEDBACK | YELLOW PAGES | HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.orgWT01-B09-168IA038-000736-B035-203http://www.calstart.org:80/cgi-bin/search.pl?dir_news=news 207.104.9.100 19970210061902 text/html 2059HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 06:11:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html  CALSTART Search CALSTART Search What would you like to search for? Advanced Search Search selected Departments: (Leave unchecked to search entire site) About CALSTART Discussion Groups Help News Reference Library: Glossary Technical Papers Participant Yellow Pages Non-Participant Yellow Pages Vehicle Services | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.org WT01-B09-169IA037-000725-B008-174http://www.calstart.org:80/cgi-bin/search.pl?dir_about=about 207.104.9.100 19970210055106 text/html 2059HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:43:16 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html  CALSTART Search CALSTART Search What would you like to search for? Advanced Search Search selected Departments: (Leave unchecked to search entire site) About CALSTART Discussion Groups Help News Reference Library: Glossary Technical Papers Participant Yellow Pages Non-Participant Yellow Pages Vehicle Services | HOME |SEARCH |NEWS |PARTICIPANTS ONLY |FEEDBACK |YELLOW PAGES |HELP |  Copyright 1996 CALSTART, Inc. All rights reserved. Please send comments and suggestions to: feedback@calstart.org WT01-B09-170IA037-000725-B007-176http://www.calstart.org:80/cgi-bin/imagemap/image/maps/arpas95.map 207.104.9.100 19970210054743 text/html 271HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:39:55 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Mapping Server Error Mapping Server Error This server encountered an error: Wrong number of arguments, client may not support ISMAP.WT01-B09-171IA037-000725-B007-302http://www.calstart.org:80/cgi-bin/imagemap/image/maps/arpaw94.map 207.104.9.100 19970210054911 text/html 271HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:41:21 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Mapping Server Error Mapping Server Error This server encountered an error: Wrong number of arguments, client may not support ISMAP.WT01-B09-172IA037-000725-B006-238http://www.calstart.org:80/cgi-bin/imagemap/image/maps/arpas96.map 207.104.9.100 19970210054532 text/html 271HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 05:37:45 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Mapping Server Error Mapping Server Error This server encountered an error: Wrong number of arguments, client may not support ISMAP.WT01-B09-173IA007-000075-B038-116http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/ 198.94.7.182 19970222071109 text/html 3381HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:11:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html  Mountain Forum Home Page MOUNTAIN FORUM For best service, click on your area of the world map to connect to the Mountain Forum server closest to you. You are now using our US West Coast Server, www.mtnforum.org Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The electronic networking services of the Mountain Forum are made possibleby support from the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation. The Mountain Forum mfsupport@mtnforum.org revised December 1996 WT01-B09-174IA007-000075-B038-132http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/members/welcome.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071116 text/html 3351HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:11:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3180Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:51 GMT  Resources- The Mountain Forum Background Docs Membership Organizational Structure How to Participate Discussion Lists It is our great pleasure to extend to you this invitation to joina newly formed, innovative and collaborative venture known as theMountain Forum. Originating from activities preceding the 1992Earth Summit, the Mountain Forum offers a venue for global linkage ofindividuals and organizations concerned with mountain cultures,environment and sustainable development. We invite your activeparticipation. The purpose of the Mountain Forum is to provide a forum formutual support and for the exchange of ideas and experiences. This will empower participants to raise mountain issues on local,national, regional, and international agendas and to promotepolicies and actions for equitable and ecologically sustainablemountain development. The basic operational values of theMountain Forum are to be open, democratic, decentralized,accessible, transparent, accountable, and flexible. As an innovative and integrative bridge between diverseconstituencies, the Mountain Forum is committed to having acompletely open and broad membership. It includes mountaincommunities, non-governmental organizations, scholars,researchers and research initiatives, individuals, groups andinstitutions that specialize in mountain-related issues, privateassociations and organizations, and intergovernmental andgovernmental bodies. Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-175IA007-000075-B038-152http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/members/members.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071128 text/html 7986HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:11:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7815Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:50 GMT   Mountain Forum Membership Pages MOUNTAIN FORUM MEMBERSHIP INFORMATION Registration Survey List Members Survey Results E-Mail Discussion There are no fees necessary to become a member of the MountainForum. To become a member, simply complete and submit the attached Registration Form and Survey (via fax, mail orelectronically) to your regional node (see below for regionalcontact points). Members will receive formal confirmation fromtheir regional node, regular dissemination of internalpublications and newsletters, announcements, updates on events,and the general opportunity for participation in all activitiesrelated to the Mountain Forum--electronically via the MountainForum's electronic discussion list and traditionally via the regional networks. Before signing up, we encourage you to read the information presented below to understand how the Mountain Forum operates. Membership in the Mountain Forum is free of charge. If you do not wish to become a member of the Mountain Forum, you are still welcome and encouraged to participate in the electronic discussions. Participation in the Mountain Forum(Activities and How to become involved) Through improved communications and information exchange, theMountain Forum will empower and enrich all members; create andstrengthen mechanism for critical dialogue; exchange bothsuccessful and unsuccessful experiences; provide a forum fordiscussing emerging tools and technologies and theirapplications; exchange lessons on monitoring, evaluating andassessing impacts; and assist members in influencing regionalmountain agendas at the local, national and intergovernmentallevels. The following activities are some examples of howMountain Forum members can actively foster mutual support: Share knowledge, information, experiences with the mountain community and interested parties, via the Information Server Node (ISN) and regional networks. Suggest and direct sources of information (documents, reports, materials) useful or relevant to the global mountain community. Alternatively, one may make requests for support, advice or information to Mountain Forum constituents. Support and respond to inquiries and requests made by other Mountain Forum participants. Support would include the sharing of relevant data and information on focused topics, or in response to other participants' research and activities. Assume personal responsibility for the dissemination of relevant and important information to Mountain Forum participants without Internet access. This responsibility likewise extends to the inclusion of input from participants without access to the Internet. Identify potential participants and members and involve them in Mountain Forum activities. Work with other members to form alliances, partnerships and joint research activities at the local, regional, and global levels. Mountain Forum participants are encouraged to promote andraise the awareness of mountain issues at local, national,regional and global levels. Successful advocacy should result in raisingmountain issues on the agendas of national decision makers, donoragencies and international organizations. Specific actions thatparticipants can initiate relevant to advocacy include but arenot limited to: facilitating dialogue and improved communications between mountain communities and national decision makers; convening local, national and regional workshops and task forces around relevant mountain issues; informing national decision makers via these workshops, briefings and media coverage; encouraging the formation of a mountain lobby which involves stakeholders and decision makers; contributing directly to the review and implementation of UNCED document Agenda 21, Chapter 13 "Managing Fragile Ecosystems: Sustainable Mountain Development". How do I find out more about the Mountain Forum? Background documents describing the work of the Mountain Forumare available through auto-reply e-mail. That is, you can simplysend a blank e-mail message to the following addresses, and therelevant document will be sent to your e-mail addressautomatically. Report of the Initial Organizing Committee of the Mountain Forum, September 1995. Report Title E-mail Address Part 1: (text) ioc95a-info@mtnforum.org Part 2: (annexes) ioc95b-info@mtnforum.org Part 3: (annexes) ioc95C-info@mtnforum.org Index of available auto-reply documents (updated regularly): mfindex-info@mtnforum.org Register for Membership Explore our Resources Check out our Regional Pages Back to the Mountain Forum home page Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised July 1996WT01-B09-176IA007-000075-B038-174http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/regions.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071135 text/html 5304HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:11:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5133Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:55 GMT  Regional Pages- The Mountain Forum To check on regional information, click on an area of the map below Africa |Europe |Asia-Pacific |North America |Latin America Visit the Global Node at The Mountain Institute Connect to the Asia/Pacific Mountain Forum at ICIMOD Connect to the Latin American Mountain Forum at CIP Back to the Mountain Forum home page Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised January 1997 WT01-B09-177IA007-000075-B038-195http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/whatsnew/whatsnew.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071144 text/html 2795HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:12:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2624Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:13 GMT  What's New at The Mountain Forum What's New at the Mountain Forum Mountain Policy and Laws - a new Mountain Forum discussion Draft copy - Mountains of the World: Challenges for the 21st Century (Prepared for CSD and UN General Assembly, June 1997) Latin American discussion list (in Spanish) UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Agenda 21, February, 1997 February discussion list postings Latest calendar event posting Newest introduction posting, Marca Hagenstad Logo contest winner! Back to the Mountain Forum home page Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised February 1997WT01-B09-178IA007-000075-B038-221http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/resources/resources.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071209 text/html 3561HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:12:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3390Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:03 GMT  Resources- The Mountain Forum Search Archives Introductions Member Listing Discussion Threads Reports and Publications The following is a list of available Resources: Search the Active Mountain Archives- Search the Mountain Forum's On-Line Resource Database: Perform full-text searches. Calendar Events- The Mountain Forum Calendar Events The WWW Links Resources Page- Make an important link or add one to our ever-expanding list. Introductions- Here you'll find an archive of the introductions from our International group. Member Listing- Listing of Registered Mountain Forum Members. Discussion Threads- View the mailing list discussion threads in month-by-month fashion. Reports and Publications Back to the Mountain Forum home page Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised January 1997WT01-B09-179IA007-000075-B039-15http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/calendar/calendar.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071224 text/html 12927HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:12:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12755Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:00 GMT   Mountain Forum Calendar Mountain Forum Calendar of Events To submit an entry use this form . More Information 24 February-7 March, 7-25 April, 23-27 June 1997, New York, USA "EARTH SUMMIT+5 EVENTS: Special Session of the General Assembly to Review and Appraise the Implementation of Agenda 21" Sponsored by the United NationsGeneral Assembly CALENDAR OF MEETINGS Official process 24 February-7 March 1997, New York Commission on Sustainable Development Ad Hoc Intersessional Working Group 7-25 April 1997, New York Commission on Sustainable Development, fifth session 23-27 June 1997, New York General Assembly, special session More Information March 3 -April 5, 1997 "Online International Ecotourism Conference" Sponsored by The Center for Nature & Heritage Tourism The Center for Nature & Heritage Tourism is announcing a global, web-basedecotourism conference. This is a free conference that will be conductedentirely on the World Wide Web in a text-based environment called COW(Conferencing on the Web). More Information March 10 to May 24, 1997 "An Electronic Conference on Balancing Livestock, the Environment and Human Needs" Sponsored by the International Livestock Research Institute(ILRI), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UnitedNations (FAO), the International Development Research Centre(IDRC) of Canada, and INFORUM (an International Non GovernmentalOrganization) If you are involved in livestock production, policy formulation,research, or development activities and are concerned about theinteraction between livestock production and environmentaldegradation, we would like to invite you to participate in aglobal electronic conference from March 10 to May 24, 1997. More Information March 17 - 19, 1997 Kathmandu, Nepal "FIRST CONSULTATION OF THE APMN COORDINATORS" The First Consultation of the Subregional Focal Points is, essentially, a face to face interaction for further defining and refining the activities of the Asia Pacific Mountain Network (APMN). More Information April 20-25, 1997 Kathmandu, Nepal "International Workshop on Dynamics of Land-Use/Land-Cover Change in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya" Sponsored by US National Science Foundation, IGBP START/SASCOM, & International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) The International Workshop on Dynamics ofLand-Use/Land-Cover Change in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya will provide aforum where researchers from Asia and around the world can synthesizeand stimulate an interdisciplinary investigation of the nature andconsequences of land-use/land-cover changes in HKH. More Information May/June 1997 Madagascar "African Mountain Development in a ChangingEconomic World" The 4th International Workshop on African Mountains and Highlands The Workshop will form apart of the UNU/IMS Mountain Ecology and Sustainable Development(MESD) project. In a major capacity building effort in African,MESD has supported the establishment of the African MountainAssociation (AMA), as well as organized together with AMA thethree earlier African mountain workshops (Ethiopia, Morocco, Kenya). More Information June 5-8, 1997 Moesgaard, Denmark "8th Colloquium of the International Association forLadakh Studies" The 8th Colloquium of the International Association forLadakh Studies is scheduled to be held from June 5-8, 1997at Moesgaard, a few miles south of Aarhus in Denmark. More Information September 1-4, 1997 Xining, Qinghai Province PRC "The 2nd International Congress on Yak" More Information 20-23 April 1998 Merano, northern Italy (The Alps) "International Interdisciplinary Conference: Headwater Control IV: Hydrology, Water Resources and Ecology in Headwaters" Jointly convened by: * European Academy, Bolzano, Italy * Standing Committee on Headwater Control * International Association of Hydrological Sciences This conference is a contribution to UNESCO's International Hydrological Programme (IHP-V, 1996-2001), "Hydrology and water resources development in a vulnerable environment". More Information September, 1998 Vladikavkaz, Russia "Sustainable Development ofMountain Territories" In accordance with the recommendation of the UN Conferenceon Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, 1992) andthe decision of the Second International Conference,"Security and Ecology of Mountain Territories (Vladikavkaz,1995), the Organizing Committee informs you about thisThirdInternational Conference Past Events: Contact Information August 26-31, 1996 High Tatras, Slovakia "Current Techniques in Alpine Ecological Research, HighTatras, Slovakia." Current Techniques in Alpine Ecological Research, August 26-31, 1996, in theHigh Tatras, Slovakia. Technical sessions on alpine flora and faunaresearch methods, plus tours, mainly in Tatra National Park. Papers will bepublished in a special volume of Oecologia Montana. More Information September 12-14, 1996 Wilmington, New York "Alpine Stewardship Gathering, A Holistic Approach to Alpine Management in the Adirondacks." Sponsored by The Nature Conservancy and the Adirondack Mountain Club. An event of the Northeaster Alpine Stewardship Steering Committee. More Information 19-21 September, 1996 Thessaloniki (Greece) "Mountain Massifs, Privileged Places of Cooperation" The role of non-governmental organizations and territorial collectivites. Colloquium organised by Euromontana with the support of the European Commission More Information 19-20 September, 1996 Sevrier France "International Alpine Congress" Invitation to an International Alpine Congress The Nature Friends International will conclude its project "Landscape of the Year 1995/96 - The Alps" with an international expert congress on "The Alps and Europe". Contact Information September 20-30, 1996 Altai Mountains "Sacred Mountains of Asia: World Heritage for Now and forthe Future, Altai Mountains." Second workshop in a series of three in the Altai. The first workshop was held in May, the second and third will be held concurrently.(Announcement excerpted from "Mountain Protected Areas Update", Lawrence S.Hamilton, Vice-Chair for Mountains, Commission on National Parks andProtected Areas/IUCN). Contact Information October 7-10, 1996 Trento, Italy "Second European Intergovernmental Conference on SustainableMountain Development." Follow-up to an initial conference in April 1996 in Aviemore, Scotland. Second European Intergovernmental Conference on Sustainable MountainDevelopment, October 7-10, 1996, in Trento, Italy.Input from the Consultation des O.N.G. et des Populations des Montagnesd'Europe in Toulouse, France (July 4-7, 1996) will be presented as well. Contact Information October 14-18, 1996 Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan "Mountain Research Conference, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan." Sponsored by the AAAS and the International University of Kyrgyzstan Themes include achieving conservation of the flora, fauna, water, soil,landscapes, and cultures. (Announcement excerpted from "Mountain ProtectedAreas Update", Lawrence S. Hamilton, Vice-Chair for Mountains, Commissionon National Parks and Protected Areas/IUCN). Descriptions are provided by event sponsors, and are not the responsibility of The Mountain Forum. To tell us about your event use this form . Back to the Mountain Forum home page Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised January 1997WT01-B09-180IA007-000075-B039-36http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/emaildiscuss/emaildiscuss.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071232 text/html 2625HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:12:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2454Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:18:54 GMT  E-Mail Discussions- The Mountain Forum How to Subscribe Discussion Threads Introductions The following electronic mail discussions are currently available: Mtn-Forum This is the common area of the MountainForum. All who wish to subscribe are welcome and encouraged toparticipate in the open discussion. This list is moderated topromote discussion. Mf-Intro A list dedicated to introducingsubscribers to one another. New subscribers are asked to post afew sentences describing themselves and their interest in theMountain Forum discussion list. Mf-Summary A weekly read-only summary of thetopics discussed in the open "mtn-forum" list. This summary issimply a list made up of the subject line of each posting in thelast week, and a repeat posting of important announcements andinformation newly available on-line. Mf-Lac This moderated discussion list focusses on biodiversity and agriculture in the Andes. It will be conducted in Spanish and all Spanish-speakers with an interest in this area are encouraged to participate. Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-181IA007-000075-B039-58http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/members/orggram.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071241 text/html 3953HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:13:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3782Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:50 GMT Mountain Forum Organizational Structure Mountain Forum Organizational Structure The Mountain Forum is a decentralized network comprised of five regional networks. Activities and membership for each region are coordinated by Regional FacilitatingCommittees (RFC). The governing body of the Mountain Forum is the InterimFacilitating Committee (IFC) comprised of a group of representatives from eachRegional Facilitating Committee, and a Global Facilitating Committee (GFC) whichcoordinates non-regionally affiliated members. Below is a listing of the existingRegional and Global Facilitating Committee members: Regional Facilitating Committee- Europe Focal Point: To be identified through by events occurring in this region. The Mountain Institute is serving as the temporary coordinator for this region. Regional Facilitating Committee- Asia/Pacific Focal Point: International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) Kathmandu, Nepal Egbert Pelinck, ICIMOD, Nepal Regional Facilitating Committee-- North America Focal Point: To be identified through by events occurring in this region. The Mountain Institute is serving as the temporary coordinator for this region. Regional Facilitating Committee-- Latin America Focal Point: International Potato Centre (CIP), Lima, Peru Hubert Zandstra, CIP, Peru Roberto Quiroz, CIP, Peru Regional Facilitating Committee-- Africa Focal Point: To be identified through by events occurring in this region. The Mountain Institute is serving as the temporary coordinator for this region. Global Facilitating Committee Global Focal Point: The Mountain Institute (TMI), West Virginia, USA Jane Pratt, TMI, USA Tage Michaelsen, UN Department of Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development (UNDPCSD), New York, USA Andri Bisaz, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), Bern, Switzerland El Hadji Sene, UN Food and Agriculture Organization (UN FAO), Rome, Italy Go to the Regional Pages Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised July 1996WT01-B09-182IA007-000075-B039-88http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/survey/survey.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071255 text/html 20843HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:13:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 20671Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:31 GMT  Survey/subscription form Join our On-Line Discussions The Mountain Forum e-conference consists of four discussion lists, with additional lists to be added as participation expands. The most recent addition is the Latin American discussion list: i. "mtn-forum" This is the common area of the MountainForum. All who wish to subscribe are welcome and encouraged toparticipate in the open discussion. This list is moderated topromote discussion. ii. "mf-intro" A list dedicated to introducingsubscribers to one another. New subscribers are asked to post afew sentences describing themselves and their interest in theMountain Forum discussion list. Just as in a face-to-faceconference, we tend to feel more comfortable in the discussion aswe begin to get to know each other. iii. "mf-summary" A weekly read-only summary of thetopics discussed in the open "mtn-forum" list. This summary issimply a list made up of the subject line of each posting in thelast week, and a repeat posting of important announcements andinformation newly available on-line. As additional discussionlists are opened within the Mountain Forum, this weekly summarywill help indicate when and where the active discussion is takingplace. For those subscribers who do not wish to receive the fulltraffic of the open lists, this summary provides a concise way tostay in touch with what's happening in the Mountain Forum. iv. "mf-lac" This moderated discussion list focusses on biodiversity and agriculture in the Andes. It will be conducted in Spanish and all Spanish-speakers with an interest in this area are encouraged to participate. To subscribe to the mtn-forum and mf-intro lists, fill out the form below and click the "Process Request" button. You will receive an E-mailconfirmation of your subscription within 24 hours. If your Browser does not support FORMs, try sending mail toMajordomo@mtnforum.org with the line "subscribe mtn-forum" as the first line in the body of mail. Your Name : Your E-mail : Please check one of the following boxes: Mountain Forum General andIntroductions Mountain Forum Summary Only General, Introductions and Summary Latin American list (in Spanish) Membership Registration and Survey Membership in the Mountain Forum is free of charge. There are noannual, subscription, or other fees. If you have already sent inyour registration and survey, please skip the rest of thismessage. If you have not yet filled it out, please take a momentto do so now. Please send it to the appropriate regionalcoordinator, as listed in section II. below. If you do not wish to become a member of the Mountain Forum, youare still welcome and encouraged to participate in the electronicdiscussions. Please fill out sections III - VI of the survey toassist us in providing useful services to you and otherparticipants. You may return it the appropriate regionalcoordinator. To fill out and send the Survey Form to the Mountain Forum, fill out the form below and click the "Process Request" button. If your Browser does not support FORMs, try sending a blank e-mail message to our auto-reply addressmfinvite-info@mtnforum.org, and you will receive a copy of the membership registration and survey in your mail within 24 hours. Contact Information Your First (given) Name : Your middle initial : Your Last (family) Name : Your Title (Mr., Ms., Dr., Prof., Other) : Your Organization/Affiliation : Mailing Information: Mailing Address : City : Province or State : Postal code: Country : Street Address (if different) : Telephone/Fax/e-mail Information Telephone Country Code: Telephone City or Area Code : Telephone Number : Fax Country Code : Fax City or Area Code : Fax Number : E-mail: Regional Affiliation Please indicate your regional affiliation(s) below, and send yourmembership registration and survey to the address for thatregion. This will insure your inclusion in regional networks andactivities. Africa, Europe, and North America have not yetidentified a regional node or members of their RegionalFacilitating Committees. Until these are identified, the InterimFacilitating Committee Convener will maintain your membership. Please Select one or more regions of interest: Asia/Pacific Latin America Africa Europe North America Global In addition, please indicate your main region (for contact information): Asia LatAmer Africa Europe NAmer NOTE:This form will automatically be e-mailed to the correct regional forum manager.  Asian regions send to:                             Latin American regions send to:  Attn: Shahid Akhtar, MF Membership           Attn: Ana Ponce, MF Membership        ICIMOD                                       Centro Internationale de la Papa        GPO Box 3226                         Apartado Postal 1558        Kathmandu, NEPAL                             Lima 100 PERU        Fax:    +9771-524-509                        Fax:    +51-14-351-570        Telex:  2439 ICIMOD NP        E-mail: mforum@icimod.org.np         E-mail: A.Ponce@cgnet.com             Africa, Europe, and North America regions send to:                     Attn: Jason Espie, MF Membership                     The Mountain Institute                     P.O. Box 907                     Franklin, WV 26807  USA                     Fax:    +1-304-358-2400                     E-mail: mfsupport@mtnforum.org Participant Background Information For the rest of the questions in this survey, please check as many answers as apply, and write out any responses or additions as you wish. If you are replying by e-mail, please indicate your choices by writing out the appropriate question number and letter(s)_that apply, and filling in the blanks. All comments are welcome, and all answers are confidential. Survey results will be made available in summary form only. For the multiple-entry boxes, please check one or more answers that apply to you. 1. On which mountain range(s) or massif(s) do you work? (please type names separated by commas): 2. How would you characterize the geographic extent of your work? one mountain range or massif mountains in general one particular mountain several mountain regions other (please describe): 3. How would you identify your principal type(s) of work? activism administration college or graduate studies policy development project implementation research teaching other (please describe):  4. Would you consider yourself as a: mountain inhabitant person interested in mountains professional working in mountains or on mountain issues visitor or user of mountains other (please describe):  5. Please list your subject specialization(s) orinterests(s):  6. How would you describe your institutional affiliation? donor organization government intergovernmental organization no affiliation (private individual) non-governmental organization university or research institution other (please describe):  Electronic access Note: this information will help us to build a database of support resources for participants, especially those in remoteareas. 7. Do you have access to: e-mail ftp (file transfer protocol) gopher World Wide Web (WWW) other (please describe):  8. In addition to a monthly or hourly connection fee, do you have to pay to receive each e-mail message?(Enter Y/N) other (please describe):  9. Which e-mail software do you currently use? Please bespecific by providing program name and version number. Eudora 1.x (free version) Eudora 2.x (Pro version) Pegasus Mail MS-Exchange MS-Mail, cc:Mail, Novell Groupwise (LAN-Based) unix PINE, ELM, etc.  10. If you know, who is your Internet service provider?:  11. Have you participated in e-mail discussion lists? (Enter Y/N) other (please describe):  12. If yes, which lists have you found useful or valuable andwhy?  Networking 13. How did you hear about the Mountain Forum? Internet printed material or publications professional colleague or friend World Wide Web other (please describe):  14. Would you consider yourself: familiar with the Mountain Forum new to the Mountain Forum other (please describe):  15. Would you consider your current network of colleagues to be: global local regional other (please describe):  16. When you need information on mountains, which resources do you usually go to? colleagues Internet or world wide web libraries other (please describe):  17. To which mountain related journals and newsletters do you subscribe already? Please list: 18. If you work in a grassroots community organization or in project implementation, do you feel that your experience andknowledge currently impact government or intergovernmentalpolicy? no not applicable possibly yes other (please describe):  How can the Mountain Forum best serve you? 19. Which of these Mountain Forum electronic services do you anticipate using: electronic magazine or e-mag (we do not have financial support for the electronic magazine yet, but we will seek support if sufficient demand exists) e-mail auto-reply document service e-mail discussion lists ftp archives (will be set up if sufficient demand exists) gopher archives (coming on-line in 1996) World Wide Web pages other (please describe):  20. What do you hope to gain from the e-mail discussion lists? access to mountain-specific information resources broader knowledge of mountain issues exposure to different viewpoints greater sense of community with other mountain peoples greater voice for your constituents or stakeholders impact on local, regional, and global policy formation participation in mountain conferences, publications, or other initiatives of the Mountain Forum specific knowledge of case studies and real-life experiences wider network of colleagues other (please describe):  21. What special discussion lists would you like to see set up? We will set up "chat rooms" whenever there is sufficientinterest: non-English language: which language?  regional: which region?  special groups (eg. women, community facilitators, students, etc.): which group?  thematic (eg. cultural diversity, tourism, climate change, natural hazards, water resources, sustainable development, production systems, energy, biodiversity, water resources, sacred mountains, etc.): which theme?  other (please describe):  22. Would you be interested in contributing to the electronic networking services of the Mountain Forum through: assisting in database searches for participants with limited (eg. e-mail only) electronic access assisting in locating technical support for new participants in your local or regional area contributing case studies, documents, bibliographies, references, or reports to the electronic archives moderating or helping to moderate a discussion list other (please describe):  23. Do you have any other suggestions to make the Mountain Forum more responsive to your needs? Please list:  Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised July 1996WT01-B09-183IA007-000075-B039-120http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/index.html 198.94.7.182 19970222071312 text/html 3381HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:13:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html  Mountain Forum Home Page MOUNTAIN FORUM For best service, click on your area of the world map to connect to the Mountain Forum server closest to you. You are now using our US West Coast Server, www.mtnforum.org Welcome to the Mountain Forum |Membership |Regional Networks |What's New Resources | Calendar of Events | E-Mail Discussion Lists The electronic networking services of the Mountain Forum are made possibleby support from the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation. The Mountain Forum mfsupport@mtnforum.org revised December 1996 WT01-B09-184IA007-000075-B039-155http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/members/memberlist.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071325 text/html 21672HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:13:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21500Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:52 GMT -Mtn-Forum Membership List Mountain Forum Membership List Author: Christine Poulson Mountain Forum Membership List If you have any questions about this list or changes please send a message to:mfsupport@mtnforum.org or Fax: +1-304-358-2400. If you are registeredbelow and would like us to post your e-mail address along with your name please send a message to Christine Poulson (cpoulson@mtnforum.org.) We would be happy to provide a link to it. The people in this list have completed the Mountain Forum survey form. If you would like to be a member of the Mountain Forum, please complete the survey form that is provided in the Web Pageand send it to the appropriate regional node. To view a more detailed membership list including member interests and affiliations, subject specializations, types of work, and massifs and mountains, Click Here. In addition to the more detailed list, some members have provided us with more elaborate introductions. To read those or to send messages to members via e-mail, click on the names of those members in blue. Members: Mr. Saroj Acharya, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Shiva Hari Achet, University of Washington, USA Mr. Nessim Ahmad, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Italy Mr. Shahid Akhtar, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Megh Ale, Nepal River Conservation Trust (NRCT), Nepal Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, Environmental and Water Management, India Dr. John Ambler, The Ford Foundation, Vietnam Dr. Massimo Antoninetti, IRRS-CNR, Remote Sensing Dept., Italy Mr. Ritesh Arya, Hydrogeologist Groundwater Organisation, Irrigation and Public Health, India Dr. Jacqueline Ashby, CIAT, Colombia Dr. Yuri Badenkov, Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Science, Russia Ms. Nicole Ballinger, University of Vermont, USA Dr. Charles Bailey, Ford Foundation, Kenya Mr. Birendra Bajracharya, ICIMOD, Nepal Dr. Anthony Barnosky, Mountain Research Center, USA Ms. Shannon Barras, USA Dr. Amanda Barrera de Jorgenson, Fundacin Natura, Colombia Dr. Barbara Becker, University of Kassel, Germany Ms. Annie Benarous, Euromontana, France Mr. Istuan Beszteri, Tree of Life Association, Hungary Dr. Stephen Bezruchka, International Health Program, USA Prof. Annada Bhagabati, Arunachal University, India Mr. Anupam Bhatia, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Mihir Bhatt, Disaster Mitigation Institute, India Mr. Bal Bhatta, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Madhusudan Bhattarai, Clemson University, USA Dr. Naomi Bishop, California State University, USA Mr. Alan Blackshaw, International Union of Alpine Association, Scotland Dr. Hubertus Bloemer, Ohio University, USA Ms. Sukhmaya Bohra, Womens' Development Training Centre, Nepal Dr. Maurice Bourgoin, ORSTOM, Bolivia Mr. Simone Borelli, FAO of the United Nations, Italy Mr. David Browning, The Mountain Institute, USA Ms. Beatriz Bruce, Adventure, Peru Ms. Magalen Bryant, USA Dr. David Butz, Department of Geography, Canada Mr. Anvar Buzurukov, Eurasion Center on Sustainable Development of Mountains, Russia Ms. Elizabeth Byers, The Mountain Institute, USA ebyers@mountain.org Mr. Steven Caicco, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, USA Mr. Rafael Calderon, Ecuador Mr. Lus Camargo, Amigos de la Sierra Nevada del Cocuy, Colombia Prof. Alejandro Camino, PROFONANEP, Peru Dr. J. Campbell, The Mountain Institute, USA Mr. Rafael Capetillo, PNUMA, Mexico Dr. Leyla Celikel, TEMA Foundation, Turkey Mr. Purna Jyoti Chakma, Parbattya Jhumia Rehabilitation and Environmental Conservation Organization, Bangladesh Dr. Ramesh Chand, National Centre for Agriculture and Policy Research, India Dr. Mahesh Chander, Agril. Extension Indian Veterinary ResearchInstitute (IVRI), India Ms. Susana Chau, PROTERRA, Peru Mr. Olivier Chave, Swiss Agency for Cooperation & Development SDC/Vietnam Lord Chorley, United Kingdom Mr. Broughton Coburn, USA Dr. Michael Cohen, Community Environment Network, South Africa Mr. Jim Conroy, Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, United Kingdom Ms. Ana Cordova, Cornell University, USA Ms. Eva Cudlinova, Institute of Landscape Ecology, Czeck Republic Dr. Ross Cullen, Lincoln University, New Zealand Ms. Monique Dejean-Servires, Work Community of the Pyrenees, France Mr. Agostino Da Polenza, Ev-K2-CNR - Mountain Equipe srl, Italy Mr. Bhuwan Devkota, Helvetas, Nepal Mr. Pierre Dzes, University of Lausanne, Switzerland Mr. Trilok Dhar, Society for Himalayan Environmental Rehabilitation, India Mr. Bruno Drera, Club Alpino Italiano, Italy Mr. Richard Dodge, Las Races Asesoras & Consultoras Ltda., Chile Dr. Michele Dominy, Bard College, USA Mr. Colin Donohue, Rural Action, USA Dr. Marc Dourojeanni, BID, Brazil Ms. Mara Duran, Fundacin ProSierra Nevada, Colombia Mr. Thomas Eastman, The Mountain Institute, USA Dr. Timi Ecimovic, SEG - Institute for Climate Change, Slovenia Mr. Cornel Ehrler, Research & Activism, Switzerland Mr. Stephen Engle, University of Idaho, Middlebury College, USA Mr. Jason Espie, The Mountain Institute, USA Dr. Fred Euphrat, Forest, Soil & Water, Inc., USA Mr. Brian John Evans, Australia Dr. Johanna Faerber, Regional Agency for the Environment, France Dr. Gernot Fiebiger, Torrent Avalanche and Erosion Control, Austria Mr. Gabor Figeczky, Biokultura Association, Hungary Dr. Ann Forbes, Dartmouth College, USA Dr. Bernard Francou, ORSTOM, Bolivia Dr. Don Funnell, University of Sussex, United Kingdom Mr. Stephan Fuller, IUCN/Pakistan, Pakistan Mr. Abdul Gafur, Soil Conservation Centre (SRDI), Bangladesh Mr. Patricio Gallo, University of Texas at Arlington, USA Dr. Rodolfo Garardo, Universidad de Chile, Chile Dr. Gary Garriott, VITA, USA Mr. Donald Garvin Jr., Mountaineer Chapter Trout Unlimited, USA Mr. Frank Gibney, The Explorers' Network, USA Mr. Alessandro Gimona, Macaulay Land Use Research Institute, Scotland Dr. Carol Goland, Denison University, USA Mr. Valer Gotea, Forestry Students' Organization "SILVA", Romania Mr. Mike Grantham, Crofters Commission, United Kingdom Dr. Lisa J. Graumlich, The University of Arizon, USA Mr. Tony Gross, Secretariat, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Kingdom Mr. Gauri Guha, Agro-Cllimatic Regional Planning Unit, India Dr. Damber Gurung, Clemson University, USA Mr. Phurba Gyalzen, Oberlin College, USA Ms. Jeannette Denholm Gurung, International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Nepal Dr. Barry Haack, George Mason University, USA Mr. Mark Haberle, Vermont Center for Geographic Information, USA Ms. Marca Hagenstad, World Resources Institute, USA Mr. Nick Halfhide, Cairngorms Partnership, United Kingdom Dr. Lawrence Hamilton, Commission on Natural Parks & Protected Areas/IUCN, USA Dr. Irena Hanouskova, Institute of Landscape Ecology, Czech Republic Dr. Hideo Harasawa, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan Dr. Kirk Haselton, Institut fuer Geowissenschaften, Germany Mr. Phil Hazelton, World Bank, USA Prof. Joel Heinen, Dept. of Environmental Studies, USA Prof. Edgar Hernandez, Universidad de los Andes, Venezuela Prof. Kip Hodges, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA Dr. Miguel Holle, CIP, Peru Dr. Kenneth Hughey, Centre for Mountain Studies, New Zealand Dr. Mikuls Huba, The Society for Sustainable Living in the Slovak Republic, Slovakia Mr. Jack Humphrey, Sky Island Alliance, Center on Aging, USA Mr. Glenn Hyman, International Center for Tropical Agriculture, Colombia Prof. Jack Ives, University of California, USA Mr. Rodney Jackson, The Mountain Institute, USA Mr. Anil Jaggi, Society for Environment, Wildlife Action & Awareness, India Mr. Waqar Ahmad Jan, Forest Management Centre, Pakistan Mr. Shi Jin, GIS Center, China Dr. Narpat Jodha, The World Bank, USA Mr. Richard Johnson, Institute of Mountain Environments, United Kingdom Dr. Dinesh Joshi, Himalayan Study Circle (HSC), India Dr. Pooran Joshi, H.N.B. Garhwal University, India Mr. Francis Kahembwe, Forestry Research Institute, Uganda Dr. Bjorn Kaltenborn, Eastern Norway Research Institute, Norway Dr. Bijaya Kattel, Colorado State University, USA Prof. Kenji Katsuragi, Toyama University, Japan Dr. Bijaya Kattel, Colorado State Univesity, USA Dr. Ramesh Khadka, ActionAid Nepal, Nepal Mr. Rash Khan, Karakoram Agricultural Research Institute for North, Pakistan Prof. Pradyumna P Karan, University of Kentucky, USA Mr. Sudibya Kanti Khisa, Chittagong Hill Tracts Development Board, Bangladesh Mr. Dwayne Knox, Newton County Resource Council, USA Mr. Are Knudsen, Chr. Michelsen Institute, Norway Dr. Stanislaw Knutelski, Jagiellomiam University, Poland Mr. Josef Krammer, Bundesanstalt fr Bergbauernfragen Mr. Akhouri Pramod Krishna, G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development, India Mr. Rajendra Kumar Kokcha, Society for Rural Action and Motivation, India Mr. Christopher Komornicki, Association "ZDANIEU", Poland Mr. Arun Kumar, UNDP-GEF Hilly Hydro Project, TERI, India Dr. Sood Kumar, State Council for Science and Technology, India Dr. Sehdev Kumar, Massey College, University of Toronto, Canada Dr. Samuel Kunkle, Colorado State University, USA Mr. Shwe Kyaw, Forest Research Institute, Myanmar Mr. Thomas Laird, Asiaweek, Nepal Dr. Andrei Laletin, Friends of Siberian Forests, Russia Dr. Richard Langlais, University of Lapland, Finland Ms. Elizabeth Larson, USA Prof. Tianchi Li, ICIMOD, Nepal Prof. Carlos Llerena, Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina, Peru Mr. David Lloyd-Jones, Canada Mr. Vicente Lopes, University of Arizona, USA Ms. Isabel Losada, I.E.S. Escairon Osavinao, Spain Prof. Rongsen Lu, Chengdu Institute of Biology, CAS, China Ms. Trine Lund-Jensen, UNDP, China Markus Lthi, bergfAhRT buero fuer montane geographie, Switzerland Dr. Kenneth MacDonald, University of Toronto, Canada Mr. Madhusudan, Bhattarai, Clemson University, USA Mr. Karna Maharjan, Save the Children (UK), Nepal Dr. Edward Manning, Centre for a Sustainable Future, Canada Dr. Andrew Manzardo, Institutional Structuring, USA Ms. Jennifer McConnell, University of Edinburgh IERM, United Kingdom Ms. Bernadette McDonald, The Banff Centre for Mountain Culture, Canada Mr. John McEachern, IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Nepal Mr. Jeffrey McNeely, IUCN, Switzerland Ms. Susan Meinheit, The Library of Congress, USA Mr. Paolo Menezes, CEPEL, Brazil Mr. Asif Merchant, Aga Khan Housing Board for Pakistan, Pakistan Dr. Irina Merzliakova, Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Science, Russia Dr. Bruno Messerli, University of Berne, Switzerland Prof. Branko Micevski, Bird Study and Protection Society of Macedonia Mr. Tage Michaelsen, IPF Secretariat, UN/DPCSD, USA Prof. David Midmore, Central Queensland University, Australia Dr.Stephen Lawrence Mikesell, USA Mr. Daniel Miller, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Stefan Mitrache, Romanian Federation for Mountain Area Development, Romania Mr. Asphandiar Moddie, Central Himalayan Environment Association, India Dr. Mohamed-Saleem Mohamed Aliyar, International Livestock Research Institute, Ethiopia Mr. Pradeep Mool, MENRIS-ICIMOD, Nepal Dr. Riccardo Morandini, Istituto Sperimentale per la Selvicoltura, Italy Prof. Laurence Moss, L. Moss & Associates / ICRI, Czechoslovakia Dr. Renzo Motta, University of Turin, Italy Mr. Yorgos Moussouris, WWF Greece, Greece Ms. Iris Muoz, CIP, Peru Mr. Suneel Muttoo, U.P. Mountainous Area Development Commission, India Mr. Olav Myrholt, Norway Dr. Enrico Negriolli, Provincia Autonoma de Trento, Italy Mr. Rohit Nepali, South Asia Partnership-Nepal, Nepal Dr. Roger Ngoufo, Global Change, Cameroon Dr. Stanislaw Niemtur, Forest Research Institute, Poland Mr. Erik Nijland, Karnali Local Development Programme/SNV-Nepal Dr. Takuram Bandu Nikam, H.P.T. Arts and R.Y.K. Science College, India Prof. Francois Nkurunziza, University of Burundi - Gerped, Burundi Ms. Amanda Nobbs, Council for National Parks, United Kingdom Mr. Doug Noonan, Gallatin Institute, USA Mr. Dan O'Brien, the Mountain Forum, USA Prof. Francis Ojany, African Mountain Association, Kenya Dr. Monica Opole, Centre for Indigenous Knowledge Systems and ByProducts, Kenya Mr. Neal Ostler, Salt Lake Community College, USA Dr. Allen Palmer, Brigham Young University, USA Dr. Y.S. Pamar University of Horticulture and Fore, India Dr. Tej Partap, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Francois Parvex, CH-REGIO, Switzerland Mr. Jacopo Pasotti, Italy Dr. Dipak R. Paudyal, Department of Natural Resources, Australia Ms. Mariana Pavalan, National Agency of Mountain Area, Romania Ms. Nancy Pearlman, Educational Communications, USA Ms. Gail Pennington, CIAT: International Center for Tropical Agriculture, Colombia Dr. Andrei Petrovich, Friends of Siberian Forests, Russia Ms. Roopali Phadke, Cornell University, USA Prof. Adrian Phillips, Irish Uplands Forum, Ireland Dr. David Pitt, Alp Action, Switzerland Mr. Kishor Kumar Pokharel, Prithwi Narayan Campus, Nepal Ms. Ana Ponce, CIP/CONDESAN, Peru Mr. Carlos F. Ponce, Conservation International - Peru Dr. Duncan Poore, IIED, United Kingdom Ms. Christine Poulson, The Mountain Institute, USA Mr. Philip C. Powers, NOLS, USA Mr. Mohan Prabhu, Canada-Commonwealth Human Ecology Council, Canada Dr. Raghbir Prasher, University of Horticulture & Forestry, India Dr. D. Jane Pratt, The Mountain Institute, USA Mr. Marko Prem, Ministry of the Environment and Physical Planning, Slovenia Ms. Lynelle Preston, The Mountain Institute, USA Dr. Martin Price, Environmental Change Unit, United Kingdom Prof. Abul Quddus, University of Chittagong, Bangladesh Mr. Gareth Quinn, USA Dr. Roberto Quiroz, CIP, Peru Mr. Miguel Rafa, Catalonian Alpine Club, Spain Mr. Mohammad Rafiq, IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Pakistan Professor Joslyne Ramamonjisoa, Department of Geography, Madagascar Mr. James Ramsay, J. Ramsay Associates, Canada Mrs. Greta Rana, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Ajay Rastogi, ICIMOD, Nepal Dr. Radu Rey, National Agency of Mountain Area, Romania Dr. Robert Rhoades, Department of Anthropology, USA Dr. Kamal Rijal, ICIMOD, Nepal Mr. Andrew Roberts, Fjall Foundation, Sweden Mr. Stephen Roberts, Natal Parks Board, South Africa Mr. Delfi Roca, Associaci per a la Protecci d'Animals, Plantes I Medi Ambient, Andorra delfiroc@correu.solucions.ad Mr. James Ross, Queen's University, Canada Mr. Jack Rucker, USA Dr. Jose Rueda, CONDESAN-CIP, Peru Dr. Thomas Schaaf, France Dr. John Schelhas, Cornell University, USA Mr. Heinrich Schmutzenhofer, International Union of Forest Research Orgs., Austria Prof. Hans Schreier, Institute for Resource and Environment, Canada Dr. Jim Schweithelm, WWF Indonesia Programme, USA Dr. Petra Schweizer-Ries, Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems, Germany Prof. Michael Sergeev, Novosibirsk State University, Russia Mr. Frederic Sellier, University of Heidelberg, Germany Dr. Ranil Senanayake, Environment Liaison Center International, Kenya Mr. El Hadji Sene, FAO, Italy Mr. Pravakar Shah, ICIMOD, Nepal Dr. Goverdhan Shamet, Deptartment of Silviculture & Agroforestry, India Mr. Prabin Shrestha, Miami University, USA Mr. Bharat Kumar Shrestha, Agricultural Projects Services Centre (APROSC), Nepal Dr. Khalid Siddiqui, Pakistan Forest Institute, Pakistan Dr. Dominik Siegrist, Alpen, Switzerland Prof. R.V. Singh, ICFRE, India Dr. Scott Slocombe, Wilfrid Laurier University, Canada Ms. Ailsa Smith, Lincoln University, New Zealand Mr. Gary Smith, Lincoln University, New Zealand Dr. David Spencer, ETH - Zurich, Switzerland Ms. Ellen Stein, The Ford Foundation, USA Mr. Erwin Stucki, Eidgenssische Technische Hochschule, Switzerland Mr. John Studley, Private consultant, U.K. 101664.543@CompuServe.COM Mr. Felix Sury, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), Nepal Mr. Jean Tafforeau, Belgium Mr. Kirk Talbott, World Resources Institute, USA Dr. Jan Tesitel, Institute of Landscape Ecology, Czechoslovakia Dr. Des Thompson, JNCC/SNH, United Kingdom Dr. Jim Thorsell, IUCN, Switzerland Prof. Pierre-Andre Tremblay, Universite du Quebec at Chicoutimi, Canada Dr. Constantinos Tsipiras, Mountain Wilderness (Green Section), Greece Dr. Raj Pal Singh Tyagi, Himachal Pradesh Agricultural University, India Mr. Jim Underwood, The Mountain Institute, USA Mr. A. Upadhyay, Himalayan Voice, Nepal Dr. Martin van Beek, Aarhus University, Denmark Dr. Godert Van Lynden, ISRIC, Netherlands Mr. Vladivoj Vancura, Alternative Projects Foundation, Slovak Republic Mr. Ivan Vashakmadze, Sustainable Tourism Center (STC), Georgia Mr. Goncalo Velez, Rotas do Vento, Portugal Mr. Ronnie Vernooy, International Development Research Centre, Canada Mr. Jan Voordouw, The Panos Institute, USA Dr. Joachim Voss, International Development Research Centre (IDRC), Canada Mr. Scott Walker, Southwest Texas State University, USA Mr. Benjamin Wang, University of Vermont, USA Mr. Sangay Wangchuk, Forestry Services Division, Bhutan Dr. Tom Warren, Mountain Research Station - Finse, Norway Ms. Suzanne Warsinsky, The Mountain Institute, USA Prof. Daniel Weiner, West Virginia University, USA Mr. Ron Waco Weissinger, USA Ms. Jennifer Wellman, Colorado State University, USA Mr. Robert Whitby, Arthur Anderson, USA Dr. Susan White, Instituto Pirenaico de Ecologa, Spain Dr. Diana Whitney, The Taos Institute, USA Dr. Elin Whitney-Smith, USA Dr. Anne Whyte, Mestor Associates, Canada Dr. Ellen Wohl, Colorado State University, USA Ms. Laura Wray, Amoco Production Company, USA Dr. Joerg Wyder, SAB, Switzerland Mr. Jianchu Xu, Center for Biodiversity and Indigenous Knowledge, China Dr. Ramanand Yadav, Environmental and Water Management, India Dr. Robert Yoder, Associates in Rural Development, Inc., USA Mr. Charles Yuill, Natural Resource Analysis Center, USA Dr. Hubert Zandstra, CIP, Peru Dr. Pier Zingari, Fdration Europenne des Communes Forestires, France To view a more detailed membership list including member interests and affiliations, subject specializations, types of work, and massifs and mountains, Click Here. Return to the Archives Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised February 1997WT01-B09-185IA007-000075-B039-184http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/survey/surveyresults.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071341 text/html 27074HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:13:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 26902Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:32 GMT Annex 1 - Results of Mountain Forum Survey  Through September 1996 Results of Mountain Forum Membership Survey June through October 1996 We are pleased to present to you the results of theMountain Forum membership survey, conducted in order to obtainbaseline demographic information on Mountain Forum constituents,as well as information on members' electronic capabilities, regionalinterests and affiliation, and hopes for the Forum. Backgrounddata from surveys provide a powerful tool to help guide and shapethe Mountain Forum's evolution. From June through mid-October 1996, 201people hadsubmitted survey forms to the Mountain Forum's regional offices.This report was complied by the Information Server Node, and reflectglobal Mountain Forum membership. Survey results will be updatedevery three months with the next scheduled update for February28, 1997. (Note: Many questions allowed for multiple answers,thus totals may be more than 201 members, and percentages maytotal more than 100%). Regional Affiliation Primary Contact Region:Each member choose only one primary region for mail and contactpurposes. Following is a breakdown of members per region: Primary Contact Region Asia Latin America Africa Europe North America Global Total Number of people: 71 27 11 52 35 5 201 Percentage of whole: 35% 13% 6% 26% 17% 3% 100% Interest by Region: Members indicated the regions theywork or have interest in, many selecting multiple regions. Regional Interest(s) Asia Latin America Africa Europe North America Global Number of people: 81 37 16 60 46 20 Percentage of interest: 41% 19% 8% 30% 23% 10% Participant Background Information Mountains, Ranges, Massifs:Below is an alphabetical list of mountains, ranges or massifsmembers indicated they either work, live, recreate, or have interestin. Duplicates, when they occurred, have been deleted. Africa; Alps - Dinaric; Alps - Dolomites; Alps -Jura; Alps - Swedish; Alps; Altai; Altai-Sayan; Andes; AnkaratraMountains (Vakinankaratra region); Appalachian; Appenines; ArcticMountains; Argentinian Andes; Arvallis; Atlas Mountains of Morocco;Australia, Snowy Mountains; Balkans; Boston Mountain Range; BritishColumbia; British Mountains; Cairngorms (the Mounth, the MonadhLiaf and other hills); Cameroonian mountains and highlands; Carpathians;Carpats Mountains; Catalonian Coastal Ranges; Caucasus Mountains;Central African Highlands; Central America; Central Asia; CentralHimalayas; Central Mountains and Knuckles Massif in Sri Lanka;Cerro de Oro Ruis Mountain in Caldas Columbia; Chita Boyaca; ChittagongHill Tracts; Coastal Range; Cocuy; Cordilleras of Luzon; Drakensburg(South Africa); East African Highlands; East Greenland Caledonides;Eastern (Arunachal) Himalayas; Etna volcano; Garhwal; Hill tractsof Bangladesh; Himachal Pradesh, India; Himalayas; Hindu Kush;Interior Philippines ; Irish Caledonides; Italian Alps; JapaneseAlps; Kamchatka (Russian); Karakoram - Hindu Kush; Kashmir, India;Kilimanjaro; Kumaon; Kunlun; Laos Uplands; Latin American Mountainregion; Macedonian Mtns. (ara/Pelister/Calicica/Jakupica)Macizo Galaico; Massif of Snieznik; Mediterranean; Mid-South East;Mongolia; Mount Kitangalad; Mountainous zone of the ButalmapuPehuenche, Argentina; Mountains in Java Island; Mountains of southwestarea of China; MRC personnel work in Rocky Mountains, Mt. Athos(possibly in future); Mt. Elgon; Mt. Kenya; Mt. Olympus; Mt. Pindus;Mt. Rwenzori; Mt. Tateyama; Natal Drakensberg; New Zealand ranges(Southern Alps); New Zealand, South Island Alps; North AmericanCordillera (US & Canada); North Vietnam Highlands; NorthernMindanao; Norwegian Arctic; Norwegian Mountains; Ouachita Mountains,Southeastern Oklahoma; Sumava Mtns. in Czech. Republic; OzarkMountains; Pamir; Pamiro-Alay; Piatra Craiului (the Stone of Prince);Piatra Mare (the Great Stone); Pindos; Pyrenees; Pyrenees - Frenchmassif central; Ranges in former Soviet Union-North Eurasia; Rhodope;Rockies (Can and USA); Romanian Carpathians; Sangre de Cristo;Scandanavia; Sierra Madre Occidental, Mexico; Sierra Nevada deGuican; Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta; South China; Sudetes; SumavaMts.; Tampa; Tian-Shan; Tibetan Plateau; Tien Shan; Tijuca's Massif;Tropical Hillsides; Turkey (Taurus); Upland Vietnam, Upland Thailand;Uttarakhand, northern India; Wasatch-Uinta Mountains (Utah USA);Western Rift Valley Highlands; Zanskar Range. Geographic Extent of Work:46% work on mountains in general; 21% work on one massif or range;4% work on a particular mountain; and 34% work in several mountainregions. (Many indicate more than one) Relation to Mountains: Membersconsider themselves to be: 23% mountain inhabitants; 35% interestedin mountains; 76% professionals working in mountains or on mountainissues, and 21% visitors/users of mountains. Principal Type of Work: Membersdefined their principal type of work as follows, with many choosingmore than one description: 16% activism; 15% administration; 10%students; 41% policy creation; 43% project-related; 62% research-related;33% teaching; 16% other. "Other "work included the following: consulting,facilitating, Alpinism, environment promotion, graduate studiesand research & policy development, editing/writing/publishing,tourism, festival organization, climbing and rafting companies,information/communications, scientific/applied work with mountainecosystems, horticulture, economic botany, natural gas development,and nature conservation Subjects of Specialization: Memberslisted their subject specialization(s) or key interest(s). Theten most popular subject specializations were: Sustainabledevelopment, watershed management and development, soil, naturalresources, protected areas, biodiversity, agriculture, community-basedprograms, the environment and tourism. Institutional Affiliation: Membersdescribed their institutional affiliation, many choosing morethan one: Categories: Donor organization Government Inter-governmental None NGO University Number of people: 11 19 13 13 75 66 Percentage of whole: 6% 10% 7% 7% 38% 33% Electronic Access of Mountain Forum Members Access to Internet: Memberaccess to electronic communications: 78% have access to e-mail; 31% have access file transfer protocol (FTP); 30% have access to Gopher; 56% have access to the World Wide Web; 8% listed other types of electronic access such asfax machines, dial-up access, and REFER (a francophonesystem of diffusing information). Six people mentioned thatthey were in the process of obtaining e-mail capabilities. 13% of Mountain Forum members have to pay to receiveeach e-mail message in addition to a monthly or hourly connectionfee. Email Software: Typeof Email Software Used: The top four responses for the e-mailsoftware used by Forum Members (in order of popularity) are Eudora(21%), Pegasus (14%), Microsoft Mail (5%), and PINE (5%). Internet Service Providers:The five most commonly used Internet service providers are: Auniversity (19%), Mercantile Office Systems (9%), CGNet (7%),IGC (6%) and CompuServe (5%). Others did not indicate their Internetprovider. Email Discussion Lists:34% of the respondents have participated in e-mail discussionlists. The most popular lists noted were INFOTERRA, HimNet, Infoandinaand SARD. Networking How Members Learned of the Forum:46% through a friend; 31% through printed material;15% via the Internet; 10% at an international meeting;4% from colleagues; 3% via the World Wide Web; and3% had helped to organize the Mountain Forum. Familiarity with the Forum:Members considered themselves: 64% new to the Mountain Forum;32% familiar with the Mountain Forum; 3% "other",and 1% did not indicate. Member Networks: Members describedtheir current network of colleagues: 62% as global; 38%as regional; 17% as local. Current Sources of Information:For information on mountains, members rely on libraries(78%) and colleagues (72%) Internet (33%) and 18%listed "other "ways they get information. The most popular"other ways" were through other organizations, conferencesand workshops, newsletters, papers, magazines, television, books,videos, universities, walks and climbs. Journals: The mostpopular mountain-related journals and newsletters to which memberssubscribe are Mountain Research and Development, Himal,ICIMOD's newsletter, and Revue de Geographie Alpine. Current Impact on Policy:Members indicated their belief that their experiences and knowledgecurrently impact government or intergovernmental policy: 31% responded"yes"; 28% responded "possibly"; 27% eitherchecked "no" or did not answer the question. How the Mountain Forum can best serveits members Expected use of Electronic Services: Forummembers anticipate using the following electronic services.: 64% e-mail discussion lists; 53% electronic magazineor e-mag; 52% World Wide Web page; 42% e-mail auto-reply documentservice; 21% gopher archives; 18% FTP archives; 7% other (Sixpeople who responded "other" said that they were anticipatinge-mail connectivity in the near future. The other services thatpeople listed as having are fax, dial-up access, and REFER (afrancophone system of diffusing information)). Expectations: Membersindicated they hoped to gain from the Mountain Forum: 65% access to mountain-specific information resources 60% broader knowledge of mountain issues 54% participation in mountain conferences, publications,or other initiatives of the Mountain Forum 59% specific knowledge of case studies and real-lifeexperiences 51% exposure to different viewpoints 53% wider network of colleagues 44% impact on local, regional, and global policyformation 34% greater sense of community with other mountainpeople 23% greater voice for your constituents or stakeholders 5% other hopes that members had for the MountainForum are the following: A better understanding of the impact of energy resourcedevelopment; a bit of all aforementioned hopes; a look at other'ssuccesses for what might be replicated in projects I am involvedin; determining the desirability of sponsoring a Mt. Kilimanjaroclimb doing an e-mail up and down using portable equipment; informationon trekking; cooperation; helping the Mountain Forum to get morepopular in Europe; raise political awareness in donor countries;and share information and experiences. New Discussion Lists-Languages: Membersindicated the following non-English languages they would liketo have special discussion lists for (given in order of popularity):Spanish, French, German, Russian, Nepali, Italian, Danish, Hindi,Japanese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian and Urdu. New Discussion Lists--Regions: Membersindicated the top five regions that they were interestedin discussing are (given in order of popularity): the Himalaya,the Andes, "other "Asian and European mountain regionsand Latin American mountain regions. Many other areas of interestwere mentioned, spanning these regions. New Discussion Lists-Special Groups: Membersindicated the following special discussion lists for these topfive special groups: Students, women, community facilitators,researchers and scientists. New Discussion Lists--Thematic Interests:Members indicated they would like to have special discussion listsset up for the following thematic interests areas (givenin order of popularity): sustainable development, water resources,biodiversity, cultural diversity, tourism, natural hazards, sacredmountains, production systems, climate change, and energy. Othertopics mentioned as possible discussion list topics are: Agenda21, Chapter 13 (post-Rio), Alpine Convention, art and mountaindevelopment, fun places to go, local mountain languages to encouragetheir use, new technology, remote sensing, silviculture, sustainableforestry, local communities, timber and logging, upland-lowlandinteractions and women in watershed management. Contributions Offered: Members indicated thewould be willing to contribute the followingto the electronic network services of the Mountain Forum: 53% contributing case studies, documents, bibliographies,references, or reports to the electronic archives; 28% assisting in locating technical support for participantsin their local or regional area. 19% assisting in database searches for participantswith limited electronic access 19% moderating or helping to moderate a discussionlist 6% are willing to make other contributions such aslinkages to their World Wide Web network, designing open learningsystems, limited financial support, databases and database images,and information about networks. Suggestions: Following is a long list of suggestionsmembers indicated on their survey forms (Though very much appreciated,greetings of a personal nature have not been included in thislist): Consideration for input support for fast networkingcommunication due to absence of e-mail service A "pin board" would be useful for informationrequests, news, etc. Better special efforts to establish relationswith the African Mountain Association Choice at present not to use electronic ! Community outreach - work hard to ensure thatthe inputs of mountain inhabitants are included in policy decisionsand recommendations Conduct field training and surveys Create an expert system for accessing databases& knowledge bases Create an electronic resource database on mountaintopics/issues Direct meetings E-mail is now a system in Turkey, but not easilyaccessible. Therefore, I also prefer written, paper communication Electronic change of real images (scanned images)which may help us create publications. This change of images mustbe based on a database w/ scanned images, & can be an attractivefacilitation. Establish a list of interesting & innovativeintegrated & sustainable development projects or case studiesall over the mountain areas of the world Exchange of ideas through debates, discussion,meeting, seminar and workshops Focus on peoples' real work and involve communityleaders For regular & effective participation inMountain Forum activities it would have been more appropriatefor me to acquire the communication package (laptop) & a modem. Further interest in dry zone mountains Growth will be demand-driven Help supporting regional directories of organizationsactive in mountain policies, research & development (see EarthwatchGems directory for i.e.) Help get off-line members & small networkcoordinators on-line. How could we contribute to this forum if we don'thave the technical facilities yet? I moderate an InSitu list called "Workshopin Situ95 or 96" I need a personal computer to be more efficientinside the electronic networking services of the Mountain Forum.A Macintosh? I think the opportunity should be taken to developin Mountain Forum an OPEN LEARNING/DISTANCE TEACHING functionas in the UK (Open University which has 1/4 million students)but also exploring a more popular medium. If possible do what HimNet did for non-geologicaltopics; In most cases with developing countries, modernelectronic communication advances are still very scanty. We are planning a network activity across Europeto draw together databases on mountain biodiversity. These youcan have when completed. Include a list of other electronic resourceswhich could supplement the Mountain Forum Incorporating the archives as suggested previously,pending demand International contacts and regional programs Inter-relate the UIAA with the Mountain Forum Is this all electronic or will you still do papermailings? It is essential that the regions of Africa, Europeand North America agree on a regional contact point ASAP in orderto reinforce and maintain the nature of decentralized regionallybased organization It needs to review the impact of its activitiesin various governmental and non-governmental sectors. This willprovide a clear view of its necessity. It will be helpful to seriously consider theneed to provide interested groups like ours with some basic communicationfacilities e.g. basic equipment to link with email. Link home page to Mountain Forum home page List members by country and list their work aswell. List of members (as a data-bank) with specialties Monitor carefully the balance of grass-roots,NGO, government, and intergovernmental organizations in MountainForum; it is essential that governments feel motivated to joinand participate actively My Institute has few computers which are underuse for other Institute matters. Offering abstracts of interesting books and articles Opening a documentation center in Himachal Pradesh Organize periodic face to face seminars/conferencesat regional level on particular theme related to mountains Post the same list to all newcomers 1-3 monthsfrom now Produce listing of other mountain-related lists Provide an easy-to-access discussion site orientedby geography and then subject Provide a Forum newsletter/mag. (elect. &hard) w/ general updates from regions, articles on topics of interest,news & events, reports of mtgs, new initiatives & summariesof on-line discussions. Provide e-mail and other lists of colleagues Provide easy-to-access copies of papers, listedor organized in logical manner Publish an electronic newsletter focusing ondifferent issues and/or regions with each issue Publish some book referring to the shown interestof the people who participate in this forum.I mean to includethese chapters in that book.I think that the most important issueis how to protect mountain ecosystems for us and future generationsw/ all positive moments which rise w/ the previous. Reports on projects in the different regionswould be very informative & would perhaps have fewer copyrightconcerns. Response of mountaineers to mountain problems Sharing scholarly information between practitioners& academics that users can read. Not just bibliographies butfull articles as possible within copyright limitations Shorter messages to ensure more frequent useof the forum Simpler instructions to access services thusa service to learn how to access a,b,c, etc. Since it is not possible to find Internet inE. Europe, is there another institution specialized in mountainproblems that can help us with the dissemination of useful information.? Solicit "papers" Start with prepared materials to break the ice,present participation is a little like teenagers at a dance; Telephone/fax accessibility is at the momenteasy with me. The only bottleneck are computers & the accompanyingaccessories. The forum could usefully provide a metadata baseof information on all computer networks related to mountain areas To have a regional meeting in every region Training programs to train regional partnerson ecofriendly technology We would like you create focal points for eachcountry What about the areas without electronic access? What is needed are selected materials uploadedonto a Web site and a back up Tutor assistance service. Would like to receive the same information throughthe post or phone/fax ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------WT01-B09-186IA007-000075-B039-200http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/africa.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071348 text/html 1127HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:14:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 957Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:56 GMT   Mountain Forum Regions-  Africa Mountain Forum Regions- Africa Regional focal points to be identified by processes already underway in this region. Return to the Regional Home Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-187IA007-000075-B039-237http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/europe.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071428 text/html 1746HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:14:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1575Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:56 GMT   Mountain Forum Regions-  Europe Mountain Forum Regions- Europe Regional focal points to be identified by processes already underway in this region. View the Recommendations of the European NGO Consultation on Sustainable Mountain Development Recommandations de la Confrence Europenne des ONG sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne The European Consultation of NGO and Populations on Sustainable Mountain Development La Consultation Europenne des ONG et des Populations sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne Return to the Regional Home Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-188IA007-000075-B039-258http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/asia.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071442 text/html 1434HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:15:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1263Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:55 GMT   Asia-Pacific Mountain Forum Asia-Pacific Mountain Forum ASIA/PACIFIC Coordinator: Send registration/surveys to: ICIMOD Attn: Shahid Akhtar, MF Membership PO Box 3226 Kathmandu, Nepal Tel: +977-1-525-313; Fax: +977-1-524-509; Telex: 2439 ICIMOD NP E-Mail: mforum@icimod.org.np Connect to the Asia/Pacific Regional Node at ICIMOD Return to the Regional Home Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-189IA007-000075-B039-277http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/namerica.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071450 text/html 1149HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:15:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 979Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:56 GMT   Mountain Forum Regions-  North America Mountain Forum Regions- North America Regional focal points to be identified by processes already underway in this region. Return to the Regional Home Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-190IA007-000075-B039-296http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/lamerica.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071501 text/html 1308HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:15:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1137Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:57 GMT   Latin American Mountain Forum Latin American Mountain Forum Coordinator for LATIN AMERICA: CIP/CONDESAN Attn: Ana Ponce, MF Membership Apartado Postal 1558 Lima 100, Peru Tel:+51-14-366-920; Fax:+51-14-351-570 E-Mail: A.Ponce@cgnet.com Return to the Regional Home Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-191IA007-000075-B039-328http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/whatsnew/laws.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071515 text/html 3603HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:15:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3432Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:13 GMT "Mountain Policy and Laws - A Special Discussion of the Mountain Forum"-Mtn-Forum Discussion Archive Article #021897 ************************************************************************ MOUNTAIN POLICY AND LAWS A Special Discussion of the Mountain Forum March 20 - April 20, 1997 ************************************************************************ We invite participation from anyone interested in mountains, indigenous rights, environmental law, international law, andinternational development policy. AGENDA ------------ I. Which existing laws treat mountains as a specific theme? Do these support the sustainability of mountain populations, cultures, and environments? II. Voices from the hills: What kinds of laws are needed? III. Can local mountain traditions function effectively within the modern legal system? IV. What advantages can trans-boundary agreements offer to mountain massifs? V. Evaluation and Synthesis * * * * * * This discussion is being facilitated through the Mountain Forum, a participatory and cross-cutting network of mountain peoples and professionals. The Mountain Forum brings together people who share a common concern for equitable, sustainable mountain development and mountain conservation. To join in the discussion, send an email message to with this message: subscribe mtn-forum For further information, please contact the Mountain Policyand Laws Moderator Group: _________________________________________________________ Yuri P. Badenkov, Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Science, and APMN/North Central Asia Mountain Network Coordinator, email: baden@zhk.l-card.msk.ru Kenneth Ewing, Attorney, Steptoe & Johnson LLP law firm email: kewing@mail.steptoe.com Lynelle Preston, Program Officer, The Mountain Institute email: lpreston@mountain.org Elizabeth Byers, Moderator, Mountain Forum Information Services, The Mountain Institute email: ebyers@mountain.org __________________________________________________________ Return to the Archives Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-192IA007-000075-B040-15http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/reportspubs/mountains.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071534 text/html 86743HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:15:48 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 86571Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:18:44 GMT Untitled Challenges of the 21stcentury (draft copy without graphics) Prepared for: CSD and Special UN General Assembly,June 1997 ,,Five Years After Rio" by the Mountain Agenda Mountain Agenda is an informal group of people with professionalinterests in sustainbale mountain development, drawn from theacademic and development cooperation communities. The group wascreated before the Rio Earth Summit to raise the position of themountains on the global environment agenda. Full references to the statements within this documentare given in: B. Messerli andJ.D.Jves (eds.), ,,Mountains of theWorld. A Global Priority." UNU and Parthenon Publishing,London. 1997. With support from: SDC Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation UNU United Nations University UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations IDRC International Development and Research Centre 1 Why Focus on Mountains? Mountains are an important source of water, energy and biologicaldiversity. Furthermore, they are a source of such key resourcesas minerals, forest, agricultural products and recreation. Asa major ecosystem representing the complex and interrelated ecologyof our planet, mountain environments are essential to the survivalof the global ecosystem." Agenda 21, Chapter 13. What are mountains? There is no clear definition of mountains and highlands and perhapsthis will always be so, because mountains with different altitudesand specific patterns of ecosystems are found on every continent,from the equator to the polar regions. Given their three-dimenesionalnature, they encompass the most extensive array of topography,climate, flora and fauna, as well as human cultural differentiation,known on earth. In lieu of an overly simplistic definition withaltitude above sea level, mountains can be characterised by theiraltitudinal succession of different climatic, geomorphic, andvegetational belts. Regardless of absolute altitudes, mountainsinclude all areas of a marked relief with significan ecologicaldifferences and slopes which are susceptible to natural hazardsand human activities. 46.7% of the total area of the continents is above500m; 26.9% above 1000m; and 11.1% over 2000m. These simplefigures show that Mountains and Highlands are indeed a major ecosystemof our planet! Mountains in the historical perspective Mountains and highlands have always played an important role inthe history of humankind. In the beginning, they were experiencedas both frightening and divine, and were often used as a refugeby persecuted groups and tribes (e.g. Kirdi in Cameroon). Lowlandpeople mostly perceived mountain inhabitants as barbarian andunlawful. Later on, mountain valleys and passes became importantfor traffic and transport. Improved economic conditions, togetherwith increasing strategic significance, served as the nucleusfor the formation of mountain states (e.g. Switzerland). Scientificinterests (e.g. Saussure, Rousseau) and subsequent enthusiasmfor mountains has grown in the last few centuries, followed bythe conquest of the high summits (e.g. Everest 1952). Since then,mountain, human, and natural resources have been recognized andhave become the focus of new attention from humankind. Mountain Resources for the 21st Century Agenda 21, chapter 13 was a great step forward towards realisingthe resource potential of the mountain world. One of the majorproblems in the next century will be water shortage; more thanhalf the world's fresh water comes from the mountains and highlands. Biodiversity is being threatened throughout the world: The mountains,especially in the tropics, are treasures of diversity for futuregenerations. Since Rio, knowledge and information have been improved,not only about water and biodiversity, but also about energy,timber, minerals, agriculture, tourism, etc. Preserving the diversityof mountain ecosystems also means understanding cultural diversity,including the religious, easthetic, ethic, and recreational significanceof mountains for humankind. Significance of the mountain chapter in Agenda 21 Chapter 13 has two programme areas: Generating and strengtheningknowledge about the ecology and sustainable development of mountainecosystems, Promoting integrated watersheddevelopment and alternative livelihood opportunities. In the first debates the question for the necessity of a specialmountain chapter arose. It was argued that all the elements ofmaountin areas are included in other chapters or conventions ofAgenda 21, i.e. Combating Deforestation, Sustainable Agricultureand Rural Development, Conservation of Biological Diversity, Protectingand Managing Fresh Water, Combating Poversy, Strengtheninmg theRole of Indigenous People, Partnerships with NGO's, Science forSustainable development, etc. It is true that mountain problemshave a connection to all these chapters, but it would be a greaterror to split the fragile ecosystems of our world, like the tropicalrainforests, the arid zones, the coastal zones, etc. into manyindependent sectors. Preservation of fragile ecosystems, especiallythe mountain ecosystems with their precious resources for ourfuture, requires research and integrated development programmeswith a stronger emphasis on linkages between economic, cultural,and ecologic aspects. Sustainable mountain development has tobe approached in a more comprehensive way. Awareness of mountains since Rio, Agenda 21 A large number of organizations, NGOs, governmental institutions,research centres, and private individuals have suddenly shownmore interest in sustainable mountain development. Since Rioand itsAgenda 21, mountains have been less marginalised. A growingurbanised world population is beginning to recognize the valueof human and natural resources of mountain areas. Governmentsare beginning to realise that long-term mountain policies areneeded. Mountains and highlands become a focus of humanity intothe 21st century. The political and economic poweris normally located in decision makingcentres outside the mountains. Consequently it is often said: Mountainsare only marginal areas, let them go, because they are only marginal! But: The fate of mountain ecosystems affectsmore than half the world's population. Mountains of the world 2 The nature of mountains Dynamic environments: living with uncertainty Mountains are highenergy environments. This brings manychallenges to planning their diverse uses, especially in relationto minimizing the natural hazards that result from high rainand snowfall, variations in temperature, steep slopes, seismicactivity and tectonic movement. The risks associated with mountainenvironments are growing rapidly with increases in resident andvisiting populations, intensification and diversification of landuses, and the construction of infrastructure. Risk assessmentand management are of ever greater importance. Right: The eruption of volcanoes is one of the greatesthazards for the populations of mountain areas and the world. WhenMount Pinatubo, Philippines, erupted in 1991, 6-8 billion m3 ofhot volcanic debris were ejected, destroying 350 km2 of land.The eruption affected more than 400,000 people directly, and 1.5million indirectly; it influenced the global climate for threeyears. The 1993 eruption of Lascar, Chile, is shown here. Falloutled to the closure of schools 200 km away. (Photo: Mina El Laco) Moving mountains Mountains include some of the most dynamic landscapes on Earth.The collision of continental plates the origin of mountainbuilding results in earth quakes and volcanic eruptions.Mountains intercept moisture from the atmosphere, resulting inboth large amounts and high intensities of precipitation, causingsnow and ice avalanches and floods. A central concern is to minimizesuch events, and to keep the water in the mountains to be usedproductively before flowing downhill. The long, steep slopes ofmountains are characterized by the downwards movement not onlyof water and snow, but also rocks and soil. While some processesare rapid lava and pyroclastic flows, rockslides, rockfalls,debris flows gradual processes, such as soil erosion, canequally put the lives of mountain people at risk. Soil erosionderives not only from the steepness of slopes, but also from humanmismanagement or other dynamic aspects of the mountain environmentsuch as heavy rainfall, strong wind, and changes in temperature. Each year, Cherrapunji, Megalaya Hills of Bangladesh,receives an average of 11.1 metros ofrainfall. In 1974, the total rainfall was 23.7 etres,more than anywhere else on Earth. 8.2 metres of this fell in July.The origin of this rainfall is the convective cloudsformed as air rises over the mountains. (Photo T. Hofer) The nature of mountains Avoiding catastrophes Mountain people who have long experience of a mountain area understandthe locations and likelihoods of natural hazards and catastrophesof moderate magnitude and frequency. Mountain people avoid dangerousareas, or take measures to control hazards. However, such knowledgeis not always used or recognized, particularly if the hazard isa process as slow as soil erosion. Catastrophic events such asglacial lake outbursts and debris avalanches related to volcaniceruptions may have long return periods or may be triggered bymultiple causes. Consequently, they are very difficult to predict,and are hardly recognized in people's perceptions. Rapid and desastrousevents are often confined to valleys, where human settlements,transport and other infrastructure are concentrated. The potentialfor losses of lives and property may be very high. left: There is a delicate balance in using steepmountain slopes. Valuable agricuHural land can be lost when cultivationis practiced on too steep slopes, as here in the Kakani valley,Nepal, where an exceptional monsoon rain triggered this landslide.(Photo: B. Messerli) The importance of protecting Andermatt, Switzerland,from avalanches was already recognized by a local law in 1397.The protective forest (Bannwald) has been complemented by modernavalanche protection structures. (Photo: Swiss Airforce) The risk of landslides Is a growing problem for urbanareas, such as the denselypopulated Jizukiyama area of NaganoPrefecture, Japan. Heavy rain caused this landslide, which killed26 people. Rehabilitation and stabilization cost S100 million.(Photo: M. Zimmermann) Mountains of the world Mountain ecosystems: fragile and diverse Mountain plant and animal communities are resilient becauseof their diversity of species, with many strategies for survival;but fragile because they may need long periods of time to recoverwhen damaged or stressed beyond a certain point, or when key speciesor soil are removed. The results may not be merely degradedecosystems,or the loss of species, but largescale destabilization oflandscapes, with major impacts on people living in mountains ordownstream. Thriving in harsh environments Most mountains are divided into vegetation belts with specifictemperature and moisture conditions. Overlain on these generalpatterns are variations deriving from underlying rocks, the orientationof slopes, the effects of large and smallscale disturbances,and the availability of microhabitats. Each species occupieshabitats to which it is adapted. Both plants and animals are foundup to 6,000 m in the tropics. Fragile ecosystems respond highly sensitive and rapidlyto human intervention. Restoring the original state may take avery long period of time. An experiment in the Schynige Plattearea of the Swiss Alps in the 1930s shows that the natural plantcommunity responds to application of fertilizer within 3 and 5years. Restoring the original plant community may take more than100 years. In this experiment, all the endangered 'redlist'species disappeared with the application of fertilizer. Inappropriatehuman intervention, here excess Nfertilizer, resulted in a 90%loss of biodiversity. (O. Hegg) Dry Temperate Mountain Site Current Climate Nival / Polar Desert Alpine Wet Tundra Subalpine Moist Forest Subalpine Dry Scrub Montane Steppe Montana Desert Scrub Lower Monhne Thorn Steppe Premontane Thorn Woodland Vegetation belts in the Sierra Nevada, California,USA, under current climatic conditions. (Source: Patrick N. Halpin) Surviving human activities Continued human intervention is necessary for some species tosurvive; such as plants in meadows, where natural herbivores havebeen replaced by grazing or mowing over centuries. However, humanactivities endanger many mountain ecosystems and species. Wetlandsare particularly vulnerable; through dam construction, drainage,pollution, and the introduction of alien species. Mountain forestsmay be lost or completely changed through clearing for agricultureand plantations and cutting for timber and fuelwood, and the introductionof new species. Medicinal and ornamental plants and mushroomsmay be collected to extinction. Quarrying and road constructioncan remove the habitat of cliff species. Downhill skiing may disturbanimals and birds, and damage vegetation. The nature of mountains The risks of climate change Climate change has significant implications for mountain peopleand billions living downstream. Major changes in rainfall andsnowfall patterns, and more extreme events, such as floods andavalanches, are likely. Governments and many industries agriculture, energy, forestry, insurance are developingpolicies for areas in the mountains and lowlands can not assumethat future climates will be similar to recent history. Regardingrisk mitigation and longtermplanning, scenarios of positive andnegative impacts of climate change are needed. Change Scenario +3.5 C / +10% Precipitation With a 3.5C increase in annual temperature,and a 10% increase in precipitation, vegetation belts will moveupwards. Ecological conditions will change and some habitats maydisappear. As many species are trapped in the "islands. ofmountains, they may be endangered if their habitat vanishes. (PatrickN. Halpin) A complex future Detailed predictions of future mountain climates are difficult,due to the complexity of mountain regions and inadequate longtermdata. Likely changes include shifts in major storm tracks andearlier snowmelt. Changes in runoff are expected to affect thelowlands, especially dry areas fed by mountain snowmelt. Highertemperatures and carbon dioxide may result in more productiveagriculture and forestry; but weeds, pests, and diseases may prosper,and fires may increase. Higher temperatures may reduce permafrostareas and foster slope processes such as rock falls and landslides.Diseasecarrying organisms may also move upwards. In winter,changes in the distribution and timing of snowfall and snowmeltmay significantly affect the ski tourism. On the other hand, thetransport sector may benefit from longer snowfree periods. Flexibility for the future Cooperation and diverse, flexible management systems will be increasinglyimportant. However, climate change is only one factor to be consideredfor sustainable development; its benefits and negative impactswill interact in complex ways. There is "a discernible human influence on globalclimate": Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 1996. Mountains are sensitive early warning systems forclimate change. Nearly all glaciers, except for some In Norwayand western North America, are retreating. One is the Zongo glacier,Bolivia (left), which provides water for large areas. The glaciersof Kilimanjaro (left) have lost more than half of their area sincethe 1880s. Mountains of the world 3 Mountain societies and economies The diversity of mountain cultures Mountain peoples are increasingly integrated into the modernworld. They face many challenges in maintaining their culturalidentity and selfconfidence, which are essential for theirproper development. These need to be fostered not only from within,but also from outside the mountains, particularly from urban centresand governments. The mountains of western Central Asia are one ofthe major centres of linguistic diversity. Other centres of ethnicdiversity include the eastern Caucasus and the Altai. (Source:H.J. Kreutzmann) Maintaining identity While most distinct mountain peoples are relatively few in number,some large groups exist, such as the Quechua (Andes), Amhars (Ethiopia),and Tibetans. Some major centres of culture have been in mountains;others have been areas of refuge for those whose language, religion,or race differed from those of a region's dominant groups. Manymountain people have intentionally maintained their cultural identityby keeping not only a physical, but a sociocultural, distancefrom their neighbours. Factors of loss Modern transport and communication vastly increase themobility of people, goods, and ideas. External ideas brought byreturning migrants, tourists, investors, or telecommunicationsalso lead to losses of cultural diversity. This concerns not onlylanguages, customs, costumes, or architecture, but also land practices,crop varieties, cultivation methods and land ownership. Mountain societies and economies Working together: Mutual aid and common property Many tasks required to ensure the continuity of mountain communitiesexceed the abilities of individuals and families. Systems of mutualaid and common property have evolved in concert with fixed andchanging local conditions. They are generally far more appropriatefor sustainable mountain development than regulations and institutionalsystems elaborated by central administrations. Thriving in a fragile environment While agricultural land is generally privatelyowned, itsproductive use may only be possible when families work togetherto construct and maintain terraces and irrigation systems and,often, to plant and harvest crops. Joint ownership and managementare also valuable in using forest resources and pastures sustainably.Such commonproperty resources are governed by strict rulesdefining individual rights and responsibilities. Protecting mountaincommunities, access routes, transit corridors and infrastructurefrom natural hazards also involves communal tasks, such as constructingdefence structures and planting trees; as well as the knowledgeablesiting of buildings and infrastructure.. Choosing the right innovations These communal institutions and systems are based on centuriesof local experience. Today, many are threatened, or have beenlost; through technical progress, increased government influence,better communication, and economic forces. Not all endeavourscan be implemented locally; for example, large construction projects.The division of labour and investment between public and privateentities and selfhelp groups must be carefully defined foreach mountain community and region. Innovations in institutionalstructures, technical knowledge, and organizational managementare often necessary to ensure better responses to changing situations,however, they must be locally suported. Terraces as in the Mandara Mountains, Cameroon, areessential for the cultivation of steep slopes in many mountainregions. Their construction, as here in the Ethiopian Highlands,requires the cooperation of whole communities. (Photos: H. Hurni,B. Messerli) Mountains of the world Managing and living in the mountain landscape For most mountain inhabitants of developing countries, fields,grazing land, and forests are their main workplaces and sourcesof sustenance. Their way of life is characterized by the complementaryuse of different attitudinal zones, whose use is conditioned byphysical factors and infrastructure constructed over generations.Pressures to intensify the use of these landscapes threaten theircareful management, on which not only mountain people, but millionsdownstream, depend. Fuelwood, the main energy source for mountain people,is mainly collected by women, as in the Megalaya Hills, India.(Photo: B. Messerli) The mountains near Solola, Guatemala are multifunctionalagrosilvopastural landscapes and mainly cultivatedfor the subsistence production of potatoes, beans, cereals, andmaize. (Photos: M. Grosjean) Diversified interconnected systems Mountain economies in developing countries are primarily basedon local resources and driven by local needs. Few people are exclusively,,farmers" or ,,foresters". Most individuals pursuemyriad activities in an agrosilvopastoral system.The forests provide essential inputs to agriculture, and manyother resources such as animal fodder, timber, nonwood productsfor food or income, and fuelwood. Mountain societies and economies Adapting to change? The vast array of mountain landuse systems reflects diversephysical and cultural conditions. Today, the rates of change mountainpeople are experiencing are too rapid to allow them to evolveeffective adaptive strategies. Larger populations, unsustainablepoverty alleviation policies and desires for higher income leadto increases in demand, often resulting in soil nutrient depletion,soil erosion and ultimately lower crop yields. Outmigration candecrease demand, and is widespread, but often at the expense ofmaintaining the land. Upgrading the production base through terracingor irrigation is often not possible due to lacking man power. Paths to intensification Where possible, new ways to intensify the use of entire mountainlandscapes are needed. This will involve among others developmentplanners, extension agents, and foresters. But they must understandthe complex systems and needs of local people. The introductionof ecologically and culturally appropriate species or varieties,combined with suitable production, harvesting, storage and marketingstrategies, may permit increased benefits. However, all longterminvestments also in agriculture and forestry are only possiblewhen property rights are guaranteed. Agriculture and forestry: pillars of mountain communities Costs of production in agriculture and forestry are generallyhigher in mountains, and transport to markets more expensive.Nonetheless, due to increasing demands for products, unsatisfiedby the lowlands, intensification in both sectors is occurring.This often results in more serious environmental costs and longterm impairment of productivity. On the other abandonment of steeplandsis occurring, and forest area is increasing through natural regrowthor state and private reforestation programs. In some countriesmountain farmers are finding a riskreduction agriculture/forestry combination by planting trees on their farms. Communitymanagement of forests as a replacement of failed or inadequategovernment control is also improving the picture. Recognizing linkages Highquality agricultural goods and forest products may increasecompetitiveness, particularly when new technologies are used.Yet such primary activities, alone, are rarely a basis for sustainablemountain development. Mountain agriculture and forestry shouldno longer be treated independently. Mountain people must by compensatedfor the inherent disadvantages of their environments and the manyservices they provide to wider communities by maintaining mountainlandscapes. This requires the integration of environmental externalitiesinto agricultural and other sectoral policies, and support formultifunctional economies. Otherwise, as has begun in manyregions, depopulation will occur, with unpredictable consequencesfor all those downstream The multifunctional landscape of Pays d' Enhaut,Switzerland, has developed over centuries of use. New technologies,such as this tractor, specially built for working on steep slopes,can help to increase production and reduce production costs wherehuman labour is expensive. (Photos: B. Messerli, Ch. Groslean) Tropical upland forests are disappearing at 1.1%per year, faster than any other forest biome. The causes includefrom smallscale clearing for agriculture to largescalecommercial logging. Rates of change are particularly high in CentralAmerica, East and Central Africa, and Southeast Asia. Mountains of the world Comparative inequalities Most mountain people have lower standards of living than peoplein the neighbouring lowlands. Lower standards of living includerestricted access to education, capital for investments and offfarmjob opportunities. This is not always true in tropical and subtropicalareas, where mountains provide more favourable conditions forlife. Even so, mountain people are typically marginalized througheconomic and political factors, which compound the environmentalconstraints. Within every mountain region, there are significantethnic, generational, and gender inequalities. Sustainable mountaindevelopment implies the reduction of these inequalities; otherwise,extensive environmental deterioration is likely. Recognizing women's roles In the mountain societies of developing countries, women are responsiblefor most of the farming, and the nurturing of future generations.Their importance is not reflected in their access to education,social services, credit, land and other assets, and technologies.These disparities begin in childhood, and continue through theirlives. Women occupy a disproportionate number of lowpaidand labourintensive jobs; cannot obtain credit even whenthey are the main food producers; and rarely have major decisionmakingroles outside their families, or benefit equitably from inheritance.A central focus of mountain development plans should be to decreasethese inequities, aiming at genderbalanced development.This will require a strong continuation of the initiated shiftin the policies and actions of aid agencies, which have oftenfurther weakened the status of women. Left: Women and girl d~ildren of ethnic minorities,such as these Yu people in northwestern Yunnan, China, are amongthe most marginalized of mountain people. (Photo: J.D. Ives) Inequalities in ,,The playground of Europe" Nearly half of the 6,000 mountain communes of theAlps are seriously marginalised as a result of external economicand political forces. The communes that are prospering are thoseat the lowest altitudes, those along transportation corridorsor those with attractive tourist destinations. Mountain societies and economies Moving through the mountains: traffic and transport Mountains are often regarded as barriers to communication.Yet most are traversed by important trade routes, often with majortrading centres for products from the mountains and the adjacentplains. The opening of ways into and through the mountains haslargely been driven by the demands of lowland economies and politicalrealities. Examples are the export of minerals, wood, or animals;the transit of goods; access for tourism, and strategic control!along national frontiers, important transit roads and passes. Benefits and costs Improved transport networks allow faster and morereliable access to other parts of the mountains and the plains.Mountain inhabitants may gain opportunities for employment, bothas commuters to jobs in the lowlands, and in new production andservice industries. Yet, improved access along one valley maydraw resources and people from adjacent valleys, causing environmentaland societal change. Major transit routes mainly benefit thoseoutside the mountains. However, people living close to these routessuffer negative impacts, such as noise and air pollution. Constructionof mountain roads may also change surface runoff and threatenthe stability of mountain environments. Integrated and longterm planning The costs of developing, maintaining, and using infrastructurefor transport through the mountains are always far higher thanon the plains. Regional approaches to planning transportationsystems are increasingly necessary, and must also consider newmeans of electronic communication, the implications of risingfuel prices and increasing tolls. Left: The Karakorum Highway links Pakistan and China,reaching an altitude of 4572m. Its opening to public traffic inthe late 1970s has been a major factor of change in regional economies.(Photo: S. Price) Right: Pack animals, such as these camels in theTibesti Mountains of the Central Sahara, Chad, have been essentialmeans of transport through the mountains for mililenia. (Photo:B. Messerli) Mountains of the world Mountain areas in the world market The liberalization of markets, the primary outcome of the UruguayRound of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) andthe establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO), willsignificantly affect mountain societies. ,,Markets should serve people, instead of peopleserving markets": UNDP Human Development Report, 1993. The decline of the production potential Industrial and agricultural goods from mountain regions rarelyhave absolute cost advantages because of high production and transportcosts, so that imported goods arecheaper. When goods areproduced in the mountains at a cost disadvantage in an attemptto compete, mountain workers receive lower salaries than equallyqualified workers in neighbouring lowlands. With lower incomes,mountain people have lower savings; and imported goods are expensiveIn relation to Income. The lack of savings tends to limit investmentsin agriculture and other sectors, leading to stagnating or decliningeconomies with a low added value. Consequently, mountain areasare likely to remain agrarian. This will further disadvantagethem as, following global trade liberalization, agricultural pricestend to decline even more relatively. The need of government action In the absence of government intentention, trade liberalizationis likely to hit areas most with high employment in agriculture,which suffer in many cases from high population growth and limitedopportunities for migration; this, leading to a stronger relianceon food imports. Conversely, mountain areas with low populationgrowth and multisectoral economies should be affected less.Nevertheless, many governments will have to develop appropriatepolicies to maintain the region's production potential. These photographs from the central Andes illustratethe difference between subsistence agriculture (preparing a potatofield at 3,900 m in the Titicaca Basin, Bolivia) and hightechnologycultivation (grapes in the Copiap6 Valley, Atacama Desert, Chile).The grapes, for export to North America and Europe, are grownin an area that was previously communal desertic area. High capitalinvestment, technology and water from the Andes have created anew economy. (Photos: B. Messerli, M. Grosjean) Mountain societies and economies Places of conflict in the mountains of the world A particularly high proportion of wars and conflicts take placein mountain regions, usually because of interactions with lowlandareas. As mountain communities have limited means to cope withenvironmental challenges, their relations to the lowlands mayrapidly precipitate into crisis when the socioecologicalbalance is disturbed. Sustainable mountain development is a vitalmeans for preventing and managing conflict. Sources of tension Although difficult to access, mountain regions have always interrelatedwith neighbouring foothills and plains, whether ecologically,through the water cycle; or socioeconomically: transhumance,providing labour, and offering transportation routes. Environmentalchange and the shortage of resources such as fertile land,water, forests are deepening poverty, widening social divides,disrupting migration patterns, and causing new population movements.Longestablished social and political structures are beingchallenged. Consequences include international disputes over waterresources and, within States, growing tensions along societalboundaries such as classes, or ethnic and tribal groups: the maincauses of many, if not most, internal wars. Avoiding stresses Where ecology is fragile, social peace is also fragile, and resourcesmust be shared equitably to avoid conflict. The management ofmountain conflicts should focus on the economic and environmentalroots of multiple stress on highlandlowland interactions.Participatory approaches, coupled with adapting established regulationsof access to resources to new conditions, are most likely to producesustainable and realistic solutions. A policy to prevent conflicts and rebuild postconflictsocieties in a mountain region should integrate elements as: - enhancing labourintensive forms of resource use; - establishing multiple resourceuse systemssuch as transboundary mountain ecoregions; - strengthening local responsibilities and decisionmaking. Of 48 wars and armed conflicts in 1995, 26 took placein or covered mountain areas including several major trouble spots,such as the Indo-Pakistani order areas, the Caucasus, and theGolan Heights. (Source: S. Libezewski and G. Bachler) Mountains of the world 4 Mountain resources for humankind Water towers for the 21st century Storing immense amounts of fresh water as ice and snow, andin lakes and reservoirs, mountains play global roles in supplyingwater and moderating river flows. This is vital not only for mountainpeople, but also for agriculture, industry, and urban centresin adjacent lowlands. Rivers cross many boundaries. Consequently,water management is highly complex, requiring technical and politicalcooperation between upstream providers and downstream consumers.This will be ever more urgent in the 21St century: 35% of theglobal population is likely to experience water scarcity by 2025. The importance of mountain water Mountains have higher precipitation than surrounding lowlands.Much of this precipitation falls as snow, which is released asmeltwater in spring and summer. This is particularly importantwhen the rivers reach to semiarid and arid regions withhigh evaporation rates and demands for irrigation water in summer.All of the world's largest rivers originate in the mountains. Planning of reselvoils must consider all aspectsof dynamic mountain environments. Sedimentation rates in the Kulekhanireservoir, Nepal, built to provide hydroelectnc power forKathmandu, have been much higher than expected. Twothirdsof its capacity were lost in the first 13 years of operanon, threequartersof this in 1993, when 500 mm precipitation fell in a single stormof 24 hours. In and and semiand areas, over 90% of the riverflow comes from the mountains. In Europe, the Alps occupy only 11% of the area ofthe Rhine's drainage basin, but contribute 31% of the annual flow more than 50% in summer. Multiple values Water in lakes, rivers, and reservoirs is not only available forconsumption, but provides a major source of energy. For instance,the hydropower potential of the Brahmaputra, Ganges, and Indus,rising in the Himalaya, is enormous. However, planning the sustainablemanagement of water resources requires adequate information andknowledge, which is generally lacking. The hydrological observationnetworks in mountains worldwide are in decline (WMO). Switzerland, the water tower of Europe, receives60 km3 of precipitated water every year. 67% of this water iscarried to the Rhine, Danube, Rhone, and Po rivers and crossesthe border to France, Italy, Germany, and Austria. Within Switzerland136 km3 of water are stored in lakes and reservoirs, such as theOberaar reservoir shown here; another 74 km3 are stored in glaciers.This is five times the yearly river flow. (Photo: KWO) Mountain resources for humankind Mining mountains: environmental challenges Driven by the growth of global consumption, modern technologyfor mineral exploration and extraction, and the constructionof infrastructure has made the most remote mountain areasaccessible and profitable for mining. Agenda 21 calls on nationalgovernments and multinational mining companies to 'pray a majorrole in reducing Impacts on resource use and the environment'.This includes responsibility to minimize the social and culturaleffects of mining. Mining at the limits Many mines are located at high altitudes with harsh climates andnatural hazards. These pose significant risks to long, circuitousaccess roads, bridges, infrastructure and camps. Present miningis challenged by avoiding air pollution, the failure of tailings,and percolation of toxic mine drainage. Many of these problemsremain after mining has finished, and rehabilitation of miningsites is often very difficult. High altitudes also mean that labour mechanical power and human effort is significantlyreduced; for instance, the oxygen concentration at 5000 m is onlyhalf that at sea level. Limited local benefits Mining in remote areas may result in severe social disintegrationand changes of local economies. Almost everything fuel,food, timber, machinery is imported. Often, the labour forcemust also be imported, resulting in ethnic enclaves in culturallydifferent environments. Some miners work long shifts for a fewdays, weeks or even months, and are sometimes hundreds of kilometersaway from their families. Success story 1: At thenew Exxon mine at Los Bronces, Chile, acid drainage water is recycledthrough lowgrade copper material in a bacterial leachingplant. This reduces the potential risk of discharge of acid watersto the Rio Mataro, Santiago's source of drinking water, and recoversenough copper to yield a profit. Success story 2: Researchby Kennecott has shown that, although at high cost, it will soonbe possible to have zero emissions of gases, liquids, and solidwaste from zinc, lead, and copper smelting. Success story 3: CODELCOof Chile, the world's third largest mining company in 1993, isinvesting 11;680 million in cleaning up smelters and introducingnew environmental management technologies. Open pit operations and heap leaching startedat the gold mine above Summitville, Colorado, USA in 1986. Cyanideleaked into the groundwater. The mining company could not affordthe necessary remedial work, and filed for bankruptcyin1992. TheState of Colorado mandated the US Environmental Protection Agencyto take over management of the site, at a cost of S40,000 perday to the tax payer. Many major mining companies have set upa study group to learn from this disaster.(Photo D.J. Fox) GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY: SPECIES NUMBERS OF VASCULAR PLANTS Mountains: The focal point of Global biodiversity Mountains are core areas of global biodiversity. Major centresof vascular plant species diversity are in, orinclude mountains: Costa Rica, tropical eastern Andes, the Atlanticcoast of Brazil, the eastern HimalayaYunnan region, northernBorneo, and PapuaNew Guinea. Many secondarycentres are found in subtropical arid mountains:the Rocky Mountains, the central Sahara, and Central Asia. Mountainsare also important centers of crop variety, a major issue of mountainagriculture. The number of vascular plant species is closelycorrelated to total species diversity. Thus the map may serveas a first approximation of global biodiversity. Maintaining biological and landscape diversity After millenia of human modification of the Earth's ecosystems,mountain areas are refuges for a great wealth of endemic species,specialized ecosystems, and remarkable landscapes. A common approachto conserving this biological and landscape diversity has beento establish national parks, nature reserves, and other protectedareas. More recent approaches recognise that biological and landscopediversity must also be conserved on land under humanuseregimes of agriculture and forestry, and that the private sectorcan be a major conserver of these values. Biodiversity richness Tropical mountains include major centres of global biodiversity;other important centres are found in arid subtropical mountains.The high biodiversity is to a large extent due to the differentclimatic attitudinal belts, the different conditions on differentsides of the mountain and the many microhabitats. Isolated mountains(such as Kilimanjaro) also result in a high proportion of endemicspecies. Mountain protected areas Many of the mountain areas of greatest biological and landscapediversity are protected areas, often with additional internationalstatus: 39 World Heritage Sites and 141 Biosphere Reserves. Suchareas can protect endemic and threatened species, offer recreationand tourism opportunities, and be used to monitor environmentalchanges. These functions are best achieved when protected areasalso provide regional or transboundary mechanisms for cooperation.This is especially critical in mountain areas, where administrativeboundaries divide ecosystems. People, wildlife, fires, diseases,air pollution regularly cross administrative and ecological boundaries. Kilimanjaro is an example of an ,,island"of high biodiversity above lowlands impoverished by centuriesof human exploitation. It is also sacred to the Masai; like manysacred mountains, it is protected as a national park. Joint management Recent conservation approaches stress the linkages between biologicaland cultural diversity. Many mountain areas which are now legallyprotected have long been used e.g. for collecting plants and forestproducts, religious ceremonies, and grazing. Prohibiting theseuses, or recreation, is not practicable or desirable. On the contrary,implementing and monitoring regional conservation policies jointlywith local and other stakeholders should be emphasized. Outsideof protected areas, needs to provide grazing for wild animals,or corridors for migration, may influence the management and useof certain areas, in buffer zones of conservation. Mountain resources for humankind Conservation corridors Most mountain protected areas were established to protect isolatedareas, usually only at high elevations above the agriculture andforestry belt. Unfortunately, relatively ,,small islands"of nature protection are inadequate for longterm conservationof biological diversity; especially if appropriate habitat forimportant species shrinks because of climate change. Animals andplants must have opportunities to migrate not only up and down,but also along and between mountain ranges. This requires migrationcorridors between isolated habitats and solitary protected areas. Large animals are vital indicators of ecosystemhealth. Their management requires cooperation between the concernedagencies and landowners. Such animals include e.g. mountain goats(Oremnus americanus) in the Colorado Rocky Mountains and lammergeiers,shown here in the Simen Mountains, Ethiopia. Lammergeiers haverecently been reintroduced to the Alps. (Photos: M.E Price, B.Messerli) Other existing or proposed corridors are in Brazil'sSerra do Mar; in the Karakoram; from tropical India to glaciatedBhutan; from Yellowstone to the Yukon; in New South Wales, Australia;and through seven Central American States. The Central Apennines Conservation Corridor isa bioregional corridor proposed to face the challenges of conservationIn the 215'century. The map shows the protected areas (brown),the proposed and new protected areas (green), and the connectingcorridors (yellow). (Source: F. Tassil) Mountains of the world Tourism: the world's largest industry Mountain regions include many major tourist destinations. Mountainpeople face many challenges in integrating this diverse and complexindustry into their lives. Tourism can provide many opportunities,but can also have great economic, cultural, and environmentalimpacts. Plans to direct local resources to tourism must carefullyconsider local people's needs and expectations. Right: Tourism can provide employment to mountainpeople, such as this woman serving tea in the Nepalese Himalaya.However, this can put additional pressure on local resources,but creates new income opportunities. (Photo: S. Price) Below: Flaine, France. Largescale infrastructurefor tourism can completely change local economies, with significantenvironmental impacts. The costs of construction and maintenancecan lead to increased dependence on outside capital, and inadequatefunds for community facilities. (Photo: P. Messerli) An allpervasive industry Tourism provides a vast range of ,,products" to millionsof mountain people. Tourism is found in almost every mountainregion and, although often highly seasonal, dominates the economyof many of them. Often, far wider areas than tourists visit areaffected. Tourism often leads to substantial tensions and inequities,for instance, between those employed in traditional economic activitiesand those with highpaying tourist jobs, or because pricesfor housing, goods and infrastructure increase. Balancing benefits and costs While the diversity of landscapes, opportunities for sports, and,,living cultural resources" attract people to mountains,tourism almost inevitably changes these attractants. It can stimulatesustainable mountain development: through employment, the productionof food and handicrafts, or transfer payments from communitieswhich benefit directly from tourist income to those which maintainthe landscape the ,,capital" of tourism. The potentialenvironmental impacts may provide opportunities to develop andtest new technologies and strategies: for water and waste treatment,energy production and utilisation, or food production. Ensuring compatibility Tourism is never freestanding, and is introduced into communitieswith existing cultural norms and economic activities. The infrastructureconstructed in a landscape is often used for many other purposes.Therefore, development of policies and plans must be based ona realistic assessment of the relative social and environmentalcompatibilities of different tourist and other economic activities,and involve local communities and other stakeholders at all stagesfrom initial definition to implementation. Mountain resources for humankind Human resources: investing in the future People are the most important resource of the mountains. Sustainablemountain development is only possible by and for people and mustreflect their problems and needs, and benefit them. The importantroles of women should be recognized by ensuring their participationin every level of decisionmaking, and access to information,education, health, and financial services. Outmigration of menmay lead to social desintegration. Finding a balance Mountain people's intimate knowledge of their environment hasproduced diverse cultural behaviours, with a common denominator:sensitivity for environmentally practicable action. This recognitionof a necessary balance between nature and human exploitation isvital for humankind, faced with major changes and uncertainties.Mountain women play the dominant role in transmitting local culture,knowhow, behaviour, and customs to their children. Thisrole is further enhanced when, as often, men are absent for manymonths, as economic migrants. Investments in a time of change Local knowledge and experience are keys to sustaining ecosystems,livelihood, and production. However, they must be cautiously integratedwith new techniques and research findings. This requires a focuson practical training and education, if possible onsitein the mountains. This will be costly, given the sparse distributionand isolation of many mountain populations. Governments must beready to make proportionately greater investments for trainingand education in mountain regions, and support their communitiesin maintaining and transmitting to their children their locallanguages, knowledge, and culture. Local people are the key to the solution, notthe main cause of the problems. Investment in people is the bestway to prosed the mountains for future generations. A Tibetanman at Namche Bazar, Nepal, and a peasant girl in the BolivianAndes. (Photos: B. Messerli, J.D. Ives) Mountains of the world 5 Research and Information Needs Governments at the appropriate level with the supportof the relevant international and regional organisaiions shouldstrengthen scientific research . (Agenda 21, Chapter 13). There is, however, a lack of knowledge of mountainecosystems. The creation of a global mountain database is thereforevital for launching programmes that contribute to the sustainabledevelopment of mountain ecosystems (Agenda 21, Chapter 13). Consider undertaking pilot projects that combineenvironmental protection and development functions (Agenda 21,Chapter 13) Mountain research is not a scientific discipline, but an interactionof different disciplines, integrating even the traditional andlongterm experience of local people. Therefore, it needsscientists who are used to working outside the office and thelaboratory; who understand, in addition to their own specializations,how natural and human systems operate and interact; and who canthink locally and globally with both a shortterm and a longtermfocus. Data Banks and Information Systems for Multinational and MulticulturalRegions (Map) Agenda 21 encourages data bases and information systems to facilitatethe integrated management and environmental assessment of mountainecosystems. There has been considerable progress since Rio: The HinduKushHimalayan Region is the world'shighest mountain region, and extending over 3500km from Afghanistanin the west to Myanmar in the east, encompassing 8 countries.Collecting information and developing a digital database for thewhole region are a major function of ICIMOD's information systemMENRIS. All information is procured from official government sourcesand through interpretation of satellite images, combined in acomprehensive GIS database at a scale of 1:250,000. - In the Alpine countries there is also a growing need for sharinginformation. Since eight countries and the European Union areinvolved, such information systems are decentralized, but wellcoordinated and open to all types of users. An Alpine Conventionis further promoting coperation among these nations. ICIMOD's Data Bank for the HinduKushHimalayas:Mountain Environment and Natural Resources Information Service(MENRIS) Research and Information Needs Research and pilot projects for community development Too often we find mountain projects without the necessary scientificbase. Expensive maintenance or even the destruction of roads,irrigation canals, small power plants, etc. could be avoided ifonly a fewpercentsof the costs were spent for a careful scientificstudy of the location and the local hazardous processes beforehand. Many mountainspecific problems require scientific work:E.g. natural hazards and changing environmental conditions, natureconservation and sustainable resource use, economic marginalisationand possible mechanisms for the compensation of disadvantages,regional development planning and its impact at the communitylevel, etc. Interdisciplinary approaches are fundamental and theinvolvement of local men and women strengthens human resourcedevelopment and capacitybuilding, even on a community level. Chapter 13 demands pilot projects in the framework of integratedwatershed development programmer. Networks for such pilot projectsin different countries of a regional mountain system, executedwith comparable objectives, methods, and techniques, lead notonly to broader knowledge, but also to scientific cooperation,which is important for a free flow of information across borders. From local science to a global mountain research network Mountain research reaches far back into the last centuries. Themain topic was fascination with nature, its processes and itsdangers. Whereas glacial advances or retreats were still consideredan act of God in past centuries, they have now become an importantindicator of climatic oscillations or even climate change. Knowing that mountain ecosystems are the most sensitive indicatorsof climate and global change, we need a mountain research networkwith monitoring stations, not only in the industrialized countries,but especially in the most vulnerable tropical mountain systems. This is not a wish of an ivory tower science, itis much more an urgent need to understand and if possible to predictpotential changes: E.g. for water and energy supply, biodiversityresources, risks of erosion and natural hazards, and especiallyalso for the living conditions of the local population like agriculture,tourism, traffic, etc. Bolivian, American, French, and Swiss researchersinstalling one of the highest permanent weather stations: on thesummit of Sajama, Bolivia (6520 m). The data collected can beaccessed by satellite from anywhere in the world, and is essentialfor understanding high mountain climates. (Photo: M. Vuille) Maintain and establish meteorological and hydrologicaland physical monitoring analysis and capabilities that would encompassthe climatic diversity as well as water distribution of variousmountain regions of the world. (Agenda 21, Chapter 13: 13.7a) Scientific research in the high mountains beganin the early 19d. century: Franz Josef Hugi and his research teamare shown here in the Rottal Valley, Switzerland, around 1830.Data collected over long periods is essential for assessing longtermtrends and planning for the future. (Painting: Martin Distely,180218U, in the Alpine Museum, Bern) Mountains of the world 6 Policies and actions for mountain communities The State: catalyst in sustainable mountain development? A national action plan: Governments should preparea comprehensive action plan for sustainable mountain development(as a visible indication of the high priority given to mountains),and commit themselves to realizing stated priorities by specifieddates. In 1996,1,000 European NGOs concerned with mountain areas statedthat political decisions and legal prescriptions (or their absence)are principally responsible for environmental degradation in themountains. (Source: Agence Regionale pour l'Environnement, RegionMidiPyrenees, France). Altough the State is the most importantplayer, the responsible ministries are generally distant, notflexible enough, and influenced by other considerations. Instruments for sustainable mountain development The State's essential role stems from its political function andfinancial power. It has to define, through means as participatoryas possible, a normative framework and a general policy for sustainablemountain development; implement this policy; control its application;evaluate its results; and play the role of arbiter. To executethese tasks, many tools with an enormous influence on the futureof mountain regions are available. Legal instruments include sectoral,integrated, and regional development policies; and the definitionand protection of property rights. Economic and financial instrumentsinclude investment in infrastructure and other projects; directfinancial support (subsidies, compensation, incentives throughgrants and loans); adapted taxation policies; fair pricing; andfinancial equalization schemes. Gantertal bridge, Simplon Pass, Switzerland. Only governments, parastatals, and major companieshave the capital to implement major infrastructure projects. (PhotoK. Aerni) Policies and actions for mountain communities Compensating the stewards of mountain resources Many goods produced by mountain communities timber,fuelwood, high quality water, agricultural products, minerals have measurable economic value. Through managing localresources, mountain people also provide other goods and serviceswhose value is not easily measured in monetary terms, althoughtheir lack can: for instance, the damage caused by floods, illhealthfrom polluted water; or the loss of species. However, there areno free goods: the provision of all goods and services has certaincosts, whether compensated or hidden. Setting values for stewardship As internal and external pressures mount, mountain people areoften forced to deplete resources of regional, national, and globalsignificance for shortterm economic gain. If they are tobe adequately compensated for ensuring the longterm provisionof goods and services to wider communities, these goods and servicesmust first be identified and valued. Various fees and taxes canthen be used to enable mountain people to capture a greater proportionof this value. To be effective, fees and taxes must be set atan appropriate level, accurately reflecting the costs of maintainingand protecting a particular resource. The revenue must be equitablydistributed among the concerned community, providing incentivesto continue their stewardship role. Fees and taxes for stewardship entrance fees to national parks and buffer zones, usedfor park maintenance and the development of local commutes. fees charged to tour operators, invested in community development. hunting and fishing fees, used to maintain habitat andsupport species management. water use fees, paid to compensate for the loss of agricultural land, or the production of hydroelectricity. bed taxes charged to hotels to compensate for social costs, tomaintain local infrastructure, or for community projects. - pass fees charged for the use of high mountain roads, used toensure yearround public trafficc service. - compensation to communities for conservation programmer, ratherthan the exploitation of resources. - royalties for climbing mountains (peak fees), directed to theconservation of the surrounding landscape and to local communities. In Nepal, the fee to climb Sagarmatha (Mount Everest)is S50,000. The government of Nepal provides 30% of this to SagarmathaNational Park for environmental and community development projects.(Photo: Survey of Mt. Everst IQomolangmal from the Chinese sidein 1975; Xinghua News Agency) Mountains of the world Capitalizing on mountain assets Mountain communities face many challenges to competing in themarket place: high production costs, limited credit facilities,unequal or unfavourable access to markets. Nevertheless, boththe diversity of mountain environments and cultures, and physicalconstraints permitting the production of specific goods, providepotential comparative advantage and opportunities to strengthenmountain economies and communities. ,,Mountain agriculture cannot compete with that ofthe plains. Its survival depends on its quality, providing addedvalue and justifying higher prices." (Alp Action) The production of many varieties of cheese is importantfor agricultural economies in the French Alps. In the Beaufortarea, its efficient production is enabled through mobile milkingmachines which are taken up into the pastures each day. (Photo:Ch. Grosiean) Turning disadvantage to advantage Comparative advantages of mountain environments and cultures include:highquality goods, particularly foodstuffs and handicrafts, oftenproduced in limited areas; local transformation of raw material;and smallscale systems which are economically and ecologicallypreferable to largescale systems. Even in a global economy,mountain communities can benefit from ,,geographical indications"or ,,regional trademarks" exclusive rights to theproduction and sale of highquality products from a specific, guaranteedlocation which all members of the World Trade Organizationare required to protect. Benefitting from biological diversity The richness of biological diversity can provide significant revenuesfor mountain communities. Many of the world's There are many varieties of potatoes, each developedfor optimal production in specific conditions. The maintenanceof this diversity can be of great benefit to mountain communitiesand be important in a time of climate change. (Photo: M. Rogers) major food crops originated in mountain areas. They are now importantsources of molecular and genetic diversity for many industries,with private companies collaborating with mountain institutionsto maximize their ability to discover promising chemicals or genes.Local people are being trained and employed as ,,parataxonomists"to collect and characterize genetic resources. Mountain communitiesmay benefit from their discovery and use through the payment of,,rental fees" for samples, royalty and profit sharing, ortechnology transfers. Comparative advantages include  solarand wind energy  micro-hydroinstallation  air-driedproducts  organicgrains and dairy products  summerpastures for lowland farmers  flowersand medicinal plants Policies and actions for mountain communities Decentralization, empowerment, and capacity building The decentralization of power from capital cities tomountain regions, towns, and villages can be one of thebest ways to empower mountain inhabitants, reduce costs, and increaseefficiency. Empowerment includes secure property rights; accessto financial resources, markets, information, training, and equitableparticipation in political decisionmaking. Unless mountaincommunities are empowered, they will increasingly be unable toact as the stewards of mountain resources. Sharing responsibility NGOs and organizations for mutual aid are effective, but onlyreach a small proportion of those living in poverty. They musttherefore be part of wider strategies for sustainable mountaindevelopment, with a reasonable distribution of responsibilitiesbetween governments, public agencies, and scientific, multilateral,community, and private organizations. Subsidiarityshould be aguiding principle, with public structures responsible only fortasks that cannot be satisfactorily devolved. State involvementis often necessary in defining property rights. When these aresecure, owners private individuals or community groups have far greater incentives to manage resources sustainably. Training and education The decentralized implementation of action programmes and developmentplans requires reliable institutions with strong leaders. Mountaindecisionmakers must be thoroughly trained in participatoryapproaches, management, and planning. Yet, for most mountain people,access to training, especially highlevel training, is costlyand difficult.. Consequently, policies for sustainable mountaindevelopment should offer mountain people opportunities and financialmeans for training and education equivalent to those accessibleto people in lowland and urban areas. Such training fosters theuse of local experts, rather than expensive consultants. Access to knowledge and information To define appropriate strategies for sustainable mountain development,all stakeholders must understand and support what is being done.However, access to relevant knowledge and information is oftenlimited to governmental and academic institutions, with minimalor no flow to other agencies, NGOs, or local communities and institutions.Stakeholders also need information to monitor and evaluate thesestrategies; particularly criteria and indicators of environmentaland societal change which can be applied reliably, rapidly, andeconomically. ,,Knowledge itself is power" (Francis Bacon) Members of the Movement Paysan Papaye, a HaitianN60, receive training at a soil conservation research and demonstrationsite. (Photo: M. Grosjean) 7 International cooperation Regional collaboration and stimulation Intergovernmental consultations on sustainable mountaindevelopment have been held in almost all regions of the world:the first step towards linking national and regional strategies.All mountain regions are encouraged to develop cooperative mechanisms,benefiting from available information and experience, in orderto work further towards the implementation of Chapter 13. The eight Alpine States and the European Communityhave signed the Alpine Convention, a framework for cooperation. In the HimalayaHindu Kush, the InternationalCentre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) is a focalpoint for research, institutional strengthening, cooperation,and information sharing among the mountains areas of Asia. Similarly,the Consortium for Sustainable Development of the Andean Ecoregion(CONDESAN) links nearly 100 institutions from 17 Latinamericancountries, with a focus on applied research, information exchange,and policy development. Identifying issues and solutions Chapter 13 of ,,Agenda 21" has been an important catalystto governmental consideration of sustainable mountain developmentaround the world. In the five years since the Rio ,,Earth Summit",various regional initiatives have started or been strengthened.Under the auspices of FAO, Task Manager for Chapter 13, regionalintergovernmental consultations have taken place for Africa,Asia/Pacific, Europe, and Latin America, involving representativesof 62 governments. These consultations have identified major issuesand existing initiatives for sustainable mountain developmentsand stimulated national mountain policies. Mechanisms for regional cooperation The most formal mechanism for regional cooperation is a convention.Only one convention for a mountain chain exists to date: the AlpineConvention, which entered into force in 1995. In theJura, Pyrenees,and the western, central, and eastern Alps, regional governmentshave established ,,Working Communities" which provide mechanismsfor cooperation and harmonization of policies and research. International cooperation Global organizations and initiatives Global organizations have major roles to play in sustainablemountain development. Trends in international trade and multilateralfunding are of central importance in defining future developmentpaths, and complementarities between global initiatives shouldbe encouraged. The role of international trade Despite attempts to integrate social and environmental factorsinto measures of development, it is still largely defined in economicterms. The World Trade Organization and the wider contextof trade liberalization, globalization, and privatization are critical factors. Yet, as long as shortterm benefitsoutweigh longterm impacts, market policies and practices generallywork against the interest of poorer countries and marginalizedre"ions, such as mountain areas. Growth should be sustainable;and the distribution of its benefits and structural adjustments should also serve poor people. Recognizing linkages Each chapter of ,,Agenda 21" has been implemented separately.Yet many are crosssectoral, and there are clear linkagesbetween thematic chapters. Sustainable mountain development cannotbe sectoral, and the UN Commission for Sustainable Development (CSD)should foster the integration of actions taken under individualchapters. The Global Environment Facility (GEF) may be an importantmechanism for financing such integrated projects. To assure the competitiveness of mountain production,action is needed at international, national, and local levels,especially by integrating full social costs in pricing. Projects for biodiversity conservation and sustainabledevelopment financed by the Global Environment Facility (GEF)in mountain areas. (Source: GEF and World Conservation MonitoringCenter) Local markets in Tadjikistan and the Alps. Will theysurvive? (Photos: B. Messerli) Mountains of the world NGOs and the private sector Nongovernmental organizations and the private sectorplay important roles in local initiatives. At wider scales, cooperationis not yet very developed, but some promising initiatives havebegun. Greater action by the private sector is most urgently needed. The Mountain Forum At the first meeting of the ad hoc interagency group for followupto Chapter 13, in 1994, NGOs were accepted as full partners. In1995, 1 10 representatives of mountain NGOs, governments, andinternational agencies met in Lima, Peru. They established 'TheMountain Forum', for mutual support and the exchange of experiencesbetween all actors organizations and individuals concerned with sustainable mountain development. Currently facilitatedby 'The Mountain Institute' (Virginia, USA), it has a decentralizedstructure, with regional focal points so far, in the Asia/Pacificand Latin American regions coordinating networking activities.There is much room for expansion, for instance through involvingother networks, such as mountaineering and business associations,and the private sector in general. Investing in mountains During summer 1996, over 200 people from 23 countries participatedin a Mountain Forum electronic conference: ,,Investing in Mountains".They identified many innovative mechanisms for financing sustainablemountain development. These often involve the private sector;industries which rely on mountain resources but are based in lowlandareas could play a far greater role. As well as paying compensationfor using resources, companies can adopt or sponsor mountain communitiesor institutions. Other private local initiatives include twinningof communities, and support from tourism companies for conservationprojects and water, education, health facilities. A survey of 1,000 NGOs concerned with European mountainareas showed a strong belief that local people and organizationsand NGOs are key actors for a sustainable future. These resultswere discussed by over 100 participants. from 24 countries, atthe 1996 European Non-governmental Consultation on SustainableMountain Development in Toulouse, France. International cooperation Chapter 13 of ,,Agenda21": Reflectionsof actions Chapter 13 of ,,Agenda 21" was prepared in a short time,with little input from NGOs and mountain inhabitants. But followupand review procedures have involved a very wide range of concernedactors. The intergovernmental and nongovernmentalconsultations, and other activities, have increased recognitionof the distinct qualities of mountain areas and their need forspecial attention, and produced important new ideas and recommendations. Continuing the implementation Implementation of Chapter 13 has followed a unique path, includingdiverse initiatives at many levels, sometimes coordinated, sometimesnot. The common thread is the commitment of all actors to sustainablemountain development. This approach is less organised and lesshierarchical than for many other chapters of ,,Agenda 21",but it is full of vitality and corresponds to the diversity ofmountain regions. This multifaceted approach must be maintained. Committed organizations Thanks to several UNorganisations, such as UNESCO, UNU,and FAO, mountain programmes have started long before the RioConference. Before and after Rio they have been joined by a numberof international, governmental, and nongovernmental organizations,such as CIP, ICIMOD, ICRAF, IUCN, TMI, etc. The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) has been carryingout the Task Manager role for Chapter 13. The overall objectiveis to ensure collaboration and cooperation in the follow up to,including reporting on, the implementation of Agenda 21 by theUnited Nations system. Major responsibilities as Task Managerinclude reporting on implementation; strengthening informationexchange; promoting interagency consultation; catalysing jointactivities and programmer; and developing common strategies. New challenges arose with the action plans of different UN-summits;their results strongly influenced also the mountain programmesand the mountain development. Cairo: International Conference on popultion and development (1994) Copenhagen: world summit for social development (1995) Beijing: UN 4 World Conference on women (1995) Instanbul: UN Conference on human settlements (Habitat II) (1996) Rome: world food summit (1996) A new impulse The proposal for an international technical meeting should beimplemented by the Task Manager (FAO) in early 1998, to enhancethe existing momentum, widen attention, exchange the results ofregional consultations, discussing priorities and setting up efficientstructures for the continuation of the process. Two conferences are in planning, one about ,,Sacred Mountains"and its significance for environment and development and one about,,Connecting Science with Community Action". Mountains of the world 8 Challenges for the 21stcentury There are three priorities that must be attained, at leastin part, if there is to be any chance for sustainable mountaindevelopment being realised during the 21st Century A new perception of the Mountain World Mountains and Highlands are extremely complex both biophysicallyand culturally. Their threedimensional character, worldwideoccurrence, and political fragmentation, together with their significantarea and population (approximately 25 percent of the world's landarea and 10 percent of total human population), demonstrates their centrality in terms of the prospects for asecure, humane, and prosperous world society. So far, while acquiringsome lipservice after the Rio Earth Summit in 1992, these"mountain imperatives" have not been incorporated intothe new approaches to sustainable development, the global market,nor world environmental policy. The recent development of worldtrade liberalization and a freemarket economy actually accentuatethe competitive disadvantage of the mountain regions. A Revolution in Political Behavior Mountains and Highlands, as marginal and marginalised regions,throughout the ages and increasingly toward the end of our millennium,have usually incurred exploitation by the power centres of theeconomically and politically better integrated lowlands. Thishas taken the form of damaging, and often ruthless, extractionof natural resources that has resulted in further marginalisationof mountain peoples and their comparative neglect during timesof natural and manmade countries, the past 50yearrecord of bilateral and multilateral "aid" and "assistance"is characterised by topdown imposition of "solutions"from outside the mountains. Some of the results of this, despitemany real advances, have been the loss of selfesteem, disregardof centuries of accumulated traditional understanding of how tolive in difficult and fragile environments, and collapse, or severemodification of mountain cultures. Even though this situation is in process of being reversed, especiallysince Rio, such progress is being overwhelmed by the growing impactsof warfare in its many forms. The majority of ongoing andrecent armed conflicts in the world impact mountain peoples andmountain lands out of all proportion to their total numbers andland area. The socalled "drug war" is merely anextension of this shame of armed conflict that disproportionatelydevastates mountain peoples. The massive displacement of anywherefrom 15 to 30 million refugees across international borders, veryoften in mountainous regions, adds to the alarming spread of malnutritionand disease. In this instance, a revolution in political behaviour is imperative:within the UN and amongst the socalled rich nations whoclaim to provide leadership for world peace. A failure to achievea virtual world revolution a real new world order will purchase an enormous penalty, for any collapse of mountaincultures and their environments and resources will have inexorabledownstream Human and Natural Resources for the next century Sustainable mountain development can proceed if based upon rationalapproaches, reduction in unbalanced highlandlowland competitiveness,and recognition that mountain people are equal in terms of theirhumanity and genetically and socially derived abilities. The recentprogress toward local and regional autonomy, at least in someareas, must be accelerated. Advances in science and technologymust be blended with traditional mountain expertise and experience.Above all, there must be direct and indirect reciprocity for goodmountain environmental stewardship. Many examples are availablethat can be useful in this respect, included direct return paymentfor export of mountain water, generation of electricity, mineralsand forest products. But to this must be added compensation forgood agropastoral and forestry management as one of thebest forms of upper watershed protection, preservation of biologicaldiversity and of an aesthetically pleasing landscape and culturefor the increasing numbers of tourists in a rapidly growing urbanworld. Above all, the gender, generational, and overall highlandlowlandinequalities must be reduced. Success will require development of a much better understandingof why mountains and mountain peoples offer particular imperativesand how to assist in development of their tangible and intangibleresources while avoiding cultural and environmental decline. Thiswill depend upon an enlarged and targeted programme of mountainpolicy, participatory research, heightened awareness, interregionalmountain communication and collaboration. WT01-B09-193IA007-000075-B040-42http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/resources/uncsdfeb.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071544 text/html 28902HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:16:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 28730Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:08 GMT  UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Feb 1997 UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Feb 1997 ***************************************************** This document has been posted online by the United NationsDepartment for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development(DPCSD). Reproduction and dissemination of the document - inelectronic and/or printed format - is encouraged, providedacknowledgment is made of the role of the United Nations in makingit available. ***************************************************** ADVANCED UNEDITED COPY MANAGING FRAGILE ECOSYSTEMS: SUSTAINABLE MOUNTAIN DEVELOPMENT 1/ Report of the Secretary-General CONTENTS Paragraphs Page I. KEY OBJECTIVES 1 -2 2 II. SUCCESSES 3 - 9 2 III. PROMISING CHANGES 10 - 16 5 IV. UNFULFILLED EXPECTATIONS 17 - 20 7 V. EMERGING PRIORITIES 21 - 31 8 I. KEY OBJECTIVES 1. This report focuses on a limited number of key objectives ofchapter 13 of Agenda 21, including those which are considered themost relevant in the post-UNCED context and which have beenidentified as "priority concerns" in chapter 13 follow-up. Theseobjectives are related to Programme Area A: Generating andstrengthening knowledge about the ecology and sustainabledevelopment of mountain ecosystems; and Programme Area B:Promoting integrated watershed development and alternativelivelihood opportunities. The two areas are often dealt withtogether in the framework of an integrated ecosystems approach tosustainable mountain development. However, key objectives dealtwith in this report go beyond those identified in these twoprogramme areas of chapter 13 and include new themes which havecome to light more recently. 2. More specifically, chapter 13 focuses mainly on thefollowing objectives: (a) Raising awareness of the importance of and improvingunderstanding of sustainable mountain development issues atglobal, regional and national levels; (b) Protecting natural resources and developing technicaland institutional arrangements for natural disaster reduction; (c) Strengthening a global information network and databasefor organizations, governments and individuals concerned withmountain issues; (d) Strengthening country capacity to improve planning,implementation and monitoring of sustainable mountain developmentprogrammes and activities; (e) Combating poverty through the promotion of sustainableincome-generating activities and improvement of infrastructure andsocial services, in particular to protect the livelihood of localcommunities and indigenous people; and (f) Formulating and negotiating regional or sub-regionalmountain conventions and possibly developing a global mountaincharter. II. SUCCESSES 3. As thinking about sustainable mountain development hasevolved over the five years since Rio, the issues raised inchapter 13 (which is often referred to as the "Mountain Agenda")have expanded beyond the original themes of the chapter toinclude, for example, new emphasis on conservation, culture,sacred values and landscape diversity. The element of spiritualitysurrounding mountains and the often special relationship betweenmountain peoples and the land they live on and care for has gainedgreater recognition over recent years and has become an essentialdriving force in the movement to conserve mountain environmentsand cultures. Recently, especially in Africa, the contribution ofmountain ranges to water resource flows, and more specifically inthe chain linking water to food security, has been highlighted.There is also increasing recognition of the importance of mountainareas in terms of biodiversity conservation, economic potentialand protection of downstream interests. This has led to a greaterwillingness to address development and conservation needs throughinvestment programmes in areas that have traditionally beenneglected in national level development planning. 4. Progress has been made in creating greater awareness of the"Mountain Agenda" and improving coordination of efforts to protectfragile mountain ecosystems and promote sustainable mountaindevelopment. This has been achieved largely as a result of theinternational and regional intergovernmental and non-governmentalorganization (NGO) consultations which have provided focus on keymountain issues and led to recommendations relevant at both globaland regional levels. Regional intergovernmental consultations havebeen held for Asia (1994), Latin America (1995), Europe (twosessions, 1996) and Africa (1996); a regional NGO consultation wasalso held for Europe (1996). Other important meetings include theInternational NGO Consultation on the Mountain Agenda held inLima, Peru in February 1995, and other regional, sub-regional andnational initiatives such as the Second International Symposium on"Sustainable Mountain Development: Managing Fragile Ecosystems inthe Andes" (Bolivia, 1995); the International Symposium"Karakorum-Hindukush-Himalaya: Dynamics of Change" (Pakistan,1995); the International Symposium on Agricultural Development inMountain and Hill Areas (China, 1996); Rwenzori mountainsconference (Uganda, 1996); and the International Conference on"Ecohydrology of High Mountain Areas" (Nepal, 1996). In addition,awareness of the importance of transboundary cooperation inmountain protected areas has been increased as a result of theTransboundary Mountain Protected Area Workshop held in Australiain 1995. 5. New institutional arrangements at global and regional levelhave also contributed to progress in achieving and improvingcommunications networking and in providing an informationclearing-house function. This has been achieved in part throughthe creation in 1995 of the Mountain Forum, a network oforganizations and institutions with a shared interest insustainable mountain development. With major financial supportprovided by the Swiss Government, the Mountain Forum operatesprimarily as a decentralized structure with regional focal pointsestablished to coordinate networking activities. The Consortiumfor the Sustainable Development of the Andean Ecoregion (CONDESAN)convened by the International Potato Center (CIP), a member of theConsultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR),has been selected as the focal point for Latin America and theCaribbean. The International Centre for Integrated MountainDevelopment (ICIMOD) is coordinating networking in Asia and thePacific, both at the regional level, through the Asia PacificMountain Network, and at the sub-regional level sinceestablishment of the North and Central Asia Mountain Network.Together with The Mountain Institute, these organizations make upthe Mountain Forum's Interim Facilitating Committee, which hasbeen set up at the global level with the specific purpose ofassisting in building the network. Regional networks are alsobeing established in Europe and Africa, mainly through NGOefforts. The Mountain Forum is one of several innovativepartnerships and alliances being studied under the GlobalExcellence in Management (GEM) Initiative by Case Western ReserveUniversity in the United States. Documenting the way in which theMountain Forum is expanding capacity beyond its own organizationalboundaries is expected to be an important outcome of the study.Another important example of new regional cooperation is theAsociacio'n de Montan~as Andinas, whose main objective is tocontribute to implementation of Chapter 13 in the Andes. III. PROMISING CHANGES 10. New forms of partnership are coming about as a result ofincreased collaboration and interaction between the public andprivate sectors in which governments, non-governmental andintergovernmental organizations have found common ground andengaged in constructive dialogue. There has been a concerted andparticipatory effort, particularly over the past three years, toamplify the original aims and objectives of Chapter 13 by forgingconsensus on priorities, and identifying the differing strengthsand capacities of public, private and NGO sectors to contribute toimplementation. In addition, there has been greater emphasis onincluding local populations and community groups in identifyingand planning mountain development activities. New partnershipsare also being realized between mountain research and developmentinterests. International research institutes such as CIP, ICIMOD,the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) (inparticular through the African Highlands Initiative), and thejoint United Nations University (UNU)/International MountainSociety (IMS) project, which have either a specific mountain focusor include strong mountain research programmes, have been activemembers of the interagency network on mountains. This has servedto strengthen the linkages and interaction between mountainresearch and development interests. Organizations including theWorld Conservation Union (IUCN), the International Center forAlpine Environments (ICALPE) and the International LivestockResearch Institute (ILRI) have increased their involvement inmountain conservation and development, and developed newpartnerships through their roles in planning and implementing theregional intergovernmental consultations in Europe and Africa. 11. Although there are still relatively few activities whichhave been initiated directly as a result of Chapter 13, thewillingness of most regions of the world to engage inintergovernmental and non-governmental consultations on the topicof sustainable mountain development has been an important step inimplementation since UNCED. This process has allowed for clearerdefinition of the challenges facing each region and possibleresponses to them, and a stronger sense of involvement andcommitment on the part of governments and other concernedstakeholders as the discussion has focused on issues of greaterdirect relevance at the regional and national level. Thisconsultation process has been carried out over a relatively shortperiod, only having begun in late 1994, with the majority ofmeetings having taken place during 1996. Although so far therehas been insufficient interest by governments of North America tohold an intergovernmental consultation there, an NGO-organizedmeeting to which governments would also be invited, is currentlyunder discussion. As a result of these regional meetings, greateractivity is expected at national and regional levels in terms ofspecific mountain development and conservation programmes andreinforced institutional arrangements. Regional networks, inaddition to those in Asia and Latin America, are also beingestablished in Europe and Africa, following the consultations heldin 1996. In accordance with the recommendations of the thirdsession of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD), uponcompletion of the regional consultations a wider internationalmeeting on sustainable mountain development is expected to beheld. Several governments have already expressed their support forholding such a meeting, the objectives of which, however, wouldneed to be clearly defined and perceived as timely and relevant toon-going implemenation to the countries and organizations involved . 12. The maintainance and generation of database and informationsystems to facilitate the integrated management and environmentalassessment of mountain ecosystems has seen little progress todate, however this is expected to change in the near future giventhe new and evolving institutional arrangements and newtechnologies becoming available for this type of work. In the areaof conventional dissemination of scientific and developmentalinformation on mountains, the quarterly journal Mountain Researchand Development, co-published by UNU and IMS, continues as theonly scholarly publication of its kind world-wide. 13. Improvements to the ecological knowledge base regardingtechnologies and agricultural and conservation practices in themountain regions of the world have been slow but recentlyincreasing. Most conservation and development programmes inmountain areas now contain specific components aimed at improvingdatabases on biological resources. On the other hand, economic,sociological and cultural information are still largelyunavailable. Greater emphasis is being placed on the importance ofunderstanding and promoting appropriate indigenous and locallyadapted technologies. 14. Transnational cooperation has also been improving. There isan increased willingness to work across national borders marked bymountain chains, in particular, for scientific reasons such as tostudy the behaviour of migratory species, for environmentalconservation purposes, and for ecological/economic reasons amongcountries sharing major water courses. Transborder collaborationamong biosphere reserves is a new emerging topic in UNESCO's"Programme on Man and the Biosphere", in particular in Eastern andCentral Europe. There is also a need for greater cooperation amongcountries sharing water resources, especially in many regions ofthe world where there is growing demand for water. 15. Work has progressed on the better understanding anddissemination of information regarding environmental risks andnatural disasters in mountain ecosystems. At the twentieth sessionof the FAO/European Forestry Commission Working Party on theManagement of Mountain Watersheds, held in Lillehammer, Norway inJuly 1996, the topic of mitigation of natural disasters inmountain areas received significant attention, both in theEuropean and global context. This topic was also dealt with indepth at the June 1996 meeting of INTERPRAEVENT, a group ofEuropean experts meeting in Garmisch, Germany to discusscooperation in research, technology transfer, planning anddevelopment relating to natural resources management in mountainareas, where protection of alpine areas against natural disasters(e.g. floods, avalanches and mudflows) was discussed at length.ICIMOD has also been very active in this field and has recentlylaunched a training programme for mountain risk engineering in theHimalayas. Also, the IUFRO Working Group on Natural Disastersplans to hold a meeting in the framework of the 11th WorldForestry Congress (Antalya, Turkey, 13-22 October 1997). Themeeting will consider, inter alia, hazard prevention measures inmountain regions. This cross-cutting issue is expected to receiveincreasing attention in the near future as a result of greaterawareness created through international initiatives, such as the1994 World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, and new andon-going efforts by international bodies such as those mentionedabove. 16. Perhaps most importantly, and underlying most other factorswhich have contributed to the relatively successful implementationof Chapter 13, is the notion of commitment. Many of those whoadvocate the sustainable development and conservation of mountainregions and peoples speak with conviction and deep emotionalcommitment to many of the causes espoused by the mountain chapter.The various stakeholders working on mountain related issues, bethey from local communities, NGOs, governments, or internationalorganizations, often share a common view of the importance anduniqueness of mountain areas and cultures and carry out their workwith a strong sense of dedication. Their conviction, and thepartnerships that were forged prior to Rio, were instrumental ingaining chapter status for mountains under Agenda 21 and inmaintaining close collaboration throughout the post-Rio period. IV. UNFULFILLED EXPECTATIONS 17. Several objectives of Chapter 13 remain unfulfilled, or haveseen little or no progress towards implementation. These include: (a) Survey work 18. Adequate progress has still to be made in undertakingintegrated survey work of the different natural resources andtheir use in mountain ecosystems and carrying out relatedactivities needed to strengthen knowledge about the ecology ofmountain ecosystems. Although greater progress is being made atthe regional level, a longer time frame than the five years sinceRio will be required to achieve a more thorough understanding ofthe knowledge base globally. (b) National level institutional arrangements 19. Although the issue has been raised in various fora sinceUNCED, there continues to be a lack of new institutionalarrangements at national level to enable a more comprehensive andintegrated approach to mountain conservation and development. Inspite of increased international attention since UNCED (throughChapter 13 follow-up) on the need for reform, examples ofdepartments, programmes or legislation that deal with mountainissues in a more integrated way are still rare. This has been aninhibiting factor in carrying out comprehensive national mountaindevelopment planning; (c) Special attention to mountainous island countries andlandlocked countries 20. Little attention has been paid so far to the need forspecific consideration for mountainous island countries andlandlocked mountainous countries. Island countries face a uniquesituation, especially with regard to water resources. Greaterefforts are needed to better understand the technical issuesfacing this category of countries. V. EMERGING PRIORITIES 21. Upon completion of the current consultation process forChapter 13 follow-up in late 1996, many of the issues concerningsustainable mountain development, which have so far been discussedin rather general terms at the global level, will have alsobenefitted from discussion in a regional context, allowing forfurther elaboration, refinement and regionally specific proposalsfor action. This process has allowed an increased focus onspecific objectives of Chapter 13 and better understanding of howthey can best be achieved. Some key objectives which have emergedduring UNCED and the five-year review period, and for which it nowseems likely that obstacles to achievement can be overcome,include the following: (a) Special status of mountain areas 22. One of the important achievements of the Chapter 13 reviewprocess has been greater recognition of mountain areas as specialand distinct from lowland areas, and therefore worthy of specialattention. This recognition is seen as a key factor in the recentchange of attitude of governments, intergovernmental organizationsand NGOs to pay greater attention to mountain conservation anddevelopment and in the mobilization of the resources that will beneeded for increased investment in mountain areas. Greater actionat national level is required, including, for example, formulationof national mountain development plans as part of nationaldevelopment plans. (b) Legal and institutional mechanisms 23. There is also greater recognition of the need for new orreinforced legal mechanisms (charters, conventions, nationallegislation, etc.) to protect fragile mountain ecosystems andpromote sustainable and equitable development in mountain regions.Additionally, governments, IGOs and NGOs agree that more suitableinstitutional mechanisms are required to assure an integratedapproach in view of the complexity of mountain ecosystems and thesocio- economic issues at stake. (c) Investment in mountain development and conservation 24. More mountain-specific investment programmes and greatermobilization of financial resources for mountain development andconservation programmes will be required in order for realprogress to take place on the "Mountain Agenda". In some casesthis may mean formulating and financing programmes which arefocused exclusively on mountain areas; other situations may lendthemselves to expanding conservation and development programmesthat have been designed for lowland areas to include mountainareas as well. There are promising signs of greater willingness onthe part of governments to increase investment levels in mountainareas, which have historically been neglected. In addition,bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors have expressed greaterwillingness to assist mountainous developing countries inelaborating and implementing mountain development plans andprogrammes, in accordance with increased attention being given tomountain regions and a redefinition of priorities. Greaterinvestment potential in upland areas is motivated not only by theneed to protect downstream infrastructure and populations, butalso by the realization of the importance of economic developmentof mountain populations, for their own benefit and the potentialcontribution to national economies, as well as by an increasingawareness of the importance of biodiversity conservation. (d) Resources flows 25. Related to (c) above, there remains the need for clearerunderstanding of resource flows to and from mountain areas whichwill lead to increased income to mountain communities and a fairerdistribution of earnings from natural resources exploitation andservices provided in mountain areas. Increased attention isalready being paid to this important issue, as evidenced by theelectronic conference hosted by the Mountain Forum in 1996,entitled "Paying for Mountains: Innovative Mechanisms andPromising Examples for Financing Conservation and SustainableDevelopment". The increased attention being paid to this issue,especially as certain mountain resources (e.g. water) become morescarce and acquire greater economic value, is expected to resultin more studies undertaken to improve understanding of the overallflow of resources and services. (e) Status of women and children 26. The need for greater empowerment, equity and equality ofmountain women has been expressed as an important concernthroughout the period of UNCED and Chapter 13 follow-up. Theseissues are expected to receive greater attention in terms ofpolicy, legislation and institutional reform with growingawareness and recognition of the role and needs of women relatedto mountain development. A recent publication by UNICEF (Children,Women and Poverty in Mountain Ecosystems, New York, 1996),produced in collaboration with UNU and IMS, is already drawingattention to the basic causes of poverty in mountain areas and theneed for policy revisions. (f) Cultural integrity and biological diversity 27. There is growing recognition of mountain areas as valuablesites for preserving cultural integrity and conserving biologicaldiversity. This has come about through increased awareness ofspecific mountain cultures and their important role in maintainingmountain ecosystems, and the greater recognition of endemism ofplant and animal species in mountain areas. More concerted actionis needed to address these increasingly important areas of concern. (g) Monitoring progress 28. As the "Mountain Agenda" moves forward and mountaindevelopment and conservation efforts grow, it will be necessary tobe able to gauge progress and the extent to which it issustainable. An enhanced ability to carry out assessment andmonitoring of mountain development and conservation activitieswill be required. The development of a set of criteria andindicators for sustainable mountain development has been underwaysince late 1995. This work is currently being refined with the aimof providing a practical tool for use at the national orsub-national level. (h) Exchange of experience and information collection anddissemination 29. More direct exchange of experience and information, bothamong mountain people themselves and among other resourcemanagement practitioners working in mountain areas is needed.Exchange visits between groups of farmers from neighboring uplandcommunities have proved to be among the most effective means ofstimulating new ideas and transferring knowledge in many mountainconservation and development projects throughout the world inrecent years. The networks which have been created over the pastfew years, especially through activities of the Mountain Forum andfrom regional intergovernmental and NGO consultations, should befully exploited to stimulate and enhance this type of directexchange at all levels. There is also a need for greateraccessibility of existing information to end-users, both at policyand operational levels. In fact, knowledge and informationdissemination was identified at the 1996 EuropeanIntergovernmental Consultation on chapter 13 as a priority area tobe addressed. Some key issues raised include: the need tostandardize data and data collection; greater accessibility ofscientific data to decision-makers; the need for improvedinter-ministerial communication on mountain issues; and a needfor more interdisciplinary and applied research on mountains. (i) Food security 30. As highlighted at the World Food Summit held by FAO in Romein November 1996, the issue of food security has become a toppriority for the global community. Accordingly, efforts toeradicate hunger and malnutrition are expected to receive greaterattention under the mountain chapter, along with the overallobjective of poverty alleviation in mountain regions. Newinitiatives in this area should focus specifically on strategiesto enhance food security in a sustainable manner, inter alia,through the sustainable flow of water resources and theirefficient use for agricultural and other production systems. (j) Mountain forests 31. As new interest and attention is being devoted to the forestpolicy debate, especially since the establishment by the CSD ofthe Intergovernmental Panel on Forests, new opportunities areavailable to further discuss the important role played by forestsin mountain areas with respect to issues such as hazardprevention, biodiversity conservation and livelihoodopportunities. New institutions and fora, including the EuropeanObservatory on Mountain Forests and the IUFRO Task Force onForests and Mountain Development, have recently been establishedto focus specifically on these types of issues. FAO is also givinggreater recognition to the importance of forests in mountainregions and is currently in the process of preparing a publicationon the management of mountain forests. Notes 1/ This report reviews progress made in the implementation ofthe objectives set out in Chapter 13 of Agenda 21 (Managingfragile ecosystems: sustainable mountain development), taking intoaccount the decisions taken by the CSD on this subject at itsThird Session in 1995. The report was prepared by FAO as taskmanager for chapter 13 of Agenda 21, in accordance witharrangements agreed to by the Inter-Agency Committee onSustainable Development (IACSD). It is the result of consultationand information exchange between United Nations. WT01-B09-194IA007-000075-B040-62http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/discuss/discuss.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071552 text/html 4030HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:16:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3859Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:15 GMT Active Mountain Archive-  Discussion Threads The Active Mountain Archive Discussion Threads Choose the appropriate button below to display a month's worthof Mountain Forum Discussion Archives Return to the Main Active Mountain Archive Index Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised June 1996WT01-B09-195IA007-000075-B040-96http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/calendar/calfull.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071607 text/html 40076HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:16:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 39904Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:01 GMT The Mountain Archives Calendar Listing The Mountain Archives Full Calendar Listing EARTH SUMMIT+5 EVENTS: Special Session of the General Assembly to Review and Appraise the Implementation of Agenda 21, New York, 24 February-7 March, 7-25 April, 23-27 June 1997 Contact & More Information: jespie@mountain.org Dear Mountain Forum Colleagues, A couple days ago a message was forwarded to our discussion listannouncing: "Earth Summit + 5 web page LAUNCHED! (fwd)" This sitelocated at http://www.un.org/dpcsd/earthsummit/ is useful,relevant and very informative to anyone concerned with theMountain Agenda. In 1992 over 100 heads-of-state met in Rio de Janeiro for theUnited Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED),also know as the Earth Summit. In Rio Agenda 21, a 300 page planfor achieving sustainable development in the 21st century, wasadopted. Chapter 13 of Agenda 21 is "Managing Fragile Ecosystems:Sustainable Mountain Development". Also in Rio, the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) wascreated to monitor and report on implementation of the EarthSummit agreements. It was agreed that a five year review of EarthSummit progress would be made in 1997 by the United NationsGeneral Assembly meeting in special session. This special sessionof the UN General Assembly will take stock of how well countries,international organizations and sectors of civil society haveresponded to the challenge of the Earth Summit. Agenda 21 in its entirety, including Chapter 13 the MountainAgenda, will be reviewed over a series of events at the UNheadquarters in New York. These events are listed below. Other useful information from the Earth Summit+5 web page arelinks to the official UN documents of the Mountain Agenda, whichinclude Chapter 13, and UNCSD Secretary General Reports on Chapter13 from 1995 and 1997. The 1997 Secretary General's reportspecifically mentions the Mountain Forum as an example ofsuccessful partnering and information sharing initiatives of themountain constituency. We have downloaded these public domain documents and are puttingthem on the "Resources" section of the Mountain Forum's web pageat http://www.mtnforum.org. If anyone wishes to receive thesedocuments directly by email, simply send your request to me at:jespie@mountain.org. -------------------------------------------------------------- EARTH SUMMIT+5 EVENTS Special Session of the General Assembly to Review and Appraise the Implementation of Agenda 21 New York, 23-27 June 1997 CALENDAR OF MEETINGS Official process 24 February-7 March 1997, New York Commission on Sustainable Development Ad Hoc Intersessional Working Group 7-25 April 1997, New York Commission on Sustainable Development, fifth session 23-27 June 1997, New York General Assembly, special session "Online International Ecotourism Conference, March 3 -April 5, 1997 Contact & More Information: Scott Walker ONLINE ECOTOURISM CONFERENCE ANNOUNCEMENT __________________________________ Online International Ecotourism Conference March 3 -April 5, 1997 URL: http://www.cybercorp.net/~ecotourism The Center for Nature & Heritage Tourism is announcing a global, web-basedecotourism conference. This is a free conference that will be conductedentirely on the World Wide Web in a text-based environment called COW(Conferencing on the Web). NOTE: If you have e-mail, but not web access, you may subscribe to theProceedings Distribution List. See end of this message for details. PURPOSE This conference is designed to advance the discussions of ecotourism topicsamong practitioners, students, policy makers, nongovernment organizations,academics, and industry representatives interested in ecotourism issues. INFORMATION/REGISTRATION Information can be found on the web at http://www.cybercorp.net/~ecotourism.Free registration is required for access to the conference site. TOPICS/FEATURES/PRESENTERS Topics include, but are not limited to: -Definition of Ecotourism -Problems in Ecotourism -Public/Private Cooperation -Product/Site Development & Implementation Strategies Features include: -A live discussion area/virtual field trip accessible via telnet or Javaenhanced browser -A web chat accessible via a browser -Posting area for information on written works related to ecotourism -Posting area for web sites related to ecotourism -An e-mail proceedings distribution list for those without web access Presenters include: --Dan Blumstein, Ph.D., University of Kansas, Author of the book *AnEcotourist*s Guide to Khunjereb National Park* and various tourismpublications including *Africa by Bicycle* and *A Training Manual forKhunjerab National Park Guides.* --James Kimmel, Ph.D., Southwest Texas State University, Director of theCenter for Nature and Heritage Tourism. --Ron Mader, environmental writer and publisher of El Planeta Platica andthe award-winning web newsletters, *Eco Travels in Latin America* and *EcoTravels in Africa.* Ron is also working on two books, *Mexico: A NaturalDestination,* and *Honduras: A Natural Destination.* --You. Participants will have equal access to these presenters and everyoneelse involved in the conference. HOSTS -Scott Walker, an ecotourism/protected areas researcher and onlinetraining/education facilitator, will facilitate the conference from SanMarcos, Texas, USA. -The Center for Nature & Heritage Tourism, Southwest Texas State University,San Marcos, Texas, USA is the sponsoring organization. -CyberCorp, Inc., a Canadian company dedicated to the advancement ofinternetworking, online education, and virtual community, is supporting theconference with online access and cyberspace. PROCEEDINGS DISTRIBUTION LIST The purpose of this list is to distribute conference proceedings to thosewithout World Wide Web access. This is a one-way list and no reply functionis available. To subscribe, send an e-mail message to:majordomo@cybercorp.net In the body of the message type: subscribe ecotourism "FIRST CONSULTATION OF THE APMN COORDINATORS, ICIMOD, KATHMANDU, NEPAL, MARCH 17 - 19, 1997 Contact & More Information: Dr. Mahesh Banskota THE ASIA PACIFIC MOUNTAIN NETWORK (APMN)FIRST CONSULTATION OF THE APMN COORDINATORS, ICIMOD, KATHMANDU, NEPAL, MARCH 17 - 19, 1997 CIRCULAR Background to the APMN The first-ever meeting on the mountain areas of Asia, held in December1994 in Kathmandu called upon the International Centre for IntegratedMountain Development (ICIMOD) to facilitate and promote informationexchange about Asian mountain areas so as to help bring aboutsustainable mountain development. Consequently, the Asia PacificMountain Network (APMN), an informal forum for the exchange ofinformation and sharing of knowledge affecting mountain development inthe Asia/Pacific region, was established. The APMN is coordinated byICIMOD through a special grant from the Swiss Agency for Developmentand Cooperation. Objectives of the APMN The main objective of the APMN is to facilitate and promoteinformation exchange about sustainable development of mountain areasamong professionals, development workers, and policy-makers in Asiancountries by establishing connectivity and interlinkages between theseindividuals and agencies. It also aims to sensitise donor agenciesabout the need for and options regarding sustainable mountaindevelopment. Activities of the APMN The principal activities of the APMN include the following.. Establishing a network through mail and other means amongindividuals and agencies working in mountain development andencouraging these to share and exchange their individual experiences,knowledge, issues, and problems in mountain development . Establishingfocal points in different subregions of Asia in an effort to developand establish strong subregional linkages for information exchange andsharing FIRST CONSULTATION OF THE APMN COORDINATORS Objectives of the Meeting The First Consultation of the Subregional Focal Points is,essentially, a face to face interaction for further defining andrefining the activities of the APMN. It aims to build a concreteprogramme, for each subregion as well as for the entire network, whichincludes the identification of critical issues and priorities. It alsoseeks to bring together the experiences, activities, and knowledge ofother networks and mountain groups. The principal task at hand is toidentify ways and means for energising the network. Issues to be discussed The issues and topics to be discussed include the structure, roles,and responsibilities of each subregional focal point and of the APMNas a whole; their proposed future activities; the gaps, new thrusts,and priorities as identified collectively as well as individually byeach focal point; and the regional priorities and initiatives of eachfocal point. The ways to establish strong interlinkages within andbetween the different subregions will also be discussed andidentified. As mentioned above, the meeting will also includediscussions and presentations by other networks. "The XII Himalaya Karakoram Tibet Workshop, Rome, Italy 16-18 April 1997" Contact & More Information: Prof. Maurizio Gaetani Received from HimalayaNet: WORKSHOP TO BE HELD IN ROME From: Alessandro Caporali gae@imiucca.csi.unimi.it Alessandro Caporali, Padova, Italy Email: alex@epidote.dmp.unipd.it "Land-Use Change in Hindu Kush-Himalaya, Kathmandu, Nepal April 20-25, 1997" Contact: Lisa J. Graumlich, Director Institute for the Study of Planet Earth University of Arizona Tucson, AZ 85748 USA phone: (+1 520) 621-9010 fax: (+1 520) 621-5004 graumlich@LTRR.arizona.edu or Sharad Adhikary, Director Himalayan Climate Center PO Box 191 Kathmandu, Nepal phone: 977-1-415-741 fax: 977-1-414-248 or 415-886 hcc@himac.mos.com.np International Workshop on Dynamics of Land-Use/Land-Cover Change in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya April 20-25, 1997 Kathmandu, Nepal Second Circular Distribution Date: January 1, 1997 Sponsored by US National Science Foundation, IGBP START/SASCOM, & International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) Organized by: Lisa J. Graumlich, Institute for the Study of PlanetEarth, University of Arizona and Sharad Adhikary, Himalayan ClimateCenter, Kathmandu Background: Accelerating rates of land-use and land-cover change areincreasingly recognized as a critical component of global change.Land-cover changes may significantly interact with globalbiogeochemistry to alter future climate. In addition, alterations inland cover often presage changes in resources that are critical tohuman livelihood. Understanding the global implications of currenttrends necessitates interdisciplinary studies of regional patterns andprocesses. Mountain regions, in general, and the Hindu-Kush Himalaya(HKH), in particular, are areas of great physical and culturaldiversity, and where rapid environmental change is often coupled withsevere socio-economic consequences. Objectives: The International Workshop on Dynamics ofLand-Use/Land-Cover Change in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya will provide aforum where researchers from Asia and around the world can synthesizeand stimulate an interdisciplinary investigation of the nature andconsequences of land-use/land-cover changes in HKH. The followingquestions as critical in this endeavor: 1. What can we learn from comparative case studies of land-usedynamics? What do existing and ongoing case studies for the HKHindicate about the relative importance of various social drivers andproximate causes of land-use change at key spatial and temporalscales? Can concepts and techniques drawn from hierarchical theory beuseful for identifying a small number of variables that controlpattern and process at a given scale. 2. What can we learn from direct observation of land-cover dynamics?How can information from satellite remote sensing be linked withanalyses of land use to best inform our understanding of land-coverdynamics? 3. How do we forge integration at regional to global scales? Can wedefine a framework and science plan that fosters integration of casestudy approaches with data sets derived from direct observations,especially remote sensing, national censuses and land coverinventories? How can we best integrate our understanding of thedynamics of the HKH region, in particular, and mountain regions, ingeneral, into global studies? Our goal is to define a regional implementation strategy for theemerging Science Plan for Land Use and Cover Change (LUCC) asestablished by the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP)and the Human Dimensions Program (HDP). Call for Abstracts: We request that all workshop participants submitan abstract in which their research is described in the context of oneor more of the three critical questions defined above. The abstractsare vital for organizing sessions and determining the expertise of theparticipants. In order to allow ample time for discussion anddevelopment of a Science and Implementation Plan, the number of formalpresentations will be limited. The Workshop Steering Committee willselect a small number of papers for oral presentation based on theabstract submissions. We encourage other participants to presenttheir research in poster format (see Program below). Abstracts are due March 1, 1997 and should be submitted in the formatspecified below to: Lisa J. Graumlich, Institute for the Study of Planet Earth 1439 E. Helen Street, The University of Arizona Tucson, AZ 85721 USA fax: (+1 520) 621-5004 Abstract Format: Please submit 1-page abstract in camera-ready formaton an A4 (or US letter) sheet with top, bottom, right, and left marginof 3 cm (or 1.8 cm on top and bottom, 3.1 cm on left and 3.0 on rightwith US letter). Text should be in English, typed single spaced,using 12 point Times or similar fonts. The abstract should includepaper title, author(s), and affiliation(s) in this order, centered andwith a blank line between them as well between affiliation and themain text. Program: On-site registration and an informal gathering will takeplace at the meeting venue on Sunday April 20. Invited oralpresentations will be given on April 21-22. A poster session isscheduled for the evening of April 22 and posters will remain ondisplay for the remainder of the Workshop. An excursion to studysites around the Kathmandu Valley is planned for April 23. On April24-25, workshop participants will break into smaller groups to discussparticular issues relating to developing a regional Science andImplementation Plan. All workshop participants are invited to abanquet, hosted by the organizers, on the evening of Thursday, April24. Registration and Fees: For preliminary registration, please send theattached form to either Dr. Adhikary or Dr. Graumlich at the addresson the form. Preliminary registration forms are due March 1, 1997. Aregistration fee of US$200 will be collected at the Workshop site tocover costs of Abstract Volume, coffee/refreshments, and distributionof the Science and Implementation Plan developed by Workshopparticipants. Workshop Steering Committee: Egbert Pelinck (Director General, International Centre for IntegratedMountain Development (ICIMOD), Nepal) Jack Ives (Univ. of California, Davis USA; President, InternationalMountain Society) David Skole (Univ. of New Hampshire, USA; Chair, IGBPLand-Use/Land-Cover Change Core Project) Billie Lee Turner (Clark Univ., USA; former Chair, IGBPLand-Use/Land-Cover Change Core Project) General Information: Language of the Workshop will be English. Visas for all foreigners, except Indians, are required. Fifteen dayvisas are available at the airport upon arrival for US$15. (Pleasebring US$ in cash and a passport style photo.) The Workshop will be held at a major Kathmandu hotel. Despite its1331m elevation, Kathmandu has a mild climate_daytime temperatures inApril are ca. 27oC (80oF). There are no required immunizations for Nepal. However, thefollowing immunizations are highly recommended for travelers toNepal: (1) typhoid fever, (2) meningitis, (3) updatetetanus/diphtheria and measles/mumps/rubella, (4) immune globulinprophylaxis. For further information, visit our WWW site http://www.ispe.arizona.edu/lucc_hkh.html orcontact: Lisa J. Graumlich, Director Institute for the Study of PlanetEarth University of Arizona Tucson, AZ 85748 USA phone: (+1 520)621-9010; fax: (+1 520) 621-5004 graumlich@LTRR.arizona.edu or Sharad Adhikary, Director Himalayan Climate Center PO Box 191 Kathmandu, Nepal phone: 977-1-415-741 fax: 977-1-414-248 or 415-886 hcc@himac.mos.com.np * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Preliminary Registration Form International Workshop on Dynamics of Land-Use/Land-Cover Change in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya April 20-25, 1997Kathmandu, Nepal Sponsored by US National Science Foundation, IGBP START/SASCOM, & International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) Name: Prof./Dr./Mr./Ms.___________________________________________________ Affiliation________________________________________________________ Address_________________________________________________________ ________________________________________________________________ FAX: _________________________________Phone__________________________ Email: __________________________________________________________ Title of Abstract: ________________________________________________________________ (Please submit Abstract in format described in Circular to Dr.Graumlich by March 1, 1997) Please return Registration Form by March 1, 1997 to either: Lisa J. Graumlich, Director Institute for the Study of Planet Earth University of Arizona Tucson, AZ 85748 USA phone: (+1 520) 621-9010 fax: (+1 520) 621-5004 graumlich@LTRR.arizona.edu or Sharad Adhikary, Director Himalayan Climate Center PO Box 191 Kathmandu, Nepal phone: 977-1-415-741 fax: 977-1-414-248 or 415-886 hcc@himac.mos.com.np "African Mountain Development in a ChangingEconomic World, Madagascar, May/June 1997" Contact: Dr. Juha I. Uitto Academic Division The United Nations University 53-70, Jingumae 5-chome Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan home page:http://sunsite.sut.ac.jp/island/ The 4th International Workshop on African Mountains and Highlands,with the theme "African Mountain Development in a ChangingEconomic World", will be organized in Madagascar in May/June 1997(exact dates to be announced later). The Workshop will form apart of the UNU/IMS Mountain Ecology and Sustainable Development(MESD) project. In a major capacity building effort in African,MESD has supported the establishment of the African MountainAssociation (AMA), as well as organized together with AMA thethree earlier African mountain workshops (Ethiopia, Morocco, Kenya). The objectives of the Workshop are as follows: 1. To share experiences in African mountains related to theworkshop theme; 2. To discuss local strategies of rural families and communitiesin mountainous areas; 3. To discuss economic and policy issues relating to mountaindevelopment at national scales; 4. To define research needs and strategies to enhance Africanresearch competence; and, 5. To obtain an insight into Madagascar's mountain developmentproblems. Following the Workshop, a proceedings will be published, possiblyincluding a theme issue of the UNU journal Mountain Research andDevelopment. The principal Workshop language will be French, but the Englishsummaries and translation will be provided, whenever feasible. The Workshop will include a field excursion, a transect from theEastern coastal plain, to the shifting cultivation area in theEastern escarpment region, to the central hilly plateau regionaround Antananarivo, and finally, to the nearby volcanic peak atabout 2,500 m asl. "8th Colloquium of the International Association forLadakh Studies, June 5-8, 1997, Moesgaard, Denmark Contact & More Information: Martijn van Beek International Association for Ladakh Studies Eighth Colloquium June 5-8, 1997 The 8th Colloquium of the International Association forLadakh Studies is scheduled to be held from June 5-8, 1997at Moesgaard, a few miles south of Aarhus in Denmark. The IALS colloquia have been held regularly, usually everyother year, since 1983, and are intended to bring togetherpeople interested or engaged in Ladakh studies from manydisciplines. Although the majority of participants generallyhave a social science or humanities background, otherdisciplines are welcome. With a view to broadening the scopeof Ladakh studies and to foster discussions and exchanges across political as well as disciplinary boundaries, researchers working in Baltistan are also very welcome. At this time, we are inviting proposals for papers and/orpanels. Anyone interested in participating is requested to pre-register at this time and - if applicable - to submit ashort (250 words) abstract for a paper, preferably in hard copy and on disk (IBM compatible) or by e-mail. Only those who are pre-registered can be sure to receive futurecommunications regarding the conference. Send all communications to: Martijn van Beek Asst. Professor Dept. of Ethnography and Social Anthropology Moesgaard 8270 Hoejbjerg DENMARK Ph: + 45 89 42 46 70 Fax: + 45 86 27 07 08 e-mail: etnomvb@moes.hum.aau.dk (include 'IALS' as subject) "The 2nd International Congress on Yak, September 1-4, 1997Xining, Qinghai Province PRC Contact & More Information: miller@icimod.org.np *** Congress Announcement *** The 2nd International Congress on Yak September 1-4, 1997 Xining, Qinghai Province PRC Contact: Dr. Han Xingtai Executive Secretary of the Congress Yak Research Institute Qinghai Academy of Animal and Veterinary Science 81003 Xining, Qinghai, P.R. China Fax: 86-0971-513-5080 "International Interdisciplinary Conference: Headwater Control IV: Hydrology, Water Resources and Ecology in Headwaters" Merano, northern Italy (The Alps), 20-23 April 1998. Contact & More Information: Conference Secretariat: Headwater '98 c/o European Academy Weggensteinstrasse 12/a I39100 Bozen/Bolzano Italy Tel: 39 471 30 61 11 Fax: 39 471 30 60 99 Home Page: HeadWater98@ms.sinfo.interbusiness.it Call for papers and provisional registration. Jointly convened by: * European Academy, Bolzano, Italy * Standing Committee on Headwater Control * International Association of Hydrological Sciences The conference will be held under the patronage of Dr. Luis Durnwalder, President of the Government of South Tyrol. This conference is a contribution to UNESCO's International Hydrological Programme (IHP-V, 1996-2001), "Hydrology and water resources development in a vulnerable environment". Sponsors include UNESCO, FAO/European Forestry Commission, International Association for Hydraulic Research, International Erosion Control Association, International Union of Forest Research Organizations, World Association of Soil and Water Conservation. Objectives and Scope Headwaters are the places where rivers are born. They are the furthest, highest, and most remote regions of a watershed. Many headwaters also lie at the periphery of national regional economies and on the front-lines of agricultural and economic development. Frequently, headwaters are wilderness and steepland. Economic activities in headwaters include agriculture, forest farming, mining, tourism, hydroelectric power and water supply. They are often regions of social and military conflict. However, many headwater regions are critical to water resources development. Traditionally, their low level of human activity, rugged landscape, and isolation from major industrial centres have made them valued for the purity of their landscapes and their surface and groundwater production. Today, this water purity is threatened by atmospheric acid deposition, by erosion associated with accelerating land-use conversion and development, and by the pollution associated with increased intensities of agriculture, mining, road, military and tourism. Headwaters may also be of major importance as conservated reserves of natural ecosystems and wildlife. Headwater ecosystems are fragile (higher elevation, steeper slope, extreme precipitation and temperature), and particularly sensitive to environmental pollution and decline. This conference will focus on the interdisciplinary aspects of scientific and applied water resource management. It will aim to link the perspectives of the research scientists, land-management practitioners and policy makers through consideration of the problems caused by pollution, land erosion, and environmental degradation. The conference will provide an international forum for the evaluation of alternative land management, environmental protection and land reclamation practices and policies. Conference Topics The conference is organized around the following main themes: 1. Monitoring 2. Processes 3. Modeling 4. Management Each of these themes relates to the following aspects: A. Hydrology B. Ecology C. Socio-economic aspects D. Interdisciplinary approaches Call for Papers Both oral and poster presentations are planned. Participants intending to present their work are requestedto send a 1-page abstract in English to the Conference Secretariat. Important Deadlines February 28, 1997: Receipt of abstracts April 30, 1997: Notification of accepted abstracts September 15, 1997: Submission of full papers Registration fee: about USD 590, which will include a copy of the two proceedings volumes, the poster volume, refreshments, lunches, and conference social events. "Third International Conference on Sustainable Developmentof Mountain Territories, Vladikavkaz, September 1998" Contact: Vice-President of RAN President of the Organizing Committee of the Conference Frolov K.B. Russia, Moscow, 101830 Fax (095) 200 42 39, 135 77 69 or Vagin V.S. Deputy-President of the Organizing Committee of the Conference Minister of the Environment Protection and Natural Resources of the Republic of North-Ossetia-Alania Russia, Vladikavkaz, 362021 Iristonskaya, 25 Tel (86722) 4 95 23 Fax (86722) 4 10 92, 4 80 48 Third International Conference on Sustainable Developmentof Mountain Territories, Vladikavkaz, September 1998 In accordance with the recommendation of the UN Conferenceon Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, 1992) andthe decision of the Second International Conference,"Security and Ecology of Mountain Territories (Vladikavkaz,1995), the Organizing Committee informs you about the ThirdInternational Conference, "Sustainable Development ofMountain Territories", to be held in Vladikavkaz inSeptember, 1998. The following items will be discussed at the Conference:1. Theoretical aspects of the stable development of mountain territories. 2. Ecosystem monitoring, information systems, communication and accessability of computer data on sustainable development of mountain territories. 3. Use of resources and reconstruction of threatened ecosystems. 4. Cultural and natural heritage of peoples, especially protected nature territories, bio-diversity of mountain countries. 5. Socio-ecological aspects of transition to the sustainable development of mountain regions. 6. Demographic and medico-biological problems of sustainable development of mountain territories.7. Creation of effective systems of education and of the ideas of development of mountain territories. 8. International Cooperation, Conventions, and Agreements. You are welcome to forward any proposals on the items to be discussed at the Conference and participation in its work (here included possible financial support) to the address of the Organizing Committee of the Conference: 1. Russia, Moscow, 101830, Fax (095) 200 42 39, 135 77 69, to the Vice-President of RAN, President of the Organizing Committee of the Conference, academician Frolov K.B. 2. Russia, Vladikavkaz, 362021, Iristonskaya, 25, Tel (86722) 4 95 23, fax (86722) 4 10 92, 4 80 48, to the Deputy-President of the Organizing Committee of the Conference, Minister of the Environment Protection and Natural Resources of the Republic of North-Ossetia-Alania Vagin V.S. Signed, Deputy-President of the Organizing Committee Academician of IAELPS V. Vaguine Past Events: "Current Techniques in Alpine Ecological Research, HighTatras, Slovakia, August 26-31, 1996" Contact: Dr. Marian Janiga TANAP Research Centre 05960 T Lomnica Slovak Republic Fax 42 96 99 67 958 (Announcement excerpted from "Mountain Protected Areas Update",Lawrence S. Hamilton, Vice-Chair for Mountains, Commission on National Parksand Protected Areas/IUCN) Alpine Stewardship Gathering Contact: Date: September 12-14, 1996 Place: Wilmington, New York, USA Contact: Alpine Stewardship Gathering P.O. Box 65 Keene Valley, NY 12943 USA Agenda Includes: "Ecology of the Adirondack High Peaks Region", by Dr. Ketchledge Posters and Displays Field Trips to: Algonquin: alpine meadow restoration Mr. Marcy: alpine ecology Wright: public outreach and eduation on remote alpine summits Colden: trail construction and stabilization Whiteface: public outreach and education on high-use alpine summits "The High Peaks Management Unit Management Plan: Policy and Alpine Management", by Jim Papero, NYDEC "Bicknell Thrush", by Chris Rimmer, Vermont Institute of Natural Science "Follow-up from the New Hampshire Gathering", by David Hooke Closing Remarks: Where do we go from here? Registration fee is $15 (not including room and board). Please register by August 15, 1996. "International Alpine Congress, Sevrier, France, September 19-20, 1996" Contact: Manfred Pils Naturfreunde Diefenbachgasse 36 A-1150 Wien Tel: 43 1 892 38 77 Fax: 43 1 812 97 89 The Alps - Touchstone of Europe Invitation to an International Alpine Congress Sevrier, France, September 19-20, 1996 The Nature Friends International will conclude its project "Landscape of the Year 1995/96 - The Alps" with an international expert congress on "The Alps and Europe". The European Single Market has, rightly or wrongly, given rise to diffuse fears among the people living in mountain regions. Like the people in many other regions, the inhabitants of the Alpine region expect the Single Market to strengthen their economic position and, in addition, to safeguard the quality of their environment and life. The Alps are consequently a touchstone for the establishment of a Europe of regions. The Alpine Conventions is the first attempt at safeguarding the sustainable development in a border-crossing region by way of an international agreement. Many obstacles will have to be overcome, however, and many problems solved before this goal can be achieved. In this context the general European framework, which may be favorable or un favourable to a sustainable development, is of paramount importance. In preparation for the Congress, a "Green Paper on the Alps" will be put together with the assistance of experts. Starting from the prevailing, general European framework and the situation resulting from it, the Green Paper is to provide the answer to the following question: What are the criteria of a general European framework conducive to a sustainable development in the Alpine region? The Alpine Congress of the Nature Friends International is meant to trigger a Europe-wide discussion of this issue. The individual chapters of the Green Paper will be presented at the Congress by experts from the Alpine region. Representatives of the European Commission will take up these topics and set out the pertinent EU policies as well as the possibilities of revising them. Programme: Thursday, September 19 * Opening and welcome address * Keynote address * Introduction to the Green Paper * Discussion * Transport: Green light for quality of life * Agriculture: The Alps - The health food delicatessen of Europe * Tourism: Socio-cultural experience vs. landscape consumption * Regional development and spatial planning, social affairs: Habitat - the top priority. Friday, September 20 * Presentation of catalog of demands * Panel discussion with representatives * Closing speech: The Alps - Touchstone of Europe * Optional excursion Conference languages: English, French, German with simultaneous translation Fees (in Austrian Schillings): 1,200 meals and documents 300 per overnight stay in double room 120 for excursion "Mountain Massifs, Privileged Places of Cooperation, Thessaloniki (Greece), September 19 - 21, 1996" The role of non-governmental organizations and territorial collectivites. Contact: Euromontana 11 rue de la Baume 75008 Paris France Telephone: (33) 1 53 83 48 06 Tel/Fax: (33) 1 53 83 48 07 Colloquium organised by Euromontana in Thessaloniki (Greece) with the support of the European Commission With the Participation of fifteen European countries. Languages: English, German, French, Greek "Sacred Mountains of Asia: World Heritage for Now and forthe Future, Altai Mountains, September 20-30, 1996" Contact: Ye. F. Veldiaev State Assembly, El Kumltai Altai Republic Commission on Ecology, 659700 Gono - Altaisk nl. Erkemena Palkina Fax 7 38 37 99 91 05 "Second European Intergovernmental Conference on SustainableMountain Development, October 7-10, 1996" Contact: ICALPE Co-ordinating Unit Centre International pour l'Environnement Alpin Centro di Ecologia Alpina Viote del Monte Bondone, 38040 Trento, Italy Tel: 39 461 948 190 Fax: 39 461 948 102. Web home page:http://wwwpat.infotn.it/pat-giunta/mod-alpi/ "Mountain Research Conference, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, October 14-18, 1996" Contact: Dr. Elizabeth Kirk Director, Europe and Countries of the Former Soviet Union Project AAAS 1333 H Street NW Washington DC 20005 USA Return to the Calendar Listings Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised August 1996WT01-B09-196IA007-000075-B040-124http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/intros/intros.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071623 text/html 29098HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:16:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 28926Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:18 GMT  Introductions Introductions To submit an entry use this form . Full Introduction Institute of Research on Seismic Risk Milan Italy Massimo Antoninetti I'm a 42 years old geologist, research scientist at the Remote Sensing Dept. of the Institute of Research on Seismic Risk, located in Milan, Northern Italy. Full Introduction La Paz Bolivia Ricardo Ayala I am Ricardo Ayala and I am a Civil Engineer with specialty inhydraulics; I am pleased to participate with all of you in thislist. Full Introduction Nigel Brett I am interested in obtaining information on the geographical distribution of poverty in marginal areas in Asia with specific relation to mountain and upland areas. Full Introduction West Palm Beach Florida (USA) Lee Porter Butler I am a practicing architect with thirty three (33) years of experiencedesigning and building sustainable Ekosea homes, all over the world. Full Introduction U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Oregon Portland Oregon Steve Caicco My name is Steve Caicco. I'm a botanist/plant ecologist interested in mountain biodiversity and conservation. Full Introduction Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation Hanoi Vietnam Olivier Chave I am presently working in Hanoi, Vietnam, as Deputy ResidentCoordinator, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). Full Introduction Wyoming USA Broughton Coburn I have lived and worked in Nepal and Tibet for 17 of the past 23years, andmaintain a general interest in the Himalayas. Full Introduction Community Environment Network Eastern Cape Province South Africa Mike Cohen I am Mike Cohen from the new Eastern Cape Province,South Africa. The new province was formed after the first democraticelections of 1994. Until six weeks ago, I occupied the post ofDirectorof Nature conservation in the new province. Full Introduction Cornell University New York USA Ana Cordova My name is Ana Cordova. I am an MS/PhD student in the Natural ResourcePolicy and Management program at Cornell University. I am currently studyingthe viability of stakeholder involvement in natural resource decision-makingin the Copper Canyon region of Chihuahua, Mexico (Sierra Madre OccidentalMountain Range). Full Introduction Ev-K2-CNR Project Pyramid Laboratory Lobuche Agostino Da Polenza My name is Agostino Da Polenza and my life and my work have always been and still are related to mountains. Full Introduction IUCN-US Washington, DC USA Kenneth P. Ewing I am a lawyer working with IUCN-The World Conservation Union during a one-year leave of absence from the law firm of Steptoe & Johnson in Washington, D.C. While at Steptoe, I specialized in internationaltrade law and antitrust law. Full Introduction University of Texas Arlington, TX USA Patricio Gallo I am from Ecuador, I am working on my master degree in Environmental Planning, since I was born and I grew up in my beautiful Andes my concern for social, economic and environmental issues for those lands is opened to any project. Full Introduction Virginia USA Gary Garriott I'm Gary Garriott and have been involved in international developmentwork in one way or another for the past 27 years, including afour-yearPeace Corps stint in Ecuador where just being in and around the Andeswas an incredible yet in some ways mystical experience. Full Introduction Vermont Center for Geographic Information Vermont USA Mark Haberle My name is Mark Haberle and I am a resident of the United States livingin the Green mountain State of Vermont. I am currently employed withthe Vermont Center for Geographic Information as GIS Data Technician. Full Introduction World Resources Institute USA Marca Hagenstad I am the assistant to the Vice President and SeniorEconomist, in WRI's economics program. We are working on variousenvironmental economic issues, including carbon taxes, capital markets,pesticides, productivity measuring, structural adjustment, and otherpolicy issues. Full Introduction Sumava Czech Republic Irena Hanouskova Subject of my work is landscapeecology. I amoriented particularly to historical development of landscapestructure, land use forms of Sumava Mts. Full Introduction Conservation International Oliver Hillel Tourism has become the world's largest industry, generating US $3.4 trillion in gross annual output, attracting $693 billion in capital investment, and providing over 200 million jobs globally (The World Travel and Tourism Council, 1996) Full Introduction FrenchNationalResearch Centre Himalaya Chercheurs "Himalaya, milieux, cultures et socites" is part of the FrenchNationalResearch Centre (CNRS). This team was founded in 1964 and includessocialanthropologists and geographers involved in all aspects of Himalayanstudies (Nepal, India, Tibet, Bhutan). Full Introduction Virginia USA Sandra S. Hodge My name is Sandra Hodge and I teach social/community forestry. Iam particularly interested in this forum in this context. Full Introduction Lincoln University New Zealand Ken Hughey The Centre for Mountain Studies, Lincoln University, New Zealand. Specific contributions to this and other forums will be made by individual associates of the Centre. Full Introduction Seattle Washington (USA) Rodney Jackson My name is Rodney Jackson, and I have worked with The Mountain Institute asits wildlife ecologist since 1990. I am also the part-time ConservationProgram Director for the International Snow Leopard Trust, based in Seattle,Washington. Full Introduction Colorada State University Colorado USA Bijaya Kattel I have been involved with the National Parks and Wildlife of Nepal since the last 20 plus years. Full Introduction NorthernArkansas USA Dwayne Knox I'm Dwayne Knox and I work with the Newton County ResourceCouncil, in the Boston Mountain Range of the Ozark Mountains of NorthernArkansas, on the headwaters of the Buffalo River. Full Introduction University of Malaya Institute of Advanced Studies Malaysia Chris Kwan Hi, I am Chris Kwan from the Institute of Advanced Studies at theUniversity of Malaya here in Malaysia. Full Introduction University of Vermont in Burlington Vermont USA Paul R. Lachapelle I am a 30 year old Environmental Studies undergraduate student at the University of Vermont in Burlington, Vermont, USA. My background is in the field of backcountry human waste management. Full Introduction Southwest USA Charles Little Hello, my name is Charles Little. I am a civil engineer workingin thefield of rural area water supply and sanitation for the Navajo people insouthwestern United States. Full Introduction Flagstaff Arizona USA Usha Little I have beenworking with the Navajo American Indian communities of NorthernArizona as a rural development specialist. Full Introduction Bureau of Archaeological Research Tallahassee Florida Florida Bruce MacMillan I have been working for the Florida Division of Historical Resources,Bureau of Archaeological Research (BAR) in Tallahassee, Florida, sinceFebruary 1994. I have worked on several major research projects for BAR. Full Introduction Peace Corps Ulaanbaatar Mongolia Jeff McCusker Myname is Jeff McCusker, and I'm currently working as a consultant on along-term contract for the Peace Corps in Mongolia, setting up a newprogram in envrionmental protection. We currently have 3 volunteersworking in protected areas here, and 6 more should be coming thissummer. Full Introduction Vancouver Washington Don Messerschmidt I am Don Messerschmidt, a PhD Anthropologist (Univ. of Oregon1974), who has worked extensively in the Himalayas both as a social scienceresearcher and development adviser and consultant. Full Introduction University of Saint Thomas Houston, Texas USA Roger Morefield Howdy! I am Roger Morefield, and I teach economics in a smallprivate university in Houston, the University of Saint Thomas. Full Introduction University of Turin GRUGLIASCO Italy Renzo Motta I am a 36 years old researcher. I am working at the University of Turin andI am a forester. Full Introduction The Mountain Institute West Virginia USA TMI's Mountain Forum Staff We would like to take this opportunity to introduce the staff atThe Mountain Institute who are currently working on Mountain Forumrelated projects--primarily convening the Interim FacilitatingCommittee, acting as the Forum's Global Node and implementing theInformation Server Node. Full Introduction Franklin, West Virginia (USA) Malcolm (Mac) Odell With the Mountain Institute's Makalu-BarunNational Park & Conservation Area Project (MBCP). My duties now are to support field operations, particularly those related to community development, culturalconservation, and eco-tourism. Full Introduction UC Berkeley California USA Bikash Pandey My name is Bikash Pandey. I am currently a student at the Energy &ResourcesProgram at UC Berkeley. I am from Nepal and have been workingthere for thelast ten years to promote rural electrification through village levelmicro-hydro schemes. Full Introduction Italy Jacopo Pasotti I am a 27 years old geomorphologist graduated in Milan (Italy) in July 1994. Since I graduated I have been working in geoenvironmental topics in mountainareas; in particular my interests are in geoenvironmental hazards forecastingand geomorphological mapping. Full Introduction CIP/CONDESAN Lima Peru Ana Maria Ponce My name is Ana Maria Ponce. I work at the International PotatoCenter (CIP) since 1987 and support CONDESAN's telecommunication network: INFOANDINA since 1995. Full Introduction National Outdoor Leadership School Wyoming USA Phil Powers My name is Phil Powers. I am the Development and PartnershipsDirector at theNational Outdoor Leadership School in Lander, Wyoming. Full Introduction Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales Quito Ecuador Jorge Recharte Hola! I am writing from Quito Ecuador. I am an anthropologist from Peru, working in Ecuador since January 1994 as coordinator of the "Programa en Sociadades de Montaa y Desarrollo Sustentable" at the Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales (FLACSO-Ecuador). Full Introduction Pyrenees Andorra Delfi Roca Mi nombre es Roca, Delfi Roca. Tengo 36 aos, varn y vivo en los Pirineos, frontera natural entre Francia y Espaa, en un pas llamado Andorra (470 km2). Nuestra lengua oficial es el cataln. (My name is Roca, Delfi Roca. I am a 36 year old man and I live in the Pyrenees, the natural frontier between France and Spain in a country called Andorra (470 km2). Our official language is catalan.) Full Introduction Kathmandu Nepal Veneeta Singha I'm Veneeta Singha from Kathmandu, Nepal and I'm actually involved in Mountain Forum work here at ICIMOD. Full Introduction US Peace Corps Dobrich Bulgaria Paul Swider I am a US Peace Corps volunteer working on business development inBulgaria.I do extensive work with the tourist industry here and havenumerous contacts. Full Introduction Huaraz Peru Miriam Torres I'm Miriam Torres, from Huaraz, Peru. I work at The Andean Program of The Mountain Institute, which is based in Huaraz, the main town near Huascaran National Park, a mountain protected area which includes the highest part of the Cordillera Blanca, at the Central Peruvian Andes. Full Introduction United Nations University headquarters Tokyo Japan Juha I. Uitto Since 1990, I have been working as Academic Officer at the United Nations University headquarters in Tokyo, Japan. I am in charge of planning and management of the University's esearch and training programme in the field of environment. Full Introduction Aarhus University Moesgaard DENMARK Martijn van Beek Here's a few words about myself. I am currently asst. prof. ('adjunkt') at the Department of Ethnography and Social Anthropology at Aarhus University in Denmark. A Dutch citizen, I received my Ph.D. this spring from Cornell University for a dissertation on contemporary Ladakhi politics and development entitled 'Identity Fetishism and the Art of Representation'. Full Introduction Natural Resource Planning University of Vermont USA Ben Wang I'm honored that the Mountain Forum will be using my logo design! Full Introduction Biological Institute, University of Oslo Norway Tom Warren My name is Tom Warren. I am an American living in Norway, and I am thedirector of the University of Oslo/University of Bergen's Mountain ResearchStation at Finse in the central part of southern Norway. Full Introduction UC Berkeley California, USA Emily Yeh I'm a PhD student at the Energy and Resources Group, UC Berkeley. I'minterested in natural resource management and meeting rural energyneeds in mountainous areas, particularly in Tibetan areas of the PRC. Descriptions are provided by individual members of The Mountain Forum, and are not the responsibility of The Mountain Forum. To tell us about yourself, use this form . Return to the Active Mountain Archive Index Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised June 1996WT01-B09-197IA007-000075-B040-148http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/whatsnew/logo.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071636 text/html 1508HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:16:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1337Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:13 GMT   New logo contest page Mountain-Related Reports and Publications * View the REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992),Chapter 13, Managing Fragile Ecosystems: Sustainable Mountain Development * UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Feb. 1997 * UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Apr. 1995 * View the Survey Results of the European NGO Consultation onSustainable Mountain Development * Les Rsultatsde l'enqute Mene par le Biais d'un Questionnaire de la Confrence Europenne des ONG sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne * View the Recommendations of the European NGO Consultation onSustainable Mountain Development * Recommandations de la Confrence Europenne des ONG sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne * View "CNPPA's special Mountain issue of "Parks" Mountain Forum Annotated Bibliography Return to the Resources Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-200IA008-000077-B038-1http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/linkadd/linkadd.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071710 text/html 8415HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:17:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8244Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:34 GMT   Mountain Forum Link-Add Resource Page Mountain Forum Link-Add Page Feel free to add your own link related to sustainable mountain development and mountain environments. Whenyou add a link you will be automatically returned to this page and your URL should appear. Remember to Reload your browser. There are 52 links on this page. Last link was added at Title: URL: Section to be placed in: Environment Development Education Non-Government Employment Recreational Online_Libraries Regional Research Miscellaneous * Quick Jump: [ Environment | Development | Education | Non-Government | Employment Recreational |Online Libraries | Misc | Regional | Research ] Environment Carpathian School Agenda 21/Chapter 13 - Sustainable Mountain Development Principals of Environmetal Conservation and Sustainable Development: Summary and Survey - A study in the field of Intl. Law and Related Intl. Reports eNetDigest Leadership for Environment and Development home page Best Environmental Resources Directories Indigenous Environmental Network: alliance to protect the earth through traditional teachings and natural laws Greendisk: a journal of contemporary environmental issues The Environmental News Network Global Drainage Basins Database "State of the Earth, 1995"- A special issue of Discover Magazine CIESIN- CONSORTIUM FOR INTERNATIONAL EARTH SCIENCE INFORMATION NETWORK The Envirolink Library Traffic: International Trade in Wildlife and Wildlife Products Australian Environment On-Line U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Mountain Regions Programme, Environmental Change Unit, Oxford University Development Agenda 21, Chapter 13 Managing Fragile Ecosystems: Sustainable Mountain Development Sustainable Development Organizations and Resources The Earthpledge Foundation- Sustainable Development Technology Resource Consortium: information technology for non-profit organizations Sustainable Development Dimensions- Part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) "Future Generations- Working on sustainable development for Tibet Education The Earth Centre Biodiversity Resource Center Non-Government The Union of Concerned Scientists The International Institute for Sustainable Development The Millenium Institute Employment Environmental Careers Organization Employment Opportunities in Water Resources Recreation the Access Fund Access Fund (climber's resources) Leave No Trace-Outdoor Ethics (NOLS, USFS, BLM, NPS) Online_Libraries National Library for the Environment: scientific reports on environmental issues International Environmental Policy Reference Guide, Harvard University Miscellaneous Agenda 21/Chapter 13 - Sustainable Mountain Development The Earth Network for Sustainable Development: Earth Council, Rio+5, Earth Charter, etc... World Atlas (by region and country) Global Recycling Network Solstice- Center for Renewable Energy and Sustainable Technology Econet's Endangered Species Resources Ev-K2-CNR Project: Italian Remote Sensing in Himalaya-Nepal The Mountain Institute Insitut de Geographie Alpine, Mountain Areas: A challenge and an opportunity for Europe United Nations University: Mountain Ecology and Sustainable Development UNESCO Man and the Bioshpere ICIMOD Regional Mountains in Korea Regional Development in Switzerland Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe Himnet: Himalayan Reference Archives Research AARAM - Andean Amazon Rivers Analysis and Monitoring Project Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised November 1996WT01-B09-201IA008-000077-B038-22http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/calendar/calform.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071717 text/html 1203HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:17:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1032Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:59 GMT  calendar form Comment Form Submit an event to the Mountain Forum Use this form to submit an entry to the calendar, or send mail to usat mfsupport@mntforum.org. E-mail address : Name (optional): Event description use as many rows as you need: URL(s): WT01-B09-202IA008-000077-B038-89http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/members/memberlist2.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071758 text/html 128061HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:17:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 127888Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:55 GMT MOUNTAIN FORUM MEMBER LIST MOUNTAIN FORUM MEMBER LIST This alphabetical list of Mountain Forummembers contains some categories taken from the Mountain Forumregistration/survey form. It is provided to give more backgroundinformation on Mountain Forum members. Saroj Acharya,ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush Type of work: research, software developer Subject Specialization(s): Shiva Hari Achet, University of Washington, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America, Global Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Olympic Mountains (WA, USA) Type of work: college/graduate studies, policy development Subject Specialization(s): mountain agriculture, education, health Waqar Ahmad Jan, Forest Management Centre, Pakistan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): relationship of inhabitants with natural resources, social survey, planning Mr. Nessim Ahmad, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), Italy Shahid Akhtar, ICIMOD,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush-Himalayas Type of work: Information/communications Subject Specialization(s): Information andCommunications Megh Ale, Nepal RiverConservation Trust (NRCT), Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: NRCT does not directlyget involved in mountain studies but it has a strong link withmountains because they are sole source of the perennial rivers ofNepal Type of work: project implementation, raftingthrough free flowing rivers Subject Specialization(s): River conservation,ecotourism, environmental protection in and along river basinand, community benefiting schemes John Ambler, The FordFoundation, Vietnam Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Upland Vietnam, UplandThailand Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,funding of policy, research and teaching Subject Specialization(s): Hill irrigation,community forestry, upland swidden systems Massimo Antoninetti, IRRS-CNR,Remote Sensing Dept., Italy Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, European Alps,North and South America Type of work: project implementation, research and teaching Subject Specialization(s): The Project EV-K2-CNR Ritesh Arya, Hydrogeologist Groundwater Organisation, Irrigation and Public Health, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: North Western Indian Himalayas and Shiwaliks Type of work: activism, administration, policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): hydrogeology and water resource management in Himalayan Region; groundwater development and exploration Jacqueline Ashby, CIAT,Colombia Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Tropical hillsides, Latin America, Type of work: research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): Institutional Development, Participatoryresearch, agricultural methodology, decision-support systems Yuri Badenkov, Instituteof Geography, Russian Academy of Science, Russia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Central Asia, Caucasus,Altai-Sayan, Europe Type of work: policy development, research, Subject Specialization(s): Sustainable mountain development, mountaingeoecology, Mountain protected areas, cultural diversity Charles Bailey, Ford Foundation,Kenya Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Africa Type of work: Philanthropy Subject Specialization(s): agricultural economics Birendra Bajracharya,ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush, Himalaya Type of work: project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): GIS, Civil Engineering Nicole Ballinger, Universityof Vermont, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Green Mountains (Vermont), Adirondack Mountains(New York), North Cascades (Washington), Coastal Acadian Range(Maine), Chisos Mountains (Texas) Type of work: student, activism, research, Subject Specialization(s): recreational use of mountains, mountaincultures Anthony Barnosky, MountainResearch Center, USA Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: MRC personnel work in Rocky Mountains, ArgentineanAndes, Atlas Mountains of MoroccoNorth America, Type of work: student, administration, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): biosystematics, ecological processes,physical processes, cultural & economic processes, G IS Shannon Barras, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Rockies, Appalachians/Blue Ridge Type of work: teaching, Subject Specialization(s): Amanda Barrera de Jorgenson,Foundacin Natura, Colombia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America, Massifs/Mountains: Cordillera de los Andes-Colombia Oriental Type of work: project implementation, research, community organization Subject Specialization(s): conservation ofthe diversity biology Barbara Becker, University of Kassel, GermanyConservation International, Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Stephen Bezruchka, InternationalHealth Program,USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: The Himalayas in Nepal, Type of work: student, activism, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): Trekking, tourism, provision of healthcare in remote mountain regions, altitude illness Annie Benarous, Euromontana,France Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: the whole of Europe Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): cooperation Edwin Bernbaum, Universityof California, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: mountain ranges around the world, Himalaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,lecturing and writing Subject Specialization(s): sacred mountains,culture and environment, comparative religion and mythology, AsianStudies Istuan Beszteri, Tree of Life Association, Hungary Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Matra, Cserviat, Zemplen, Borzsony Mountains in Hungary (northern part) Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): sustainable mountain tourism/development Annada Bhagabati, ArunachalUniversity, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Eastern (Arunachal) Himalayas, Type of work: administration, activism, research Subject Specialization(s): Soil and cultural anthropology, culturalecology, socio-economic change in hill areas of NE, India Anupam Bhatia, ICIMOD,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Region, Type of work: policy development, activism, project implementation,research Subject Specialization(s): natural resources, common propertyregimes Mihir Bhatt, DisasterMitigation Institute, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching, Subject Specialization(s): food, earthquakes, landslides, watershed,work, shelter Bal Bhatta, ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): agroforestry, natural resources management Madhusudan Bhattarai, ClemsonUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Himalayan Range Type of work: college or graduate student Subject Specialization(s): agriculture, researcheconomics, regional development Naomi Bishop, CaliforniaState University, Northridge, USA Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, North America Type of work: administration, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): anthropology, cultural ecology, physicalanthropology of human population, primate sociology Alan Blackshaw, InternationalUnion of Alpine Associations, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: worldwide, Europe Type of work: policy development Subject Specialization(s): access to mountains, tourism Hubertus Bloemer, OhioUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica, Africa, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Appalachian, Mt. Kenya, Kilimanjaro, Alps Type of work: research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): high mountain remote sensing &cartography Sukhmaya Bohra, WomenDevelopment Training Centre, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): gender planning, rural development Simone Borelli, FAO ofthe United Nations, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): forestry, watershed management Maurice Bourgoin, ORSTOM, Bolivia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Bolivian Andes Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): hydrology, geochemistry David Browning, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Appalachians, Himalayas Type of work: administration, Subject Specialization(s): financial management and enterprisedevelopment Beatriz Bruce, Adventure,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: student Subject Specialization(s): art and mountain ranges Magalen Bryant, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): David Butz, Departmentof Geography, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Karakoram - Hindu Kush Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): power & resistance, labor, colonialism Anvar Buzurukov, EurasianCenter on Sustainable Development of Mountains, Russia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: All ranges in former SovietUnion-North Eurasia Type of work: policy development, administration, activism, projectimplementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Protected areas in mountains regions,developing information network in mountain regions, tourism and sustainablemountain development Elizabeth Byers, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Global Massifs/Mountains: Appalachians, Himalayas, Andes Type of work: administration, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Mountain conservation, gender issues,biodiversity Rafael Calderon, Ecuador Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Central America Type of work: consulting Subject Specialization(s): wildlands management,protected areas management EIA Steven Caicco, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, USA Work/Interest region(s): Global Massifs/Mountains: Rocky Mountains (US), Sierra/Cascade Range (US), Olympic Mountains (US) Type of work: project implementation, policy development Subject Specialization(s): botany, plant ecology, landscape ecology, conservation biologyLus Camargo, Amigosde la Sierra Nevada del Cocuy, Colombia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Sierra Nevada de Guican, Cocuy, Chita Boyaca,Colombia Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain rescue, environmental issues,community mountain training, community development, Alejandro Camino, PROFONANPE,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Himalayas Type of work: policy development, administration, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): ethnobiology, ethnobotany, anthropology,environment, institution building J. Campbell, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Natural resource management, humanecology, anthropology Rafael Capetillo, PNUMA,Mexico Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Latinoamerican Mountain region Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): biodiversity, desertification, vulnerableecosystems, aquatic ecosystems Leyla Celikel, TEMA Foundation,Turkey Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Mediterranean, Mid-SE Europe Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): Rangeland rehabilitations, biodiversityconservation Purna Jyoti Chakma, ParbattyaJhumia Rehabilitation and Environmental Conservation Organization,Bangladesh Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush Himalaya Type of work: activism, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Socio-economic development of mountainpeople, mountain environment Susana Chau, PROTERRA,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Eastern slope of Central Chain of Mountains, Andes Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research, Subject Specialization(s): Agricultural-forestry-pastoral management Ramesh Chand, NationalCentre for Ag. Ecpm/ & Policy Research, India Work/Interest region(s):Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Western Himalayan Region of India Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): Agricultural development policy Mahesh Chander, Agricultural Extension Indian Veterinary ResearchInstitute, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Central Himalayan Region Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): agricultural development, extension education, transfer of technology, sustainable rural development, organic farming Susana Chau, PROTERRA,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Eastern slope of Central Chain of Mountains,Andes Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research, Subject Specialization(s): Agricultural-forestry-pastoral management Olivier Chave, Swiss Agencyfor Cooperation & Development SDC, Vietnam Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: North Vietnam Highlands Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): International Development Policies,(Inter)national Negotiation, Sustainable Development Problematique Lord Chorley, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Europe, Himalayas Type of work: policy development Subject Specialization(s): Broughton Coburn, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Protected area designation and management, biodiversity conservation, project management, basic needs rural developmentand alternative energy sources, writing Michael Cohen, CommunityEnvironment Network, South Africa Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: East Cape Mountain belt Type of work: protected area planning and management Subject Specialization(s): protected areas,community involvement in resource utilization Jim Conroy, Instituteof Terrestrial Ecology, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Cairngorms Type of work: activism, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain ecology, conservation of mountains Ana Cordova, Cornell University,USA Work/Interest region(s): Global, North America,Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Sierra Madre Occidental, Mexico Type of work: policy development, student, project implementation,research Subject Specialization(s): natural resource policy and management Eva Cudlinova, Instituteof Landscape Ecology, the Czech Republic Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Sumava Mts. in SW Czech Republic Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): landscape ecology, ecological economics,sustainable development, economic incentives, economic policy Ross Cullen, Lincoln University,New Zealand Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: New Zealand ranges (SouthernAlps), Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Application of economics to mountainissues Agostino Da Polenza, Ev-K2-CNR - Mountain Equipe srl, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: all high mountains, in particular Alps, Himalaya and Karakorum range Type of work: activism, policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): sport, study and scientific research in regions of medium and high mountains Monique Dejean-Servires,Work Community of the Pyrenees, France Work/Interest region(s): Global, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Pyrenees Type of work: policy development, student, environment promotion Subject Specialization(s): sustainable mountaindevelopment, development of local projects Bhuwan Devkota, Helvetas,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush-Himalayas Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Transport, road and foot trail bridges Pierre Dzes, Universityof Lausanne, Institut de Minralogie, Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya (Zanskar Range, Kashmir, India) Type of work: student, research Subject Specialization(s): Geological study in SE Zanskar Trilok Dhar, Society forHimalayan Environmental Rehabilitation, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Type of work: activism, project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): development & environmental security ofmt. regions, watershed management & people's participation, mountaindatabanks, mt. ecology and biodiversity, preparation of environmental statusreports Richard Dodge, Las RacesAsesoras & Consultoras Ltda., Chile Work/Interest region(s): LatinAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Andes al este de Sierra Nevada y el VolcanLlaima, Zona montaosa del butalmapu pehuenche, Argentina Type of work: activism, project implementation, Subject Specialization(s): Michele Dominy, Bard College,USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: New Zealand, South IslandAlps, Australia, Snowy Mountains Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): anthropology of place, settler descendantpopulations, cultural identify, gender Colin Donohue, Rural Action,USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Appalachians Type of work: administration, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): sustainable forestry including non-timberproducts Marc Dourojeanni, BID,Brasil Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Latin America Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): sustainable development, natural resourcesmanagement Bruno Drera, Club AlpinoItaliano, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Global, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps Type of work: activism, Alpinism Subject Specialization(s): Alpinism, sustainabledevelopment Mara Duran, FundacinProSierra Nevada, Colombia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): Thomas Eastman, The Mountain Institute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Andes Type of work: administration, Trustee of the Mountain Institute Subject Specialization(s): legal issues Timi Ecimovic, SEG - Institutefor Climate Change, Slovenia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, North America, Africa, Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps/Dinaric Alps Type of work: policy development, project implementation, researchScientific/Applied work with mountain ecosystems, teaching Subject Specialization(s): climate change, mountain ecosystems,environmental protection of mountain ecosystems Cornel Ehrler, Research & Activism, USA Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps Type of work: activism and research Subject Specialization(s): snow, snowhydrology, runoff, remote sensing, GIS Stephen Engle, University of Idaho, Middlebury College, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Washington Cascades Type of work: policy development, research, cartography/GIS, information access/data distribution Subject Specialization(s): GIS and cartography, atlas and CD-ROM design, decision support methodologies, incorporation of socio-economic data into resource management Jason Espie, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global Massifs/Mountains: Appalachians, North America, Latin America Type of work: policy development, administration, project implementation,teaching Subject Specialization(s): environmental education, eco-tourism,sustainable agriculture Fred Euphrat, Forest,Soil & Water, Inc., USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): watershed management, hydrology, biodiversity Brian John Evans, National Cross Country Skiing, Australia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Snowy Mountains and Australian Alps (NSW and Victoria, Australia) Type of work: cross country skiing Subject Specialization(s): ski trail systems and management coaching and athlete development, background in ecology Johanna Faerber, RegionalAgency for the Environment, France Work/Interest region(s): Global, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Pyrenees, (French Massif Central) Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,environment promotion Subject Specialization(s): sustainable mountaindevelopment, landscape evolution, vegetation dynamics Gernot Fiebiger, TorrentAvalanche and Erosion Control, Austria Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Himalaya, JapaneseAlps Type of work: student, administration, activism, project implementation,research, international societies and organizations, teaching Subject Specialization(s): avalanche, erosion and torrent control,landslides (including control), soil bio-engineering, watershedmanagement and forestry, planning, consulting, engineering, andsustainable development Gabor Figeczky, Biokultura Association, Hungary Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: northern range of mountains in Hungary Type of work: activism, teaching Subject Specialization(s): sustainable agriculture in mountains, tourism, ecological considerations, botanical research Ann Armbrecht Forbes, DartmouthCollege, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya Type of work: activism, policy development, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): political ecology, sacred mountains,sustainable development Bernard Francou, ORSTOM, Bolivia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Central Cordillera (Bolivia/Peru/Ecuador) Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): glaciology, geomorphology, climatology Stephan Fuller, IUCN Pakistan,Pakistan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Karakoram, Hindu-Kush Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): strategic environmental planning, biodiversity,park and protected areas, mountaineering Don Funnell, University of Sussex,United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: college or graduate studies Subject Specialization(s): geography, rural development, environmental management, GIS Abdul Gafur, Soil ConservationCentre (SRDI), Bangladesh Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: hill tracts of Bangladesh Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): soil conservation and watershed, managementresearch and studies Patricio Gallo, Universityof Texas at Arlington, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: student, activism, project implementation, research,graduate student in city and regional planning with an environmental planningconcentration Subject Specialization(s): sustainable developmentimplementation, urban development, one of the major problems ofour environmental situation, economy, environment Gary Garriott, VITA, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Mt. Kilimanjaro, Tanzania (interest) Type of work: project implementation, Subject Specialization(s): computerized communication, informationsystems with access to the Internet Donald Garvin, Jr., MountaineerChapter Trout Unlimited, USA Work/Interest region(s): Global, North America Massifs/Mountains: mountains in general Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): coldwater fisheries, water qualityissues, economic issues Frank Gibney, The Explorers' Network, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia, Africa, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Cordillera Blanca - Nepal Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching, focused expeditions Subject Specialization(s): provide logistical platform for accomplishing objectives beyond tourism and climbing in mountain regions. Alessandro Gimona, McCaulayLand Use Research Institute, Scotland Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific , North America, LatinAmerica, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): Carol Goland, DenisonUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Ecological Anthropology, agriculture,Ethnobotany Valer Gotea, ForestryStudents' Organization "SILVA", Romania Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Carpats Mountains, Piatra Mare (the Great Stone),Piatra Craiului (the Stone of Prince), Tampa Type of work: activism, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): protected areas, endangered speciesof flora and fauna, ecological information, education of tourists& public Mike Grantham, CroftersCommission, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: administration Subject Specialization(s): rural communities in mountain areas Lisa J. Graumlich, The University of Arizona, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Sierra Nevada, Brooks Range Type of work: college/graduate studies, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): climatic variation, vegetation dynamics, land-use change Tony Gross, Secretariat,Convention on Biological Diversity, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, Subject Specialization(s): political science, social anthropology,international relations, environmental change Gauri Guha, Agro-ClimaticRegional Planning Unit, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Arvallis Type of work: policy development, administration,research Subject Specialization(s): resource economics, operations research,Geomatics Damber Gurung, ClemsonUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America Massifs/Mountains: Himalayan Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): applied economics, health and humandevelopment issues Jeannette Denholm Gurung, International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush-Himalayas Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): forestry, gender and development, agriculture Phurba Gyalzen, Oberlin College, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Europe, North America, Global Massifs/Mountains: Grew up in the Khumba region of the Himalayas Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Barry Haack, George MasonUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): Remote sensing & GIS for resourceassessments & environmental analysis Mark Haberle, Vermont Center for Geographic Information,USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Green Mountains-VT, Northern Appalachians, North Adirondacks Type of work: college/graduate studies, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): monitoring/restoration Marca Hagenstad, WorldResources Institute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, research Subject Specialization(s): environmental economics Nick Halfhide, CairngormsPartnership, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: The Cairngorms, the Mounth, the Monadh Liath Type of work: policy development, administration Subject Specialization(s): environmental protection, sustainabledevelopment Lawrence Hamilton, Commissionon Natural Parks & Protected Areas/IUCN, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: all Type of work: networking with mountain p.a. managers, scientists,teaching Subject Specialization(s): protected areas, watershed management Irena Hanouskova, Instituteof Landscape Ecology, AS CR, Czech Republic Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Sumava Mts. (Central Europe) Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): landscape ecology based on biologyand remote sensing, historical landscape development based onbiology and remote sensing Hideo Harasawa, NationalInstitute for Environmental Studies, Japan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Kirk Haselton, Institutfuer Geowissenschaften, Germany Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, North America, Africa,Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Himalayan, Asian Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): satellite remote sensing of rainfall,satellite remote sensing of flooding, satellite remote sensingof surface conditions, Earth Sciences, Physics Phil Hazelton, World Bank,USA Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Joel Heinen, Dept. ofEnvironmental Studies, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): ecology, park management Edgar Hernandez, Universidadde los Andes, Venezuela Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): sustainable development, erosion control,watershed management Kip Hodges, MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Tibet, Irish Caledonides, East GreenlandCaledonides, North American Cordillera (US & Canada) Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): geology - I study the geologic evolutionof mountain ranges Miguel Holle, CIP Biodiversityof Andean Crops, Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: administration, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Andean Crops Production Systems Mikuls Huba, The Society for Living in the Slovak Republic, Slovakia Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Carpathians (Tatras, White Carpathians, etc.) Type of work: activism, policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): nature protection, management of national parks, sustainable development of submountain regions Kenneth Hughey, Centrefor Mountain Studies, New Zealand Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: New Zealand, sometimesalso in Asia Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Sustainable resource management, culturaldimensions of mountain land management, natural resources generally Jack Humphrey, Sky IslandAlliance, Center on Aging, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Glenn Hyman, InternationalCenter for Tropical Agriculture, Colombia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): geography, soil erosion, sedimentation Jack Ives, Universityof California, Davis, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Andes, Alps, Rocky Mountains, Arctic Type of work: student, administration, activism, project implementation,research, editing/writing/publishing, teaching Subject Specialization(s): geography, resource use, geomorphology,glaciology, timberline Rodney Jackson, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Karakoram, Altai, Tien Shan, Kunlun Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): wildlife conservation, pastoralish,environmental impact assessment, research Anil Jaggi, Society forEnv., Wildlife Action & Awareness, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Garhwal, Part of Himachal,Kumaon Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): Eco-friendly technologies, Employmentgeneration Shi Jin, GIS Center, PRChina Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Mountains of southwestarea of China Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): remote sensing and GIS Richard Johnson, Institute of Mountain Environments, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Scotland, Alps, Pyrenees, Himalaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research, management training Subject Specialization(s): hydrology, geomorphology, land use change Narpat Jodha, The WorldBank, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas (HK-H) Type of work: policy development, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain agriculture, mountain naturalresource management, mountain sustainable development policies Dinesh Joshi, HimalayanStudy Circle (HSC), India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Micro Watershed Area Development, communityeducation and development, Human Geography of the Mountains Pooran Chand Joshi, H.N.B.Garhwal University, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Central Himalaya (Uttrakhand) Type of work: activism, policy development, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): mountain cultures and developmentcultural ecology: forests, water management, biosphere medicalanthropology: traditional, shaman, healer, herbs Francis Kahembwe, ForestryResearch Institute, Uganda Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: Mt. Elgon, Mt. Rwenzori Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): biodiversity conservation, indigenousknowledge of natural resource management, participatory forestmanagement, wildlife ecology, Pradyumna Karan, University of Kentucky, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Indian, Nepal, Bhutan Himalaya Type of work: college/graduate studies, policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): environment/development issues Bjorn Kaltenborn, EasternNorway Research Institute, Norway Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Scandanavia, Norwegian Arctic, Himalayas (occasionally) Type of work: policy development, research, Subject Specialization(s): Social/human dimensions of naturalresource use, recreation/tourism issues Kenji Katsuragi, ToyamaUniversity, Japan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America Massifs/Mountains: Mt. Tateyama Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): ecol-econ Bijaya Kattel, Colorado State Univesity, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayan Range Type of work: university/research Subject Specialization(s): mountain protected areas, wildlife research in high mountains, tourism impact and habitat degradation Ramesh Khadka, ActionAidNepal, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Region Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain farming systems, policy researchand advocacy, poverty management Rash Khan, Karakoram AgriculturalResearch Institute for North, Pakistan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): agricultural soil and water Sudibya Kanti Khisa, ChittagongHill Tracts Development Board (CHTBD), Bangladesh Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Hindu Kush Himalaya Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain farming system, upland settlement Dwayne Knox, Newton CountyResource Council, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Boston Mountain Range, Ozark Mountains Type of work: administration, activism Subject Specialization(s): Are Knudsen, Chr. Michelsen Institute, Norway Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Karakoram, Kohistan, N-Pakistan Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): anthropology, forestry, common property, local management systems Stanislaw Knutelski, Janielloniam University, Poland Work/Interest region(s):Europe Massifs/Mountains: Carpathians and Pyrenees Mountains Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): biogeography, ecology and systematics of Weevil Coleoptera (Coleoptera: Curulionoidea) of Europe's mountains. Rajendra Kumar Kokcha, Society for Rural Action and Motivation, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Arawali Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): mountain agriculture, education, health Christopher Komornicki,Association "ZDANIEU", Poland Work/Interest region(s): Europe, Massifs/Mountains: Sudetes, massif of Snieznik Type of work: policy development, activism, project implementation, Subject Specialization(s): ecological education, political debate Josef Krammer, Bundesanstalt fr Bergbauernfragen, Austria Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): policy analysis and development, rural development, university or research institution Akhouri Pramod Krishna,G. B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): remote sensing and GIS application in natural resources studies; terrain classification and evaluation studies in the Himalayas; environmental impact studies and watershed management Arun Kumar, UNDP-GEF HillyHydro Project, TERI, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Indian Himalayan Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): small hydro, renewable energy, environment,watershed development, Sehdev Kumar, Massey College,University of Toronto, Canada Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himachal Pradesh, India Type of work: policy development, student, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Impact of Globalization on Human &natural resources in the Himalayas, and questions of sustainability Sood Kumar, State Councilfor Science and Technology, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Remote Sensing, Water Resources, NaturalHazards and Geomorphology, Integrated Natural Resources Evaluation Samuel Kunkle, ColoradoState University, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Rocky Mountains, Appalachia, sometimes LatinAmerica Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): watershed management, watershed planning,water quality Shwe Kyaw, Forest ResearchInstitute, Myanmar Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Bago, Shan Plateau, Myanmar Type of work: administration, research Subject Specialization(s): forest resources inventory, shifting cultivation Mr. Thomas Calvin Laird, Asiaweek,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Central Himalayas Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Spent one year in Lo Monthang,journalism, photography, film making, history (modern and ancient),Sherpa folk songs and myths Andrei Laletin, Friendsof Siberian Forests, Russia Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Sayan, Altai, Baikal Type of work: activism, research, Subject Specialization(s): ecology, botany, forestry, conservation,NTFP, geography Richard Langlais, University of Lapland, Finland Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, NorthAmerica, Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Arctic mountains, Swedish Alps, Himalaya Type of work: research, Subject Specializations: meanings of mountains, indigenous peopleand mountains, Tibetan Buddhism and mountains Elizabeth Larson, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: student Subject Specialization(s): sustainable development Tianchi Li, ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Region Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): mountain mazard mitigation and managementmatershed management, soil erosion and rehabilitation of slopeland Carlos Llerena, Univ.Nac. Agraria La Molina, Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: research, extension, teaching Subject Specialization(s): watershed management, forest hydrology,soil erosion, EIA David Lloyd-Jones, Usenet,Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): economics, business, computer science Vicente Lopes, Universityof Arizona, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: student, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): interactions between geomorphic processes& biotic systems, climate-soil-vegetation interactions, erosional& depositional processes, geomorphic thresholds, feedbackmechanisms, environmental modeling & monitoring Isabel Losada, I.E.S.Escairon Osavinao, Spain Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Macizo Galaico Type of work: activism, project implementation, teaching Subject Specialization(s): geography, environment, community mobilization Rongsen Lu, Chengdu Instituteof Biology, CAS, China Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research, mountain horticulture and economic botany Subject Specialization(s): Germplasm ResourcesConservation, Seabuckthorn (Hippophae L.) Trine Lund-Jensen, UNDP,China Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Tibetan Plateauranges Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): agriculture, poverty alleviation,Tibetan situation Markus Lthi, bergfAhRT buero fuer montane geographie, Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe, North America, Global Massifs/Mountains: Alps Type of work: activism, project implementation, teaching Subject Specialization(s): sustainable tourism, landscape, wilderness Kenneth MacDonald, Universityof Toronto, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Karakoram Type of work: policy development, activism, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): natural hazards, cultural ecology,social geography Karna Maharjan, Save theChildren (UK), Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): sustainable development, communityparticipation, children in mountains Edward (Ted) Manning , Centre for a Sustainable Future, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Many: e.g. Caucasus, Carpathians, Rockies, Coast Ranges, Caribbean Island Ranges Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research, management training Subject Specialization(s): sustainable development, sustainable (eco)tourism, integrated planning, land use, conservation strategies Andrew Manzardo, InstitutionalStructuring, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, interior Philippinesmountains Type of work: policy development, projectimplementation Subject Specialization(s): mountain irrigation, user group formation,local management Jennifer McConnell, Universityof Edinburgh IERM, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Cairngorms massif in Scotland, interest incoordin. res. across Europe Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): plant ecologist interested in Alpinebiodiversity & ecosystem structure & function Bernadette McDonald, TheBanff Centre for Mountain Culture, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: all Type of work: research, festivals Subject Specialization(s): film, literature,publications, exhibitions, scholarships John McEachern, IUCN-TheWorld Conservation Union, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation, Subject Specialization(s): natural resources management, ecotourism Jeffrey McNeely, IUCN,Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Himalayas, Andes Type of work: policy development Subject Specialization(s): biodiversity, mammals Susan Meinheit, Library of Congress, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): Tibetology Paolo Menezes, CEPEL,Brasil Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Tijuca's Massif Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): climatology, geography Asif Merchant, Aga KhanHousing Board for Pakistan, Pakistan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): earthquake, disaster mitigation, training,research & development related to construction industry Irina Merzliakova, Instituteof Geography, Russian Academy of Science, Russia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Pamir, Pamiro-Alay, Tian-Shan,Caucasus Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): sustainable development, resourcesassessment and utilization, GIS modeling, cultural diversity Bruno Messerli, Universityof Berne, Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Africa,Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Andes, East Africa Type of work: research, Subject Specialization(s): climate & environmental change,erosion & hazards, protected areas Branko Micevski, BirdStudy and Protection Society of Macedonia Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Mts. in Macedonia (ara/Pelister/Galicica/Jakupica Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): birds, protection of natural mountainhabitats (for birds), traditional farming (sustainable farming),general mountain protection Tage Michaelsen, IPF Secretariat,UN/DPCSD, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, Subject Specialization(s): international and national policy developmentfor sustainable mountain development David Midmore, CentralQueensland University, Australia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Northern Mindanao, MountKitangalad Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): Stephen Lawrence Mikesell, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya mountains Type of work: activism, research, teaching, popular education and organizing Subject Specialization(s): cultural anthropology, political economy, history environmenntalism, non-formal education Daniel Miller, ICIMOD,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Kunlun, TibetanPlateau, Mongolia Type of work: policy development, projectimplementation, research Subject Specialization(s): rangeland ecology, wildlife conservation,Tibetan pastoralism Stefan Mitrache, RomanianFederation for Mountain Area Development, Romania Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Romanian Carpetiens Type of work: project implementation, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Asphandiar Moddie, CentralHimalayan Environment Association, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): eco-development, people's participation,mountain water & energy patterns Mohamed-Saleem Mohamed Aliyar,International Livestock Research Institute, Ethiopia Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: East African Highlands Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): pasture and environmental agronomist,crop-livestock systems specialist Pradeep Mool, MENRIS-ICIMOD,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global Massifs/Mountains: several parts of Nepal & Tibetan highlands,Italian Alps, Etna volcano, Mountains in Java Island, Cerro deOro %26 Ruis Mountain in Caldas Colombia Type of work: policy development, administration,activism, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): remote sensing, GIS, natural hazards,especially landslide %26 debris flow, inventory, mapping Riccardo Morandini, IstitutoSperimentale per la Selvicoltura, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps (esp. Dolmite region), Apennines Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): research on forestry, ecology &protection of the natural environment Laurence Moss, L. Moss& Associates / ICRI, The Czech Republic Work/Interest region(s): North America,Europe, Massifs/Mountains: Rockies (Canada and USA), Sumava (Czech Rep.),Cordilleras of Luzon, South China, Laos Uplands Type of work: policy development, activism, project implementation,research, development consulting (planning and management), teaching Subject Specialization(s): strategic analysis and management,cultural and income maintenance problems of mountain indigenous peoples,tourism and amenity migration impacts Renzo Motta, Universityof Turin, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Global Massifs/Mountains: European Alps Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): sylviculture, relationships betweenforest and wildlife in the European mountain forests Yorgos Moussouris, WWFGreece, Greece Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Rhodope, Pindos, Mt. Athos (possibly in future) Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Iris Muoz, CIDPER,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: policy development, student, administration, activism Subject Specialization(s): informatics Suneel Muttoo, U.P. MountainousArea Development Commission, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Northern Indian State ofUP known as UTTARAKHAND Type of work: policy development, administration, project implementation,research Subject Specialization(s): enterprise development (small villageindustries, handicrafts, spices, etc.) Olav Myrholt, Norway Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Norwegian Mountains, West & Central Himalayas,Chittagong Hill Tracts, Wasatch-Uinta Mountains (Utah USA) Type of work: policy development, activism, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): tourism management, sustainable developmentstrategies, organizational development, nature interpretation Enrico Negriolli, ProvinciaAutonoma de Trento, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Rohit Nepali, South AsiaPartnership-Nepal, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: administration, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): community development, environment,gender and development, agriculture development, health and sanitation Roger Ngoufo, Global Change- Cameroon, Cameroon Work/Interest region(s): , Massifs/Mountains: Cameroonian mountains and highlands, Africa, Type of work: research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): natural resources management, landuse and land degradation, natural hazards Stanislaw Niemtur, ForestResearch Institute, Poland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): sylviculture, air pollution Erik Nijland, KarnaliLocal Development Programme/SNV-Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): natural resource management, GIS Takuram Bandu Nikam, H.P.T. Arts and R.Y.K. Science College, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Western Ghats, India Type of work: college or graduate studies, research Subject Specialization(s): beekeeping and mountain agriculture development (bee pollination); Eco-friendly biotechnologies and agricultural development in mountain areas Francois Nkurunziza, Universityof Burundi - Gerped, Burundi Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: Western Rift Valley Highlands, Central AfricanHighlands Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): environment & development, population& development, mountain geography Amanda Nobbs, Councilfor National Parks, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: National park mountain areas in England &Wales Type of work: policy development, activism, research Subject Specialization(s): sustainable mountain development, protectionof the fragile mountain ecosystems of our national parks Doug Noonan, GallatinInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Rocky Mountains, Sierra Nevadas, Cascade Mountains Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): communities of the Western U.S., sustainableeconomies, ecologies, communities Dan Obrien, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Alps Type of work: administration Subject Specialization(s): photography Francis Ojany, AfricanMountain Association, Kenya Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): geomorphology, resource analysis, impactassessments Monica Opole, Centre forIndigenous Knowledge Systems and ByProducts, Kenya Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: Africa Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): biodiversity, gender and development Neal Ostler, Salt Lake Community College, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Wasatch Range of the Rocky Mountains Type of work: I reside in the mountains, about 6 1/2 miles northeast of Park City, Utah Subject Specialization(s): As an environmental health and safety professional I direct the affairs of the Environmental Training Center at Salt Lake Community College and have instructed credit courses in the Environmental Technology Associated Degree Program at SLCC. Allen Palmer, BrighamYoung University, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, North America, Africa, Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Tej Partap, ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Region Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain agriculture Francois Parvex, CH-REGIO,Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Switzerland (Alps, Jura Arch), Eastern &Western Europe Type of work: project implementation, research, networking - exchangeof information and know-how, teaching Subject Specialization(s): development programs, innovation, know-howtransfer, intercommunality, documentation Jacopo Pasotti, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Carpathians Type of work: college or graduate studies, research Subject Specialization(s): geomorphology, geoenvironmental hazards forecasting and monitorization, GIS (and remote sensing) applications in geomorphology, global change, periglacial environment Dipak R. Paudyal, Department of Natural Resources, Australia Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Snowy Mountains and Australian Alps (NSW and Victoria, Australia) Type of work: project, research, training Subject Specialization(s): remote sensing, GIS, natural resources management Mariana Pavalan, NationalAgency of Mountain Area, Romania Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Romanian Carpathians Type of work: policy development, activism Subject Specialization(s): mountain environment, environmentaleducation & culture, international cooperation on mountainissues, sustainable development Nancy Pearlman, EducationalCommunications, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Sierra Type of work: activism, media - radio & TV Subject Specialization(s): biodiversity, wildernesspreservation Gail Pennington, CIAT: International Center for Tropical Agriculture, Colombia Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andean Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): farmer participatory research Roopali Phadke, CornellUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayan Type of work: student Subject Specialization(s): international development, Asian studies,energy issues, multilateral banks, hydro-electric projects Adrian Phillips, IrishUplands Forum, Ireland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Irish, Kamchatka (Russian) Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): geology, integrated rural development,informatics related to sustainable development David Pitt, Alp Action,Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Carpathians, Caucasus, Balkans Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): anthropology, sustainable development Kishor Kumar Pokharel, PrithwiNarayan Campus, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Annapura Mountain Range Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): fish and fisheries (Ichthyology), biodiversity Ana Ponce, CIP/CONDESAN,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: policy development, administration, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Telecommunications for sustainabledevelopment, database design & development, GIS applications Carlos F. Ponce, Conservation International, Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): Andinos Duncan Poore, IIED, UnitedKingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development Subject Specialization(s): botany, ecology, sustainable use, erosioncontrol Kishor Kumar Pokharel, PrithwiNarayan Campus, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Annapura Mountain Range Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): fish and fisheries (Ichthyology), biodiversity Christine Poulson, TheMountain Forum, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Appalachians Type of work: activism, tourism Subject Specialization(s): conflict transformation, mountain biking,hiking, eco-tourism Philip Powers, NOLS, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America, Global Massifs/Mountains: Cascades, Andes, Wind Rivers, Alaska Range, Chugatch, Karakoram Type of work: administration, project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): education - recreation ecology Mohan Prabhu, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, interest in the developing countries of the Caribbean and South and Southeast Pacific Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research and teaching Subject Specialization(s): capacity building through law and compliance mechanisms to achieve sustainable mountain development Ragbbir Prasher, Universityof Horticulture & Forestry, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: North-Western Himalayan Region Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): natural resource economics(policy issues) D. Jane Pratt, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Appalachia, Himal,Central Asia Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): ecology, community development, culturalheritage, organizational management, institutional development Marko Prem, Ministry ofthe Environment and Physical Planning, Slovenia Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Europe Type of work: policy development, administration Subject Specialization(s): planning landscape (all aspects: typologie,patterns, planning, etc.), environmental policy Lynelle Preston, The MountainInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Himal, Appalachians, Andes Type of work: policy development, student, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): community-based conservation, ecotourism,social impact analysis, conflict management, local policy issues Martin Price, EnvironmentalChange Unit, United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research, Subject Specialization(s): tourism, forest, policy Abul Quddus, Universityof Chittagong, Bangladesh Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Chittagong Hill Tracts Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): social forestry, population, environment Gareth Quinn , USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Himalaya Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): Roberto Quiroz, CIP, Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: research, Subject Specialization(s): land and water management Miguel Rafa, CatalonianAlpine Club, Spain Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Pyrenees, Catalonian Coastal Ranges Type of work: nature conservation Subject Specialization(s): conservation ecology,protected areas, environmental education, alpinism, Mohammad Rafiq, IUCN-TheWorld Conservation Union, Pakistan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Hindu Kush, Karakoram Type of work: policy development, projectimplementation Subject Specialization(s): environmental planning and policiessocial forestry, capacity development-institution building Joslyne Ramamonjisoa,Department of Geography, Madagascar Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: Ankaratra Mountains (Vakinankaratra region) Type of work: policy development, student, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): mountain ecosystems, tropical cities,especially in highlands, ecotourism, regional atlas James Ramsay, J. RamsayAssociates, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Coastal Range, B.C., Central Himalaya, rangesin Eastern Africa Type of work: policy development, project implementation, consultancy Subject Specialization(s): watershed management,environmental impact assessment, protected area planning &management Greta Rana, ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Region, Type of work: research, processing of research Subject Specialization(s): languages and sociology Radu Rey, National Agencyof Mountain Area, Romania Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Romanian Carpathians Type of work: policy development, administration, activism, projectimplementation Subject Specialization(s): Robert Rhoades, Departmentof Anthropology, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, NorthAmerica, Africa, Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Andes, Alps Type of work: policy development, student, administration, activism,project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): comparative mountain studies (sociocultural),mountain agriculture, migration Kamal Rijal, ICIMOD, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: HKH Region Type of work: policy development, research Subject Specialization(s): energy development Mr. Andrew Roberts, FjallFoundation, Sweden Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Arctic Scandinavia Type of work: policy development, project implementation,research Subject Specialization(s): sustainability analysis, rural development,water resources Stephen Roberts, NatalParks Board, South Africa Work/Interest region(s): Africa Massifs/Mountains: Natal Drakensberg Type of work: policy development, administration, project implementation,research, Nature Conservat. Authority for Natal Drakensburg Subject Specialization(s): mountain management,fire, community conservation, environmental education Delfi Roca Roche, APAPMA, Andorra Work/Interest region(s): Europe, Global Massifs/Mountains: Pyrenees Type of work: activism, project implementation, sensibilization of population Subject Specialization(s): environment, sustainable development James Ross, Queen's University,Canada Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Middle mountains of Nepal,North America, Type of work: student, research Subject Specialization(s): erosion and sedimentation in monsoondominated mountainous environments and the impact on reservoirsiltation Jose Rueda, CONDESAN-CIP,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: policy development, administration, project implementation,research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): water and land management, agroecology,farming systems Thomas Schaaf, UNESCO,France Work/Interest region(s): Global Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, administration, project implementation,research Subject Specialization(s): research & conservation of mountainecosystems, research & conservation of arid & semi-aridlands John Schelhas, CornellUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Cordillera Volcnica Central &Talamanca/CostaRica Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): cultural ecology, forest conservation Jack Rucker ,USA Work/Interest region(s): Himalayas Massifs/Mountains: Everest Type of work: project implementation, teaching: training local residents to maintain solar and hydro electric systems Subject Specialization(s): small solar & hydro power installations in remote Nepali mountain village John William Schelhas, Cornell University, USA Conservation International, Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Cordillera Volvanica Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): cultural ecology and forest conservation Heinrich Schmutzenhofer,International Union of Forest Research Organizations, Austria Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: administration, communication to IUFRO structure Subject Specialization(s): Hans Schreier, Institutefor Resource and Environment, Canada Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas (Nepal), Andes (Chile, Ecuador),Rockies and Cordilleras (Canada) Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Watershed management, soil processes,land-water interactions, GIS, Water and soil chemistry Jim Schweithelm, WWF IndonesiaProgramme, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Indonesia mountains, primarilyin Irian Jaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Protected area managementand policy land use planning, natural resources management, forests Petra Schweizer-Ries,Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems, Germany Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Europe Type of work: project implementation, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): environmental awareness, renewableenergy, resource use systems Frederick Sellier, Universityof Heidelberg, Germany Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Trekking areas of Himalaya(Langtang) Type of work: college or graduate studies Subject Specialization(s): mountain tourism developmentin the Himalaya: its impact, socio-economic, environmental strategies Ranil Senanayake, EnvironmentLiaison Center International, Kenya Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, North America, Africa, LatinAmerica, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Andes, Mt. Kenya, CentralMts. & Knuckles Massif Sri Lanka Type of work: activism, research, NGO coordination Subject Specialization(s): systems ecologist El Hadji Sene, FAO, Italy Work/Interest region(s): Global Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, institutional cooperation Subject Specialization(s): forestry, agroforestry,soil, watershed management, conservation Michael Sergeev, NovosibirskState University, Russia Work/Interest region(s): Asia, Europe, North America,Global Massifs/Mountains: Asia, Altai, Sayany, Tien Shan, Pamiro-Allay,Pamirs, Caucasus, Carpathians, Rocky Mountains Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): biogeography, ecology,entomology Pravakar Shah, ICIMOD,Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): soil/land use mapping, surveying andcomputation, soil fertility assessment, land use planning, landsuitability and capability analysis Goverdhan Shamet, Departmentof Silviculture & Agroforestry, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: West Himalayan Range Type of work: activism, project implementation, research, mainlywith research and teaching Subject Specialization(s): plantation forestry,silviculture (clonal propagation), agroforestry Prabin Shrestha, MiamiUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): environmental planning,GIS Bharat Kumar Shrestha, Agricultural Projects Services Centre (APROSC), Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya mountains Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): ecology and environment, community institution development, sustainable agriculture Khalid Siddiqui, PakistanForest Institute, Pakistan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): mountain eco-system, forest eco-system,research, training and development Dominik Siegrist, Alpen,Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Himalaya Type of work: project implementation, research, Subject Specialization(s): tourism, ecology R. V. Singh, IDFRE, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Western Himalayas in India Type of work: policy development Subject Specialization(s): agroforestry and forestmanagement Scott Slocombe, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: St. Elios, Rockies, Australian Alps Type of work: policy development, research and teaching Subject Specialization(s): sustainability, ecosystem management, environmental planning, information systems and simulation, systems approaches Ailsa Lorraine Smith, LincolnUniversity, New Zealand Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Mountain Taranaki Type of work: college or graduate student, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): indigenous history, cultural studies Gary Smith, Lincoln University,New Zealand Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation, Subject Specialization(s): Soil, land & water mgt. & use,agrl. & hort.. crop production, livestock production, integrate.rural dev., forestry & agroforestry, tourism planning, dev,environment. and social impact assess. David Spencer, Swiss FederalInstitute of Technology - Zrich, Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): geology of Himalayas Ellen Stein, The Ford Foundation, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America, Global Massifs/Mountains: The San Juan Mountains in S.W. Colorado/Northern New Mexico Type of work: activism, policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): community-based forestry efforts that sustain forest ecosystems, rural community health Erwin Stucki, ETHZ EidgenssischeTechnische Hochschule, Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alpine massif, Europe Type of work: research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): regional science, agricultural economyrelated to general economy, society and ecology John Studley, Rural Development Forestry Specialist, UK Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya, Hengduan Mountains, Tibetan Plateau Type of work: college or graduate studies, policy development,project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Community forestry, sustainabledevelopment, intervention holistic rural, development, knowledge,systems, indigenous knowledge, traditional NR management systems Felix Sury, Swiss Agencyfor Development and Cooperation (SDC), Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Nepal/Himalayas Type of work: policy development, administration, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Jean Tafforeau, Belgium Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps, Himalaya (Nepal) Type of work: hobby Subject Specialization(s): Kirk Talbott, World ResourcesInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): upland development, environment policies Jan Teitel, Instituteof Landscape Ecology, The Czech Republic Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Sumava Mts. Type of work: policy development, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): landscape ecology, economy, modeling Des Thompson, JNCC/SNH,United Kingdom Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Cairngorm, British Mountains Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Alpine habitats, birds, conservationevaluation Jim Thorsell, NaturalHeritage Programme, Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: all Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): conservation Pierre-Andre Tremblay,Universite du Quebec at Chicoutimi, Canada Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Central Himalalya (India, Nepal) Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): social movements, localdevelopment Constantinos Tsipiras,Mountain Wilderness (Green Section), Greece Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Mt. Olympus, Mt. Pindus Type of work: activism Subject Specialization(s): eco-development Dr. Raj Pal Singh Tyagi, HimachalPradesh Agricultural University, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Western Himalayas Type of work: administration, policy development Subject Specialization(s): agriculture and livestock Jim Underwood, The Mountain Insititute, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Appalachian, some other Type of work: administration, project implementation, teaching Subject Specialization(s): education/environment A. Upadhyay, HimalayanVoice, Nepal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: policy development, activism, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): Plt. genetic resources conservationand mgt. Martin van Beek, AarhusUniversity, Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya (Ladakh, Kashmir,Tibet, Nepal) Type of work: policy development, activism, research, teaching, Subject Specialization(s): cultural diversity, sustainable development,regional autonomy, ethnic conflict Godert Van Lynden, ISRIC,the Netherlands Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): soil and terrain related issues, soildegradation and conservation Vladivoj Vancura, Alternative Projects Foundation, the Slovak Republic Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Tatra Mountain, Carpathian Mountains Type of work: policy development, project implementation, teaching Subject Specialization(s): forestry, resource management, protected areas, interpreting Ivan Vashakmadze, SustainableTourism Center (STC), Georgia Work/Interest region(s):, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Caucasus Mountains Type of work: administration, project implementation, Subject Specialization(s): sustainable tourism development, NGOactivities, NGO - Governmental business network Goncalo Velez, Rotas doVento, Portugal Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Alps, Andes,Kilimanjaro, Turkey (Taurus) Type of work: I am a climber and own a trekkingagency Subject Specialization(s): environment, localculture, travel, climbing, photography Ronnie Vernooy, InternationalDevelopment Research Centre, Canada Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: administration, research Subject Specialization(s): sociology of rural development, participatoryresearch Jan Voordouw, The PanosInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Joachim Voss, InternationalDevelopment Centre (IDRC) Work/Interest region(s): Asia Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: research Subject Specialization(s): sustainable agriculture, food security,indigenous minorities, biodiversity Scott Walker, Southwest Texas State University, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America, Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Sierra Madre Oriental Type of work: college or graduate studies, project implementation, research, teaching, and I assist local residents in environmental interpretation development Subject Specialization(s): ecotourism, environmental education, environmental interpretation, impact assessment Benjamin Wang, Universityof Vermont, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific, Global, North America Massifs/Mountains: Appalachian only at present Type of work: policy development, student, research Subject Specialization(s): mountain recreation, ecotourism planning,protected area planning & management, project implementation Sangay Wangchuk, ForestryServices Division, Bhutan Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Integrating conservation and developmentin protected areas Tom Warren, Mountain Research Station - Finse, Norway Work/Interest region(s): Europe, North America Massifs/Mountains: Norway, Scandinavia Type of work: administration, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): multiple use, range ecology, wildlife management, plant/animal interaction Suzanne Warsinsky, TheMountain Institute, USA Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps Type of work: student, research Subject Specialization(s): concentric policy levels - national,regional international, sharing economic development, (niche)knowledge between local inhabitants & policy-makers internationally Daniel Weiner, West VirginiaUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica, Africa Massifs/Mountains: Appalachia, Drakensburg (South Africa) Type of work: policy development, research Subject Specialization(s): agriculture, GIS Ron Waco Weissinger, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: any Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): surveying Jennifer Wellman, ColoradoState University, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Rocky Mountains Type of work: policy development, student,research, graduate studies and research & policy development Subject Specialization(s): watershed management,community participation in watershed management, women in mountainregions Susan White, Instituto Pirenaico de Ecologa, Spain Work/Interest region(s): Latin America, Europe Massifs/Mountains: Pyrenees, Andes Type of work: policy development, project implementation, research,teaching Subject Specialization(s): Robert Whitby, Arthur Andersen, USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia, Europe, North America, Global Massifs/Mountains: Wasatch (Rocky Mountains - North America, Himalayans - Nepal, Alps - Switzerland, France Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): ecological preservation, open access of wilderness mountains for adventure climbers and adventure expeditions. Diana Whitney, The TaosInstitute, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Sangre de Christo, Rocky Mountains Type of work: consultation and facilitation Subject Specialization(s): design and facilitationof large meetings, social and organizational transformation, appreciativeinquiry, spirituality at work, Elin Whitney-Smith, USA Work/Interest region(s): Global Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: Subject Specialization(s): quaternary studies Anne Whyte, Mestor Associates, Canada Work/Interest region(s): NorthAmerica Massifs/Mountains: Himalayas, Andes, East African Highlands Type of work: policy development, research Subject Specialization(s): natural resources management, environmentalpolicy, development policy Ellen Wohl, Colorado StateUniversity, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Nepal Himalayas, USA Rocky Mountains Type of work: research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): geomorphology - river & hillslopeforms & processes Laura Wray, Amoco ProductionCompany, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Ouachita Mountains, Southeastern Oklahoma, Type of work: project implementation, research, natural gas development Subject Specialization(s): petroleum geology,sedimentation (clastic & carbonate), geology of thrusted mountains,stratigraphy Joerg Wyder, Swiss Groupfor Mountain Regions (SAB), Switzerland Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: Alps - Jura Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): Mr. Jianchu Xu, Centerfor Biodiversity and Indigenous Knowledge, China Work/Interest region(s): Massifs/Mountains: Type of work: project implementation Subject Specialization(s): biodiversity, indigenous knowledge,environmental natural resources management Ramanand Yadav, Dr. B.R.Ambedkar Environmental and Water Management, India Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Central Himalaya Type of work: project implementation, research Subject Specialization(s): Hill Area Development Engg, hydrology Robert Yoder, Associatesin Rural Development, Inc., USA Work/Interest region(s): Asia/Pacific Massifs/Mountains: Himalaya Type of work: policy development, project implementation Subject Specialization(s): common property resourcemanagement, locally governed irrigation Charles Yuill, NaturalResource Analysis Center, USA Work/Interest region(s): North America Massifs/Mountains: Appalachians - USA Type of work: student, research, teaching Subject Specialization(s): remote sensing, spatial modeling -physical Hubert Zandstra, CIP,Peru Work/Interest region(s): Latin America Massifs/Mountains: Andes Type of work: policy development, activism, project implementation,research Subject Specialization(s): agronomy, land system analysis andutilization, natural resources management, biodiversity Pier Zingari, FdrationEuropenne des Communes Forestires, France Work/Interest region(s): Europe Massifs/Mountains: All European Type of work: policy development Subject Specialization(s): forest, forest resources, grassland& natural areas, forest resource economies, policy WT01-B09-203IA008-000077-B038-143http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/intros/intrfull.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071827 text/html 127541HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:18:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 127368Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:22 GMT The Mountain Archive's Full Introductions Page The Mountain Archive's Full Introductions Page Name:Massimo Antoninetti Web Home Page: http://www.tel-irrs.mi.cnr.it/ Date: Fri, 8 Nov 1996 06:42:26 -0800 (PST) From: Massimo Antoninetti I'm a 42 years old geologist, research scientist at the Remote Sensing Dept. of the Institute of Research on Seismic Risk, located in Milan, Northern Italy. The Institute forms part of the National Research Centre (CNR) of Italy in the frame of the Ministry of University and Scientific Research.The Department has been created in beginning of '70 to study and apply the remote sensing techniques on the environment. My research activities in high mountain are related to the application of enhanced and classified satellite data for geo-structural studies, snow and ice investigations including the glacial and periglacial phenomena, such as the permafrost. I use the fuzzy set theory in a Decision Support System knowledge-based to classify the images, I'm also working on the settle-up of the GIS of EV-K2-CNR Project. In the Mountain Forum I would like to represent this project sponsored by CNR and located in the Himalayas, I'm working on a EV-K2-CNR Web page at the following address: http://www.tel-irrs.mi.cnr.it/ This is the home page of my Dept., here you can follow the Ev-K2 project address. Let me, finally, briefly describe the Project. The EV-K2-CNR Project The EV-K2-CNR Project born in 1987 as an expedition aimed to the measurement of the height of Mount Everest and K2, after the sensational announcement in the USA press that K2 was supposed to be higher than Everest. Prof. Ardito Desio, the geologist who led the first ascent to K2 in 1954, was the project promoter.These initial operations were the starting point for further checks and researches in the geodetic, geophysical and geological fields in the Himalayas and Karakorum ranges.In 1989, two Italian industrial groups offered the project with a "Pyramid" of glass and aluminium to host the scientific laboratories with the special and delicate equipment necessary to the researches. Because of a cooperation agreement signed between the Italian National Research Centre (CNR) and the Royal Nepal Academy of Science and Technology (RONAST), the Pyramid has been installed at 5,050 m of altitude in the Sagarmatha (Everest) National Park above the mountain pasture of Lobuche, near the Base Camp, starting point to climb Everest.The "Laboratory of studies and research at high altitude" is a three-storied glass and aluminium pyramid, measuring 13 m at the base and 9 m in height.Due to laboratory's unique position, the power generating system was conceived to be highly reliable, easy to install, simple to conceive, and environmental friendly: micro-hydraulic unit, photovoltaic panels, and wind generator. During the last years of activity, the Pyramid hosted more than 300 researchers coming from different countries who produced hundreds papers, articles and specialised publications.More, climbers and backpackers had the possibilities to used the medical facilities of the laboratory to cure the mountain sickness, it is also the only centre supplied with satellite telephone in this area.The Pyramid can offer an unique possibilities for researches in different fields: Medical, Environmental, Earth Science and Technological studies.The same researchers are also involved in similar research activities in the European Alps, in Antarctica and North Pole.The Project signed international agreement with: RONAST, Nepal; Himalayan Research for Science and Technology NGO, Nepal; Centre for Integrated Mountain Research, Pakistan; Tibetan Academy of Social Science, Tibet. Reconfirming, if necessary, my complete availability to provide any other information regarding the project and thanking you for the kind attention, I remain. Massimo Antoninetti Name: Ricardo Ayala Date: July 31, 1996 From: bolfor@bolfor.rds.org.bo Dear readers: Hi! I am Ricardo Ayala and I am a Civil Engineer with specialty inhydraulics; I am pleased to participate with all of you in thislist. I have fulfilled the post of Director of Water Basins, from theMinistry of Sustainable Development and Environment in Bolivia,since october 1995 until now. 35% of Bolivia's territory is mountain zone (1,100,000 km2) and 65%of the population (7,000,000 inhab. approx.) lives on this part. Asyou well understand, the majority of the people live in themountain zone, where one can find the city of La Paz and El Alto(1,800,000 inhab.). This is why I am so interested in beingacquainted with experiences in the management of natural resourceson mountain zones. Since 1992, in Bolivia we have stared to work with pilotexperiences in water management on mountain zones, which are foundnow on an inplementation and evaluation phase. Once I have thefinal results from these experiences, I will be delighted toshare them with you all. I will be most grateful if anyone can provide me references fromexperiences on water management on similar mountain zones. Thanks! Ricardo Ayala ------------------------------------------ BOLFOR / MDSMA J. J. Perez # 275 Tel/Fax: (591-2) 319712 E-mail: bolfor@bolfor.rds.org.bo La Paz - Bolivia Name: Nigel Brett Date: November 7, 1996 From: n.brett@ifad.org I am interested in obtaining information on the geographical distribution of poverty in marginal areas in Asia with specific relation to mountain and upland areas. I am particularly interested in finding out if there are anypapers or reports which hint that poverty is more acute in upland areas than elsewhere in the region and if there is a growing proportion of poor people in upland areas in Asia. Many thanks in advance for your help with this query. Best regards Nigel Brettn.brett@ifad.org Name: Lee Butler Web Home Page: www.webcast1.com/ekosea Date: Fri, 9 Aug 1996 07:39:13 -0400 From: lbutler@emi.net Dear Participants in the Mountain Forum Please allow me to briefly introduce myself, my name is Lee Porter Butlerand I am a practicing architect with thirty three (33) years of experiencedesigning and building sustainable Ekosea homes, all over the world.Ekose'a is an ancient Greek word defining "the essence of being", family,food and shelter. The Ekosea homes described in my book reflect thatphilosophy. I would define "sustainable mountain development" and mountain conservationas building designs which do not require resources or produce pollution.These are the designs we should all be seeking to develop. Once they arebeing manufactured by the same techniques we use to create automobiles,airplanes and ships, they will be affordable, flexible and permanent. The new global utility will utilize "technology" or knowledge to take theplace of resources. I believe a major source of pollution as well as stress, work and theconversion of fossil resources arises from trying to stay warm in coldmountainousclimates. What could be more relevant that a simple concept for eliminatingheating energy requirements in areas where there is nothing left to burn.Is this not the very definition of sustainability, where we live. If thesedesigns also allowed for the production of the family's food supply, wouldit not further raise the standard of living of all people. The Ekosea home integrates solar, gravity and geothermal energy in a uniquepatented design, to bring the interior state of the home into thermal andenvironmental equilibrium. The design is especially easy to adapt to mountain regions. Please contact me for more information.With best wishes for the success of the forum,I am sincerely yours, Lee Porter Butler email, lbutler@emi.net, or see our www site, www.webcast1.com/Ekosea If you can not access the web, send for a free color brochure. to Lee Porter Butler, 620 Biscayne Drive, West Palm Beach, Florida, 33401. Name: Steve Caicco Date: Mon, 09 Dec 96 09:34:00 MST From: Steve Caicco, Steven_Caicco@mail.fws.gov Hi everyone, My name is Steve Caicco. I'm a botanist/plant ecologist interested in mountain biodiversity and conservation. I did my graduate research on the classification and ordination of high elevation plant communities in the Rocky Mountains of Idaho (USA). That was over a dozen years ago. Since then I've worked in many fields mostly related to conservation. Most recently I've been studying riparian ecosystems. My present job is with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in Portland, Oregon, where I work in the endangered species arena. Although I currently have no active research in mountainous areas, I retain my interest in mountain environments worldwide. I am particularly interested in the high mountains of tropical Africa and have visited Mt. Kenya twice over the past several years. Thank you for taking the time to read this. I look forward to discussing our common interests in the mountain forum. Sincerely, Steve Caicco Steven_Caicco@mail.fws.gov Name: Olivier Chave Date: July 18, 1996 From: hanoi!ochave@netnam.org.vn@postbox.anu.edu.au My name is Olivier Chave. I am presently working in Hanoi, Vietnam, as Deputy ResidentCoordinator, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). My previous assignement with SDC was in the field of MultilateralCooperation. In this capacity I took part in the entire Rio(UNCED) process and in its follow-up. It offered me the greatopportunity to cooperate closely with the fantastic constituencyadvocating the "Mountain Agenda" (Agenda 21, chapter 13). My present activities are essentially to develop an extensive SDCprogram in Vietnam - which is a new "focus country" for Swiss ODA.I am especially in charge of the "green sector", with two major(but not exclusive) components: sustainable land resourcesmanagement andenvironment monitoring. Since SDC decided not to work in the two large delta zones (RedRiver and Mekong) we are active in the hilly/mountainous regionsof Vietnam - which represent around 75% of the national territory.Our entry pointwas "social forestry" but, given the forestry situation in thecountry, we are rapidly reorienting toward a much morecomprehensive and integrated conception of land resources. We alsodecided recently to focus on the general question of "training forextension", at all levels, with a strong emphasis on participatoryapproaches. We are promoting national and regional networking and partnership.In this context we try e.g. to valorize the activities of regionalCenters such as IBSRAM (International Board for Soil Research andManagement)and its program "Asialand-Slopingland" - a new partner of ICIMODand CIP within CGIAR's Mountain Initiative - or RECOFTC (RegionalCommunity Forestry Trainig Center) or Asian Institute ofTechnology's SERD (School of Environment, Resources and Development). Name:Broughton Coburn Date: July 17, 1996 From: bcoburn@wyoming.com Hello, I have lived and worked in Nepal and Tibet for 17 of the past 23years, andmaintain a general interest in the Himalayas. I'm especiallyinterested inprotected area designation and management, environmental trustfunds, ruralenergy generation and disribution (esp. micro-hydro), and issues ofsustainable development and "conservation and development." Also, through non-fiction and historical fiction writing (books andarticles), I am attempting to convey my understanding of the people,cultures, religions, environment, and issues of the Himalayas to abroadwestern (uninitiated) audience. I look forward to further discussion. Regards, Broughton Coburn bcoburn@wyoming.com P.O. Box 1022 Wilson, WY 83014 USA Phone and Fax 307-733-4124 Name: Mike Cohen Date: July 20, 1996 From: steenbok@iafrica.com First let me express my gratitude to all who are participating in thelist. I have found the contributions to be of great interest andvalue. As introduction - I am Mike Cohen from the new Eastern Cape Province,South Africa. The new province was formed after the first democraticelections of 1994. Until six weeks ago, I occupied the post ofDirectorof Nature conservation in the new province. I have since resigned thisposition and opened a consulting business attached to aCommunity Based Organization, Community Environment Network,which was established during the struggle against apartheid. The ideaof the consultancy is to generate funds for the CBO and to providetraining for young scientists and environmentalists from the formally disadvantaged community. We are becoming involved in a seriesof community based projects ranging from urban agriculture throughenvironmental impact assessments to assisting the newprovincial government with certain restructuring problems. My interest in mountains is as follows. many of the mountainous areasof the Eastern Cape are heavily infested with alien plants, mainlythe alien acacias from Australia that were introduced to South Africaover the years. These aliens have had a tremendous negative impacton the water production from the catchments. The hard engineeringoption in rectifying the problem is to build more dams. The softoptionis to involve communities in the clearing of the aliens. A projecthas commenced here which has established several hundred jobsfor people clearing alien vegetation and at the same time is leadingto a better management of the catchment area. This is especiallyimportant in that we are suffering for a 70 percent unemployment inparts of the province. A further problem that we are faced with is the establishmentof a comprehensive system of protected areas and the funding ofsuch a system. Here I am interested in learning more about TrustFunds and Debt for Nature Swaps as well as other mechanismsfor the funding of protected areas. I would also like to learn moreof how protected areas are managed in other parts of the world.For example here in South Africa, each of the Provincialconservation agencies are establishing their own nature conservationorganization. These will take the form of full governmentdepartments or statutory boards. There is also a statutorynational parks board which is responsible for the national parkssystem. There are therefor 10 organizations looking after the protected areaestate in South Africa and competing for a slice of the same cake.Linked to these 10 nature conservation organizations which areeither statutory boards or full government departments are a furtherenvironmental protection components which look at thebroader environmental issues of waste management, pollution control,development planning etc. I should be glad if participants in the list could let me havereferencematerial on the funding of protected areas, mountain or other, andexamples of the administrative structures that have beenestablished to manage the protected area system. Please bear in mind that we arefairly isolated in the Eastern Cape and that it is not always easy to obtainobscure reference material. Many thanks Mike Cohen Community Environment Network Integrated Environmental Management Unit 36 River Road Walmer Port Elizabeth 6070 Name: Ana Cordova Date: Sat, 9 Nov 1996 10:24:32 -0500 (EST) From: ac58@cornell.edu Hi, My name is Ana Cordova. I am an MS/PhD student in the Natural ResourcePolicy and Management program at Cornell University. I am currently studyingthe viability of stakeholder involvement in natural resource decision-makingin the Copper Canyon region of Chihuahua, Mexico (Sierra Madre OccidentalMountain Range). Citizen/public involvement is particularly relevant at thismoment, where various government agencies are independently proposingdifferent regional plans for this area (Tourism Master Plan, SustainableForestry Plan, a possible Protected Area) and could perhaps benefit frominput from a wide range of stakeholders. This is the first time I am participating in an electronic discussion group. Ana. Name: Agostino Da Polenza Date: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 14:09:21 +0100 (MET) From: Mountain Equipe mountain@spm.it Dear Subscriber and Members of Mountain Forum, I have just subscribed and become a member of your "group", I would like to present myself to all of you. My name is Agostino Da Polenza and my life and my work have always been and still are related to mountains. I started my relation with mountain as a visitor, then as an alpinist (Ireached the peak of K2 in 1983 from the chinese face) and last years as,coordinator, leader or organisator of many mountaineering and scientificexpeditions in the Himalaya and Karakorum range. I am now managing Ev-K2-CNR Project, a multidisciplinary project related tohigh altitude which base of research is the Pyramid Laboratory-Observatoryinstalled at Lobuche, at an altitude of 5050m nearby the base camp of Mt.Everest. I hope that this is enough for the moment and that my presence will beuseful and fruitful for you all and for myself. Thanks and best regards. Agostino Da Polenza Name: Kenneth P. Ewing Date: July 16, 1996 From: kewing@sysnet.net Greetings: I am a lawyer working with IUCN-The World Conservation Union during a one-year leave of absence from the law firm of Steptoe & Johnson in Washington, D.C. While at Steptoe, I specialized in internationaltrade law and antitrust law. More recently, I have completed a paperfor IUCN surveying issues at the intersection of international trade law and environmental protection. Currently, I am beginning a project on international legal regimes regarding conservation and sustainable development of mountains. I hope to shed some light on both the implications of international environmental regimes for sustainable development of mountains and the opportunities these disparateregimes offer to those working in and for mountains. Kenneth P. Ewing Law Fellow IUCN-US Suite 502 Tel: ++1 (202) 797-6587 1400 16th St., NW Fax: ++1 (202) 797-5461 Washington, DC 20036 email: kewing@sysnet.net Name:Patricio Gallo Date: Wed, 04 Sep 1996 09:58:21 -0500 (CDT) From: fpg5254@utarlg.uta.edu Hello everyone I am from Ecuador, I am working on my master degree in Environmental Planning, since I was born and I grew up in my beautiful Andes my concern for social, economic and environmental issues for those lands is opened to any project. I have been involved with the mountian situation for long time by being part of a mountaineering club, and some grassroot actions and enviro-education with the Boys Scouts. Now I am concentrating my estudies in Latin America. Environmentally, Patricio Gallo Environmental Planning University of Texas at Arlington fpg5254@utarlg.uta.edu Name: Gary Garriott Web Home Page: http://www.vita.org Date: July 23, 1996 From: garyg@vita.org I'm Gary Garriott and have been involved in international developmentwork in one way or another for the past 27 years, including afour-yearPeace Corps stint in Ecuador where just being in and around the Andeswas an incredible yet in some ways mystical experience. I've alsospenta week trekking in Nepal and someday hope to figure out a way toget toBhutan! My main interest is seeing how to provide useful lowcostcommunicationstechnologies to help preserve/protect mountain environments. MyemployerVITA (Volunteers in Technical Assistance) has been involved with lowearth orbiting satellites for the past 13-14 years which has thecapability of supplying Internet email connection for toughenvironmentslike mountain valleys. My I-don't-want-to-grow-up dream is to take one of these smallboxes thatcan do email from a battery pack and climb Mt. Kilimanjaro! Maybe itcould be part of a general fundraisingeffort/consciousness-raising eventabout the fragility and importance of mountain environments ingeneral.Ideas along these lines are welcome. Good luck on the conference(s). Best, Gary ================================================================ | Gary Garriott, Director, Informatics | Volunteers in Technical Assistance | 1600 Wilson Blvd., Suite 500 | Arlington, VA 22209 | Tel. 703/276-1800 Fax 703/243-1865 | Email: garyg@vita.org | Web: http://www.vita.org | Gopher: gopher://gopher.vita.org ================================================================ Name: Mark Haberle Date: Wed, 5 Feb 1997 11:52:22 -0800 (PST) From:Mark Haberle - VCGI GIS Data Technician markh@vcgi.uvm.edu Greetings Mountain Forum Members! My name is Mark Haberle and I am a resident of the United States livingin the Green mountain State of Vermont. I am currently employed withthe Vermont Center for Geographic Information as GIS Data Technician. You may visit the site at http://geo-vt.uvm.edu and further visit mystaff page under the "more about VCGI and its staff" link. I have been interested in the mountains of Northern New England since Iwas a child. Particular enjoyment stemmed from the open Alpine summitsof the White, Green, and Adirondack mountains. I also have fondmemories of the sweet smell of decaying hardwood leaves from Connecticutwhere I grew up. In December of 1996 I graduated from the University of Vermont with adegree in Environmental Studies from the School of Natural Resources. Iearned the degree from the multi-disciplinary Environmental Program witha focus in Ecological Restoration and Monitoring. To complete mystudies I designed and implemented a monitoring protocol for the summitridgeline of Mount Mansfield in Vermont. This protocol, PhotographicInventory Monitoring System, is designed to provide a quantifiable dataset on trends in the alpine communities directly adjacent to the highlytraveled trail treadway. Current work in the GIS field has me curious about the applicability ofGIS technology to the small scale for impact trend analysis andmonitoring. I would love to begin a dialogue specific to trail treadwaytrend analysis and monitoring techniques including the use ofphotography as a monitoring tool. I look forward to participating in the Mountain Forum. ___________________________________________ ___________________________________________ Mark Haberle GIS Data Technician Vermont Center for Geographic Information 206 Morrill Hall University of Vermont 802-656-8319 W 802-496-7028 H 802-656-0776 F mhaberle@zoo.uvm.edu markh@vcgi.uvm.edu Burlington, VT 05405-0106 http://geo-vt.uvm.edu Name: Marca Hagenstad Date: Wed, 12 Feb 1997 09:24:57 -0800 (PST) From: Marca Hagenstad Due to myinexperience with working with mountain issues, I wanted to observemore than 'participate', but would partake in any discussion that I couldcontribute to. I am the assistant to the Vice President and SeniorEconomist, in WRI's economics program. We are working on variousenvironmental economic issues, including carbon taxes, capital markets,pesticides, productivity measuring, structural adjustment, and otherpolicy issues. I have lived in the Rockies and the Alps and am interestedin how natural resource economics analyses could benefit sustainablemountain development. I have read some reports from ICIMOD andreceive the quarterly journal from the UNU. Name: Irena Hanouskova Date: Fri, 9 Aug 1996 15:53:36 +0100 (GMT+0100) From: irenaha@dale.uek.cas.cz Hello in Mountain Forum, I would like to join the discussion on PFM. My name is Irena Hanouskova. Subject of my work is landscapeecology. I am improved in natural sciences. Nowadays, I amoriented particularly to historical development of landscapestructure, land use forms of Sumava Mts. Following contribution describes one way of long-term developmentresulting in area sustainability. Landscape ecology approach isused for the description. I am convinced, that the conditions andconstraints, gathered in Sumava case study might be considered inanalogies to similar areas with similar trajectory of land-use.Information is elaborated in the study "Future for Sumava",Institute of Landscape Ecology in 1995(-1997.) Information, which I consider as important for further contacts: (1) Project "Biodiversity of Sumava" is solved on the Instituteof Landscape Ecology, Czech Republic. Sustainable development ofthe Sumava region (Sumava Mts, Central Europe, large area wasdeclared as National Park) is focussed in social and economicalcontext. Groups of economically and ideologically active peopleare classified and assigned to their roles for innovativefinancial mechanisms in the area. For detail information contact:Biodiversity project, manager, Institute of Landscape Ecology,Academy of Sciences, Na sadkach 7, 370 05 Ceske Budejovice, CzechRepublic. (2) The National Park Administration is the most importantcontrolling subject of Sumava area. Park is responsible fornature protection, scientific research, education and instructionof public (particularly local inhabitants and tourists). Park issupported from national level, has its own production andinvestments. The important tool for nature protection and selfmaintainig of undisturbed environment is the legacy which has thelong tradition in Czech Republic. Presently the possibility ofaccepting a special law for National Park Sumava is beingdiscussed. It might state better condition for park economy. Fordetail information contact: National Park Sumava, director,Namesti 84, 341 92 Kasperske Hory, Czech Republic. Irena Hanouskova, Institute of Landscape Ecology, Academy ofSciences of the CR, Na sadkach 7, 370 05 Ceske Budejovice, CzechRepublic. Name: Oliver Hillel, Conservation International INTRODUCTION Tourism has become the world's largest industry, generating US $3.4 trillion in gross annual output, attracting $693 billion in capital investment, and providing over 200 million jobs globally (The World Travel and Tourism Council, 1996) Travelers that enjoy and appreciate nature represent between 40% and 60% of the 500 millions that cross international boundaries every year, and for a growing number of countries, tourism based on natural attractions is a top earner of foreign exchange. Given its economic power, tourism provides powerful incentives to government policy makers and local people to conserve natural and cultural resources which attract outside visitors. Nevertheless, the immensity of the tourism industry and the possibility of its explosive growth in a region can overwhelm natural resources and community infrastructure. For the last 15 years ecotourism has been heralded as one of the most promising tools for the conservation of natural habitats. These high expectations have not been fully realized and critics claim that many ecotourism ventures are simply a Trojan horse--marketing tourism as environmentally friendly, but in fact destroying the very ecosystems they claim to protect. Attaching the "ecotourism" label to poorly planned projects provides local populations with little besides social tension and environmental degradation, while leaving the tourist dissatisfied and cheated. However, Conservation International (CI) believes that when planned and implemented properly, ecotourism can be both an effective conservation tool and a successful community development model. Conservation International's mission in ecotourism is to develop and support ecotourism enterprises that contribute to conservation; and to influence the broader tourism industry towards greater ecological sustainability. The CI Ecotourism Program pursues these objectives through the following activities: National/Regional Ecotourism Strategies--To maximize the conservation impact of ecotourism, CI is involved with evaluating the conservation potential of ecotourism on a national/regional level, developing ecotourism policy through a regional consensus building process, and assisting policy implementation. Currently, the ecotourism program is working to develop an ecotourism strategy for the Inka Region in Peru. Capacity Building--The Ecotourism Program uses a local capacity building approach to ensure that ecotourism benefits communities and merges with traditional practices and conservation. The Ecotourism Program provides effective training for both CI-local staff and community members to help them understand and manage ecotourism enterprises. In addition to conducting training workshops, the Ecotourism Program supports capacity-building by helping to organize local ecotourism societies and disseminating detailed information on model ecotourism projects in the form of case studies. Highlights of the Program's capacity building efforts include the Brazil Train-the-Trainers Workshops and the development and support of INDECON (Indonesian Ecotourism Network.) Important case studies on CI s ecotourism efforts in Brazil, Guatemala, and Ghana will be developed in 1996. Ecotourism Product Development--An ecotourism product is a combination of resources, activities, and tourism services which are sold and managed through professional tour operators. The Ecotourism Program seeks to develop ecotourism products which benefit local communities and meet conservation objectives in design, implementation, and management. Special ecotourism product development highlights are the Scarlet Macaw Trail in Guatemala, the Canopy Walkway in Ghana, the Chalalan Lodge in Bolivia and Makira Island in the Solomon Islands. International Marketing--To ensure the business sustainability of the ecotourism products, the Ecotourism Program actively markets CI destinations to both international tour operators and directly to ecotourists. Ongoing marketing efforts have contributed to the success of the Eco-Escuela in Guatemala and a new marketing highlight for the Ecotourism Program is the development of the Ecotravel Center, an Internet home-page dedicated to providing information for the ecotourist. CURRENT PROJECTS BOLIVIA The Alto Madidi Region of northwestern Bolivia is located in a belt of high biodiversity which runs through western South America where the Andes meet the Amazon basin. CI's work in the region in the early 1990s started with a Rapid Assessment Program (RAP) Expedition which reported the region as being of great significance, with extremely high levels of biodiversity. The government of Bolivia has recognized the importance of the Madidi area by establishing the Madidi National Park in 1995 and is now looking to ecotourism as a means of generating income for the people living in and around this important ecosystem. Ecolodge at Chalalan--CI is in a unique position to demonstrate the potential of ecotourism through the development of a model ecolodge at Chalalan. With full support from local CI project managers, a small group of entrepreneurs from the Quechua-Tacana community of San Jos de Uchiapomonas constructed a few buildings in the local thatched-hut style at Lake Chalalan, a site located 2 hours by boat down river from the village. These facilities were constructed for the existing backpacker market in Rurrenabaque. With the help of a grant from the Inter-American Development Bank, CI has worked with experts in the field of landscape architecture from Design Workshop Inc., to ensure that the lodge will serve as a prototype for ecotourism sustainable technologies and architecture. The CI Ecotourism Program will work to ensure the effective training of community members in tourism planning and management. This will enable them to successfully assume responsibility and ownership of all aspects of the operation by the year 2000. BRAZIL Brazil is a country of continental proportions in both land mass and population. Although recognized as the nation with the world's highest level of terrestrial diversity, each of the five major biomes of Brazil--the Amazon, the Atlantic Forest, the Pantanal Wetland, the Cerrado and the Caatinga--are significantly threatened by a variety of human activities. The development of ecotourism as an alternative to destructive land-use practices has been a priority for the CI-Brazil Program since 1992. Ecotourism Train-the-Trainers Workshops--In 1992, CI developed a strategy for a series of ecotourism workshops for Brazil. A 10-day train-the-trainers workshop was conceived in order to build local capacity and to adapt relevant procedures and technology to Brazilian culture and circumstances. With a consortium of NGOs and The Ecoplan:net Institute, CI has been holding a series of workshops since 1994. These workshops trained tourism professionals from 8 Brazilian states to be interactive instructors (called facilitators) capable of conducting a 5-day regional ecotourism workshops. From an original group of 35 facilitators, more than 600 individuals throughout Brazil have participated in 20 workshops. Sixteen of the original train-the-trainers workshop participants continue to assist CI-ecotourism initiatives in Brazil as members of a Group of Specialists, and have been invited to implement the training portion of Brazil's new National Ecotourism Plan. In December 96, further training of the original facilitators will enable them to become consultants for sustainable tourism and ecotourism developments, and to train other trainers who will disseminate the methodology in the nine States of the Brazilian Legal Amazon. With 58 additional workshops planned for 1996, this initiative continues to meet the CI's objective of increasing local capacity to develop and implement ecotourism ventures. The Atlantic Forest--In the southern portion of this highly endangered rain forest, the Ecotourism Program is working to guarantee buffer zones around the Biological Reserve of Una, in Southern Bahia. In an effort to counteract threats from logging interests in the area, the Ecotourism Program has been discussing the benefits of ecotourism to private land-owners in the area who are looking for alternative revenue sources. One of these land-owners has been convinced that ecotourism is more lucrative than logging in the long run, and CI will be working with him to develop the tourism potential on his land. Additionally, the Ecotourism Program is cooperating with our local partner, Instituto de Estudos Socioambientais do Sul da Bahia (IESB,) to develop a wildlife rehabilitation and visitor center for a nearby 250-room resort. National Marine Park of Abrolhos--The National Marine Park of Abrolhos, located off the coast of Southern Bahia, is the first and only marine park in Brazil. Unfortunately, irresponsible tourism has seriously threatened seabird nesting colonies and marine fauna in and around the park boundaries. To counter these threats, CI will be leading a consortium of NGOs in an effort to devise a management plan. A large component of this plan will be focused on more effective regulation of tourism. GUATEMALA The Maya Biosphere Reserve in Northern Guatemala is the largest remaining tract of intact tropical rainforest in Central America. Its high level of biodiversity, and its remarkable cultural heritage contribute greatly to its ecotourism potential. The northern lowland tropical forests provide an extensive, but highly threatened, ecosystem which makes up the Department of the Petn. The Petn was once the center of Maya civilization and is home to the ancient city of Tikal, which draws hundreds of thousands of visitors each year. However, travel to the Petn region has traditionally consisted only of one to two day excursions. This has meant that local communities have received few benefits from tourism and visitors have missed opportunities to explore ecological, cultural, and other archaeological riches that the Petn has to offer. In an effort to address these issues CI is working to develop community-based ecotourism projects which will encourage visitors to explore the other attractions of the Petn. The Scarlet Macaw Trail--With the support and participation of local communities, CI Guatemala (ProPetn) and the Ecotourism Program have been developing ecotourism infrastructure to help curb the destruction of forests within the Maya Biosphere Reserve. As a result of three years of development, the Scarlet Macaw Trail Tour was launched in May 1996, and is being marketed internationally by many respected ecotour operators. Led and managed by the inhabitants of the Centro Campesino and El Cruce a Dos Aguadas communities, the ecotour is an ecologically-sensitive excursion through the tropical forest surrounding the El Per archaeological site. Visitors on the tour will enjoy local interpretation of natural and cultural attractions, including stays with the communities, and sightings of howler monkeys, imperial woodpeckers, and the endangered scarlet macaws. Besides providing alternative livelihoods for the communities, it is hoped that the presence of tourists along the trail will deter looting of the El Per archaeological site, prevent further agricultural encroachment into the reserve, and eradicate poaching of young scarlet macaws from nesting areas. The Eco-Escuela de Espanol--Located in the small town of San Andrs on the shores of Lake Petn-Itz, the Eco-Escuela is a Spanish language school with an ecological curriculum for tourists. Students of the school stay with local families and are encouraged to work on various volunteer activities within the community. After three years of operation, nearly 700 students have participated in the program, the Eco-Escuela has become fully independent, and is managed by a cooperative of teachers, homestay owners and administrators . With limited promotional aid from CI, the Eco-Escuela is now a model for an independent community-based ecotourism enterprise. Center for Information on the Culture, Nature and Arts of the Petn (CINCAP)--Located in the hub of Flores, the region's capital, this center serves as an information clearinghouse for tourists seeking low-impact alternative attractions in the Petn. CINCAP exhibits local natural and cultural history and highlights regional arts and crafts. As a center for regional environmental education and training in tourism, the center will work with local communities as well as with tourists. In October 96, it housed a Workshop for CI's enterprise project managers from 14 different countries. El Mirador Trail--ProPetn has been working with the community of Carmelita to develop infrastructure for tourists visiting the immense ruins of the Maya city of "El Mirador." Located in northern Petn, the project was initiated to generate sustainable economic alternatives for the community which conserve the natural resources of the area. An association of local guides has formed a committee to direct tourism activities around Carmelita, including leading expeditions along the El Mirador Route. The community has recently constructed an eco-camp to host arriving visitors for this five-day interpretive trip. The camp provides environmentally friendly showers and self-composting toilets to ensure minimal impact on the ecosystem. The Ecotourism Program will work to link this product with a larger market to increase revenues and jobs and thereby provide even greater protection for the Petn forests. PERU The tropical forests of Peru contain an enormous variety of habitats and organisms making it one of the world's centers of biological diversity. Combined with unique cultural attractions such as Machu Picchu, the nation has the potential to be one of the world's premier ecotourism destinations. Unfortunately, lack of strategic planning to take advantage of these incredible resources has left them open to rapid degradation by environmentally destructive industries, including poorly managed tourism. Ecotourism Strategy for the Inka Region-- With the support of the Peru United Nations Development Program, CI's Ecotourism Program is working to develop a sustainable tourism development plan for the Inka Region. Utilizing a unique consensus building approach, the Ecotourism Program is working with stakeholders in the departments of Cusco, Madre de Dios, and Apurimac to produce a practical strategy for ecotourism development in the region. The strategy will include necessary first steps for policy implementation, as well as the identification of alternative sites, trails, and attractions to ensure that tourism revenues are distributed throughout the region. SURINAME/GUYANA Located on the northeastern coast of South America, the adjacent countries of Guyana and Suriname still maintain 80% of its surface covered with uninterrupted expanses of tropical forest in the northern reaches of the Amazon Basin. Due to low population density and shifting political fortunes, there has been virtually no pressures on these forests until recently. New logging and mining concessions, road construction, insufficient protected areas systems and policies, and lack of economic opportunity, are now posing tremendous threats to the incredible biodiversity of these nations. Ecotourism is already a budding economic activity in both of these countries and has tremendous potential to improve income opportunities for local people and promote conservation. Both Suriname and Guyana have tremendous ecotourism potential due to the cultural diversity of Maroon and Amerindian communities and an array of unique and fantastic natural attractions. Although obstacles to effective development of ecotourism must be overcome, growing political stability creates a situation where tourism can generate considerable foreign exchange and job opportunities. All CI projects for ecotourism in these nations are in the initial stages. The Ecotourism Program will work with both Guyana and Suriname in government planning efforts to establish ecotourism policies and guidelines. Additionally, the Ecotourism Program will be working with the design of facilities and business opportunities in the communities of Kwamala and Asindopo in Suriname, and the development of a unique cultural and rain forest tour with the Nappi community in the Kanuku mountains of Guyana, where scientists have detected the highest population density known for the endangered Harpy Eagle. BOTSWANA CI's program in Botswana focuses exclusively on the Okavango Delta. As the world's largest inland delta, protection of the Okavango ecosystem is critical for both the wildlife and the people in the region. In order to ensure both environmental protection and enhanced economic stability, the CI-Botswana Program is seeking to develop community management of the increasing numbers of tourists coming to the delta. CI-Botswana Expedition--CI is working with an ecotour operator, Explorers, to develop an unique eco-safari to the Okavango for 1997. Individuals on the tour will have the opportunity to not only enjoy the wonders of the delta, but will be able to visit project sites with CI-Botswana Director, Karen Ross, and witness first-hand Conservation International's efforts to protect this important ecosystem. New staffing for the program will expand the possibility for ecotourism products. GHANA The Upper Guinean rainforest block in West Africa is one of the most diverse ecosystems on the continent. The forest zone in Ghana contains the eastern fifth of this important ecosystem. The CI-Ghana Program is presently focused in the Kakum National Park whose forest elephants, seven species of primates, high antelope and bird diversity provide tremendous potential for ecotourism. The park will serve as a model in West Africa for integrated conservation and economic development by combining sound scientific analysis and ecotourism as a sustainable enterprise. To achieve this goal, CI provides technical assistance for the planning and development of Kakum. Early in 1995, CI and the American Society of Landscape Architecture organized a charette for the conceptual design of the Kakum Conservation Area to be developed within the framework established by the Tourism Development Scheme for the Central Region (TODSCER.) The workshop resulted in designs for a canopy walkway system and a visitor center to enhance tourist experience and understanding of the natural and cultural history of Ghana. Kakum Canopy Walkway--The first of its kind on the African continent, the Kakum canopy walkway was completed and opened to visitors on Earth Day 1995. Seven suspended walkways extend over some 1,000 feet, attached to six platforms in tall trees, and allow visitors to experience the rainforest where its biodiversity is at its highest, at heights up to 100 feet . The walkway has greatly increased the numbers of national and international tourists coming to the park: in 1992, fewer than 2000 people visited the park, whereas in 1996 more than 30,000 visitors are expected. This increase in visitation, while still far below the 70,000 annual visitor capacity, has brought jobs and revenue into the area and demonstrated to local communities the profitability of protecting the park. CI is working in several nearby villages to develop other business alternatives for the population. Kakum Visitor Center--Although a temporary center currently displays culture and nature exhibits, the planned Kakum Visitor Center will become model for protected areas throughout Ghana and West Africa. Highlights of the facilities at Kakum include the innovative use of local materials and crafts in its design, and creative educational exhibits. Combined with the canopy walkway, this world-class visitor center will attract ecotourists and thereby preserve cultural and natural resources. MADAGASCAR Madagascar is often considered the highest biodiversity conservation priority on earth. Its unique evolutionary history has resulted in exceptional species numbers and endemism (species that exist only in a specific ecosystem.) Because of this fascinating natural history, Madagascar could rival the Galapagos Islands as a natural tourism attraction. Unfortunately, the island has yet to live up to its promise as an ecotourism destination. As threats of further deforestation increase, the CI Ecotourism Program is working to develop ecotourism in Madagascar as a means of protecting this natural heritage. Ankarafantsika Reserve--Located in northwestern Madagascar, the Ankarafantsika Reserve plays a vital role in protecting watersheds and directly supports nearly 20,000 Malagasy whose daily lives depend on the region's rice crops for sustenance. CI believes that an ecotourism industry focused on Ankarafantsika's rich wildlife will not only promote conservation within the region, but could also be a major source of foreign exchange for Madagascar. Many of the reserve's lemurs (a primate endemic to the island) are found nowhere else on earth; yet only a handful of lemur watching sites are visited regularly. Additionally, the reserve houses a research station for an endangered tortoise which is also rarely visited. The Ecotourism Program is conducting a market survey to determine the best strategies for developing ecotourism in the reserve's buffer zone. The objective is to provide local communities with a sustainable means for subsistence which will not endanger the natural resources of the reserve, as part of a broader Integrated Conservation and Development Project. INDONESIA Despite occupying only 1.3% of the earth's land surface, Indonesia has a level of biodiversity which rivals that of Brazil. The more than 17,000 islands which make up the nation contain the world's largest number of mammal species, over 20,000 plant species, and 17% of the world's bird species. This natural diversity is matched by Indonesia's cultural diversity. The population of 180 million have hundreds of distinct cultures and languages. As the nation experiences rapid economic growth, CI's efforts in Indonesia are focused on strengthening the capacity of Indonesian organizations and establishing successful enterprises to promote the conservation of marine and forest ecosystems. Togian Islands--The Togian Islands of Central Sulawesi have extraordinary potential in ecotourism and an unique opportunity to promote an integrated conservation program for both terrestrial and marine ecosystems. Diving and snorkeling options in the Togians are exceptional, and the islands themselves host a wide array of endemic fauna attractions. As large-scale tourism development is a realistic threat, CI has been working with the District Tourism Agency to ensure sound planning of conservation areas and tourism zones. In 1996, the Ecotourism Program will be working on capacity building, product development, and international marketing for the Togian Islands. INDECON--The Indonesian Ecotourism Network (INDECON) was established in 1995 by the Institute for Indonesian Tourism Studies, in association with Bina Swadaya tours and CI. This non-profit organization publishes a newsletter on Indonesian ecotourism issues and hosts monthly seminars which are attended by a variety of local NGOs, the Indonesian government, USAID, and in-county tour operators. The Ecotourism Program continues to act as a special advisor to INDECON, and will aid them in their efforts to support Indonesian ecotourism projects and develop different training modules for guides, tour operators, and developers of ecotourism products. Gunung Gede Pangrango National Park --Located only an hour away from Jakarta, Gunung Gede park receives hundreds of thousands of annual visitors, and offers a tremendous opportunity to disseminate information to both visiting locals and tourists on issues important to conservation in Indonesia. The park protects two mountainous formations with unique fauna and flora, and CI is working with a consortium for the development of tourist infrastructure at the site, including a canopy walkway and a visitor center. PAPUA NEW GUINEA Papua New Guinea (PNG) is the largest country in Melanesia, and is one of the most biologically and culturally diverse nations in the world. It contains the Old World s greatest expanses of forests, mangroves, and reefs that still thrive in a largely pristine condition. PNG's wealth in biological diversity is matched by an unrivaled cultural diversity with over 700 distinct languages. Over the past five years, the PNG highlands have developed into one of the most popular cultural ecotourism destinations in the world. However, if ecotourism in PNG is to prosper, the Ecotourism Program believes that it is the responsibility of all tourism operators and other stakeholders involved in tourism to ensure that their products are environmentally sensitive and contribute to the conservation of the natural and cultural resources. To meet this objective, the Ecotourism Program seeks to increase local capacity to improve existing ecotourism and to develop additional sites outside of the PNG highlands. Community-based Ecotourism Planning Workshop--In collaboration with the Ecoplan:net Institute and the PNG Tourism Promotion Authority, CI held an ecotourism workshop in July of 1996. The workshop effectively introduced thirty PNG tourism professionals to the essential components that are required to develop a successful ecotourism venture. Based on the model provided by the ecotourism workshops in Brazil, this process will provide participants with relevant ecotourism planning skills and the ability to share these skills with other communities and members of the travel industry. Lakekamu Basin--The Lakekamu Basin, an incredible tract of lowland rain forest surrounded by hills and high mountains, supports approximately 2,000 people in several village settlements near the basin's major rivers. Most of this area is rarely, if ever, visited, and thus constitutes a near-pristine natural destination with high conservation potential. Timber agents continue to look at the area for large-scale logging. Working with all four of the major land-owning peoples, CI has been developing tourism enterprises in the Basin. A trek through the spectacular gorge county up to the Kuper Range field station has been mapped out and maps for shorter hikes along an old World War II road next to the beautiful Avi-avi river are being developed for a softer ecotour. CI is working with the Biara and Kovio peoples to develop two simple lodges for tourists to the Basin. With natural attractions including tree kangaroos, the southern cassowary, and numerous species of birds of paradise, these ecotourism initiatives provide the first promise of a sustainable alternative in the Lakekamu Basin. PHILIPPINES Although over 95% of its forested area has been lost, the Philippine archipelago has the highest levels of endemism in the Indo-Malayan realm. CI's efforts in the Philippines focus on preserving the last remaining tracts of forest on the islands of Luzon, Palawan and Mindanao, and on protecting the incredible marine richness along the coast of the nation. Due to the fact that subsistence use is a major cause of destruction in both of these ecosystems, along with destructive technologies like dynamite and cyanide fishing, CI's work in the Philippines emphasizes the development of conservation enterprises such as ecotourism. St. Paul's and El Nido National Parks, Palawan-- Both St. Paul's National Park and El Nido National Park receive thousands of tourists, attracted by the unique underwater river that runs along the coast of Palawan and the haunting limestone formations that characterize the coast. However, tourists to the area currently come with city tour operators for day visits, resulting in little or no benefit for the local communities. To address this issue, the Ecotourism Program will be working to build the local capacity for tourism and develop ecotourism products to help the communities around St. John National Park and El Nido National park benefit from the tourism coming to their area. Tubbataha Reefs National Marine Park, Palawan--The Tubbataha Reefs National Marine Park is a World Heritage site located in the open sea, close to the island of Palawan, and its conservation is already a priority for the local diving community. Keidenren, a Japanese foundation, is funding a broad conservation plan to be developed by a presidential Task Force with CI as a leading member. Palanan--In 1992, CI identified ecotourism as a potential sustainable enterprise in Palanan, located in the Sierra Madre Mountains of Northern Luzon, northern Philippines. This area was rated by consultants from Mountain Travel/Sobek and The Ecoplan:net Institute as an attractive regional and international destination. The consultants then developed a carrying capacity plan and itineraries for varying interests were for Palanan. The Ecotourism Program has been involved with training of nature guides and other tourism service providers, and is looking to expand its efforts in facilitating Palanan's entry into international ecotourism markets. SOLOMON ISLANDS The Solomon Islands are a double chain of islands which extend eastward from Papua New Guinea and presently maintain 80% of the land covered in tropical forest. The country sustains high levels of endemism due to its remote location, however, forest and marine ecosystem degradation caused by the timber industry are becoming significant concerns for the islands biodiversity conservation. As the majority of tourists to the Solomon Islands are divers, the Ecotourism Program strategy involves developing an ecotourism product which would highlight the forest ecosystem and island culture as an additional attraction for a stay on the islands. Makira Island--Working through the Solomon Islands Development Trust, CI has developed a model of community-based ecotourism. Tours to Makira Island include a trek through the cloud forest of the highlands, a visit to the rural community at Hauta, and a stay with the hill top people of Hunama. Only four trips a year are planned, as the communities would like tourism to provide them with much needed currency, but not impact their daily routines. In 1996, the Ecotourism Program will be looking to link the local tour operator with a greater international market, to increase the revenues from the enterprise and thereby provide an alternative to destructive logging and unsustainable harvesting of marine products. Name: Himalaya Chercheurs Date: July 3, 1996 From: himal.res@cnrs-bellevue.fr CNRS "HIMALAYA" contact : Corneille Jest, Philippe Ramirez "Himalaya, milieux, cultures et socites" is part of the FrenchNationalResearch Centre (CNRS). This team was founded in 1964 and includessocialanthropologists and geographers involved in all aspects of Himalayanstudies (Nepal, India, Tibet, Bhutan). In the recent years, wecompletedtwo multi-disciplinary research progammes on the interactions ofsocietiesand environment in Nepal, one at the village level in the middlemountainsof Nuvakot district, the other in the low mountains of Gulmi andArgha-Khanci districts. Our main focus is on historical as well asregionalcomparisons. In this respect, we have begun a new project on "Past andPresent Changes of Landscapes in the Himalayas". Our aim is tounderstandthe wide diversity of landscapes in this area which may not beexclusivelyjustified either by natural or human factors. The historicalperspectivemay help to go beyond the current assumptions concerning thedegradation ofHimalayan environment in the recent years. Name: Sandra Hodge Date: July 22, 1996 From: Sandra S. Hodge ssh3w@faraday.clas.virginia.edu My name is Sandra Hodge and I teach social/community forestry. Iam particularly interested in this forum in this context. I havefound some of the case studies and examples very interesting andam mulling over how different components can be part ofsocial/community forestry. Sandra S. Hodge Name: Ken Hughey From: hugheyk@lincoln.ac.nz Dr Ken Hughey, Director since 1995. Involved in variety of researchand management positions involving mountain lands since 1985. Workedas a senior manager with the Department of Conservation, involved withendangered species, mammalian herbivores such as Himalayan tahr, habitat restoration, etc. Current research interests includeintegrated vertebrate pest management, customary resource use, andrestoration issues. Name: Rodney Jackson Date: Wed, 14 Aug 1996 19:52:15 -0700 (PDT) From: rodjackson@igc.apc.org My name is Rodney Jackson, and I have worked with The Mountain Institute asits wildlife ecologist since 1990. I am also the part-time ConservationProgram Director for the International Snow Leopard Trust, based in Seattle,Washington. As this suggest, I am especially interested in this species,which we consider could play a significant role as a catalyst forbiodiversity conservation in the high mountains of Central Asia. It occursacross 13 countries, and much of its distribution is along internationalboundaries. Much of my work presently focusses on alleviating people-wildlife conflictdue top crop or livestock damage. TMI and ISLT have sponsored trainingworkshops for park staff in places as diverse as Tibet, Pakistan andMongolia. Our approach has also been to integrate wildlife conservation withenhanced means of income-generation, such as ecotourism, nature viewing andphotography, using participatory resource management as a foundation forconserving species, ecosystems and communities in remote mountains. I look forward to learning from other Forum participants. Best wishes, Rodney Name: Bijaya Kattel Date: Fri, 15 Nov 1996 09:08:02 -0800 (PST) From: bjkattel@lamar.ColoState.EDU (Bijaya Kattel) I have been involved with the National Parks and Wildlife of Nepal since the last 20 plus years. I have worked as a park warden of various National Parks in Nepal and I explored areas like Shey Phoksundo and Khaptad for the establishment of protected areas, which are now National Parks. I conducted research on Himalayan Musk deer in Sagarmatha National Park for my dissertation. I also worked as the Chief Warden of the Sagarmatha National Park. Presently, I am involved in monitoring of the musk deer population in Sagarmatha National Park. I am also directing a musk deer research project at the outskirts of Kathmandu, where three species of deer including musk deer are put in a semi captive condition. Careerwise I am Deputy Director General of the Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation of His Majesty's Government of Nepal. My extensive travel in the mountains of Nepal has enhanced my interest in mountains. Bijaya Kattel bjkattel@lamar.ColoState.EDU Name: Dwayne Knox Date: July 26, 1996 From: dhaller@oursc.k12.ar.us Hi, I'm Dwayne Knox and I work with the Newton County ResourceCouncil, in the Boston Mountain Range of the Ozark Mountains of NorthernArkansas, on the headwaters of the Buffalo River. We are located on the highest uplands between the Rocky Mountains and the Appalachians, and havethe highest waterfall between them too. Most of our county is managedby the U.S Forest Service as the Buffalo Ranger District of the OzarkNational Forest, or by the National Park Service as the Buffalo NationalRiver. The entire river is undamned and free flowing, and is in underfederal management from the headwaters to the mouth. We have a large Elkherd and a large number of Black Bear. The more remote southern half of ourcounty has a population density of about 7 people per square mile, andcontains four Wilderness Areas. The Census Bureau considers our county 100%rural. The Newton County Resource Council and the Ecotourism Project The Ecotourism Project is a program of the Newton County Resource Council, (NCRC), a nonprofit community development corporation.Since 1987 NCRC has worked to improve the quality of life in Newton County while preserving and enhancing the county's traditions, values and natural resources. NCRC's other current projects include HarmonyHouse, a shelter for victims of domestic violence, Project Care, an adultday care center, Bradley Park, a ten acre park on the Little BuffaloRiver, Summer Youth Program, a six week-day camp for elementary agedchildren, Healthy Families Arkansas providing information for new parents,and the Newton County Single Parent Scholarship Fund. NCRC is committed through grassroots organizing, training, andleadership development to empowering low-income people to be part of thesolution to the pervasive poverty in Newton County. The county's $10,406 percapita income rates last of the 75 Arkansas counties, per capita retailsales are $750 and 52% of the county's workforce are employed outside the county. The Ozark National Forest and the Buffalo National Rivermanage 59% of the county's 822 square miles. In late 1991 NCRC began the VISTA community economic developmentproject to study sectors of the economy which would stimulate jobopportunities for low-income families. Ecotourism was chosen in 1993 as itcombines magnificent scenery, bountiful natural resources, rich culturalheritage and the diverse backgrounds, talents and knowledge of local people. Ecotourism seeks to preserve the qualities of life that make Newton County unique. Establishing ecotourism in Newton County calls for dialogue, experimentation, imagination, collaboration and alliances.Ecotourism funding is provided by The National Corporation for CommunityService, the Winthrop Rockefeller Foundation, the Campaign for HumanDevelopment, and the Foundation for the Mid-South. The Ozark National Forest, Buffalo National River and Arkansas Game and Fish resourcemanagers are committed partners. Ozark Ecotours gives you an opportunity tobecome part of a community economic development that filters out the harmful side effects of irresponsible tourism while striving for job creation that is economically viable, ecologically sound and socially just. Ecotourism, Newton County style uses the skills, talents andknowledge of local people to promote activities that share the county's natural resources and cultural heritage. The number of visitors is keptto no more than fifteen, and activities are dispersed throughout thecounty and throughout the year, ensuring that fragile ecological and historicsites are not "loved to death." Ecotour sites are monitored for the accumulated impact of tourism and collected data is shared withfederal and state resource managers. Job creation barriers are removed bythe project providing land use permits, liability insurance, access to transportation, advertising and booking and one-on-one assistancein tour development. Already existing small businesses providing lodging,arts and crafts, food and retail services are utilized and promoted. The project staff and VISTA volunteers are assisted inimplementing the program by the Ecotourism Advisory Team which meets bi-monthly andits steering committee of nine meets monthly to: * plan and develop goals which meets low-income needs. *assure that the program conforms to the values of ecotourism and preservation of cultural and natural resources. *evaluate the program and report to the NCRC board on its progress. *foster involvement and leadership skills of project participants. *reach out to the community to inform and involve county residents. The Ecotourism Project of NCRC is community economic developmentwhich strives to be economically viable, ecologically sound and sociallyjust in a NCRC's Ecotourism Project is seeking to filter out theharmful side effects of irresponsible tourism while preserving what it has tooffer visitors to the benefits of its residents. We hope that you willcome and share what is a very special place in the natural state. NCRC carries out its activities on a very low budget derived from foundation, church, corporation, federal state and individual donors. Newton County Resource Council Post Office Box 513 Jasper, AR 72628-0513 phone 501-446-5898 FAX 501-446-2701 e-mail 2077973@mcimail.com Name: Chris Kwan Date: July 17, 1996 From: Kwan Khai Hee h1kwan@cc.um.edu.my Hi, I am Chris Kwan from the Institute of Advanced Studies at theUniversity of Malaya here in Malaysia. Before my teaching post, Iwas aMerchant Banker and have worked on some project sites around theworld. Ispecialize in Environmental Law and policies matters and am currentlyteachingin the Masters program of Environmental Management. I am trained inAccounting, Banking, Finance and Environmental Law. I am currently looking at Mt Kinabalu in Sabah (North Borneo) and the kind of tourism and population that livearound themountain. There is also a huge copper mining operation operatingnearby inthe same vicinity. Both Mt Kinabalu and the copper mine operationhave thedisctinction for being the highest and largest in South East Asia respectively. The people around that area are suffering(have beensuffering since 1976) from some kind of health difficulty. We havetried toidentify the source of this problem for years and it could be from theoveruse of pesticides used for farming to heavy metal poisoining. It is anybody's guess. By the way, Mount Kinabalu is a touristattraction with a growing number of tourists hiking up the mountain every year. It isalsoknown as the Mountain of Gods by the natives here. I hope that Ican help insome ways in this forum. Thanks Chris Name: Paul Lachapelle Web Home Page: http://www.uvm.edu/~plachape/toilets.html Date: Mon, 9 Dec 1996 19:47:41 -0800 (PST) From: Paul R. Lachapelle" plachape@moose.uvm.edu I am a 30 year old Environmental Studies undergraduate student at the University of Vermont in Burlington, Vermont, USA. My background is in the field of backcountry human waste management. 1) I am a 1995 and 1997 National Security Scholar and will be returning to Nepal for continued language study and research of water and wastewater issues. In the Spring of 1995, I completed a report on human waste management in Mt. Everest National Park. This report included analyzing two solar-assisted toilets located in the Park. The report is available in full-test (and with photos) at my web site below. In the Spring of 1997, I plan to conduct a watershed sanitary survey (as outlined by the American Water Works Association, AWWA) in Mt. Everest National Park to analyze potential water quality problems and recommend a management plan. 2) In the summer and fall of 1996, I worked with the United States Forest Service Technology and Development Center in San Dimas, California designing a passive solar cooker to pasteurize the compost removed from backcountry toilets at Yosemite National Park, California, USA. We demonstrated that the end-product from these toilets could be safely treated on-site and that all Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations could be met. I also have experience dealing with high-altitude treatment and disposal of human waste including field work at Mt Rainier National Park, Washington, USA studying techniques for human waste dehydration and the current blue bag policy (for climbers to pack-out their waste). 3) Following a literature search and field site visits of various waste treatment systems, I designed a working composting toilet system at Crag Camp on Mt. Adams, NH, USA (el. 4,270 ft). This facility is located in the alpine zone of the Presidential Range in the Appalachian Mountains and is subject to extreme weather conditions. I am happy to share information about my experiences with sanitation in mountain environments and would appreciate guidance to any available information regarding my up-coming research in the Mt. Everest region relating to past water quality issues in the Park. ****************************************** Paul Lachapelle 23 Juniper Ridge, Shelburne VT 05482 USA Phone: (802) 985-8723 Fax: (802) 985-5084 E-mail: plachape@moose.uvm.edu Web: http://www.uvm.edu/~plachape/toilets.html Name: Charles Little Date: July 21, 1996 From: clittle@primenet.com Hello, my name is Charles Little. I am a civil engineer workingin thefield of rural area water supply and sanitation for the Navajo people insouthwestern United States. Surprisingly, many Navajo people are without adequate drinking water. I have worked at this position for both theNavajo and Tohono O'dham people, of southern Arizona, since 1984. Before that I studied at Pennsylvania State University for four years. The highlight of my life so far, hence the interest in sustainabledevelopment for mountain ecosystems, was a two year Peace Corps experience inNepal. In 1977, I was with the first and last group of rural area watersupply surveyors for Peace Corps Nepal. Peace Corps later decided that itwas a good position for an extended volunteer instead of a new volunteerbecause the position required good language skills and also was a ratherrewarding position. The position was rewarding because the villagers,hoping to get water piped near their home, always would treat the Saab surveyorwell; feeding them either chicken meat, eggs, raksi, or yogurt. Besidesthat, the surveyor got to travel quite extensively as I did through most ofeastern Nepal. I also spent three weeks in Argakanchi District southwestof Pokhara. Nowadays, we live in Flagstaff, Arizona, a mountain community innorthern Arizona. The community is nestled among a Ponderosa Pine forestswhich used to have logging as one of the main industries. Since then andfor avariety of reasons, logging is no more a viable industry. Flagstaff is nowa bustling university, Northern Arizona University, and tourist town.Tourism is popular especially during the summer because its proximity to theGrand Canyon and the Native American reservations. Thank you to the Mountain Institute in their efforts to extend thedialogue to all of us out here. Name: Usha Little Date: Wed, 17 Jul 1996 02:41:53 +0000 NST-5.45 From: neeco@little.mos.com.np Hello, namaste to you all from Kathmandu, Nepal.My name is Usha Little. I live in Flagstaff, Arizona and have beenworking with the Navajo American Indian communities of NorthernArizona as a rural development specialist. I recently returned toNepal to share my forest ecosystem management and economicdevelopment experiences with the Nepali rural communities. The major areas of my interest while I was in Northern Arizona has beenintroduction of community based natural resource management based oncommunity forestry principles and establishment of cultural andecotourism in the Navajo Indian Reservation communities.At present, Navajo communities, similar to the many communities ofdeveloping nations, are concerned with local empowerment, culturalpreservation, and sustainable development. The Arizona AmericanIndian Tourism Association have been established to promotecommunity based environmentally acceptable, culturally appropriate,and economically sustainable tourism programs. One of the mainchallenges faced by the native communities of Northern Arizona ishow to promote tourism industries that promotes local communityempowerment while maintaining highest priority to the preservation ofnatural wonders and endangered native traditions. This is all for nowand I hope to share more discussions pertinent to tourism developmentin natural resource depended indigenous communities soon. Name: Bruce MacMillan Date: Fri, 6 Dec 1996 10:05:12 -0800 (PST) From: bmacmill@freenet.tlh.fl.us (Bruce MacMillan) I have been working for the Florida Division of Historical Resources,Bureau of Archaeological Research (BAR) in Tallahassee, Florida, sinceFebruary 1994. I have worked on several major research projects for BAR. The most significant of these were: (1) a management plan for Florida'sSubmerged Cultural Resources (shipwrecks and other inundated heritage sites), funded by the Coastal Zone Management Program; and (2) a study of US Navy shipwrecks in Florida waters, funded by the U.S. Dept. of Defense Legacy Program. Although my work has had little to do with mountain preservation, I have been gradually broadening my natural and cultural heritage management perspective! The recent IUCN World Conservation Congress in Montreal, provided me with an excellent overview of developments in many fields of heritage preservation. There were many excellent presentations concerning mountain preservation at the Congress. Dr. Larry Hamilton, and his wife Linda, of the Islands and Highlands Environmental Consultancy, tirelessly organized the mountain preservation sessions at the Conference. They also organized a delicious "mountain preservation" dinner which was well attended! I hope to continue to develop my career in heritage management, such as with World Heritage Sites and historic parks. I would like to follow on-going developments with heritage corridors, greenways, and mountain preservation, as part of my career growth. I look forward to being a part of the Mountain Forum. -------------------------- Bruce MacMillan #151, 1350 E-4 Mahan Drive Tallahassee, FL 32308 E-Mail: bmacmill@freenet.fsu.edu Home: 904-681-2911 Work: 904-487-2299 (Monday-Friday 8:00 am to 5:00 pm) FAX: 904-877-5474 Name: Jeff McCusker Date: Fri, 7 Feb 1997 10:10:04 -0800 (PST) From: Jeff McCusker mccusker@magicnet.mn Re: wolf depredation case study Myname is Jeff McCusker, and I'm currently working as a consultant on along-term contract for the Peace Corps in Mongolia, setting up a newprogram in envrionmental protection. We currently have 3 volunteersworking in protected areas here, and 6 more should be coming thissummer. I am trying to put together a two week inservice training course forthe volunteers and their counterparts, (Mongolian biologists, andresource specialists working for the Protected Area Bureau here). I'vebeen thinking that an intensive case study in setting up andimplementing a monitoring program might be a good exercise, if itinvolves a lot of practical field work. One of the common managementissues at all three protected areas, is livestock depredation bywolves. The park service here needs lots of assistance with carryingout scientific studies, planning monitoring activities, andpredator-prey ecology. If you have the time, and would be interestedin giving me some advice, let me know, and I'll send you some info onwhat I'm considering doing. We are looking for technical assistance ondesigning and planning the training. If you or your organization wouldbe interested, let me know also. The training would probably be heldin early May of this year. Jeff McCusker Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia Name: Don Messerschmidt Date: July 9, 1996 From: mx@e-z.net Greetings. I am Don Messerschmidt, a PhD Anthropologist (Univ. of Oregon1974), who has worked extensively in the Himalayas both as a social scienceresearcher and development adviser and consultant. My anthropological interests in mountains are partly demonstratedin a 2-part article in Mountain Research and Development entitled "Hindu Pilgrimage to Muktinath, Nepal" (in 2 parts; 1989, v.9,no.2:89-118). (I am also on the editorial board of this journal.) I have also published a book on the Gurungs, a Himalayan ethnicgroup, and on many subjects dealing with the culture and societies of mountain peoples... Two collections are now out from Bibliotheca Himalayica(EMR Publishing House, Kathmandu): one on development studies, theother on ethnic groups. My development/consulting interests are focused on natural resources management, especially social forestry. I have a number ofpublications in this field. My most recent sojourn to the Himalayas was on aconsultancy for the Australian Government (which funds one of the finest communityforestry development projects in the Himalayan mid-hills), to determine the feasibility of extending the community forestry/user group management approach to the highest altitude forests. I led the team offoresters and social scientists over a 4-months period. Great high altitudetrekking and research! The work was conducted using rapid and participatoryassessment techniques (both for forest profile transects and villageinterviews and observations). I have developed a special expertise in the use ofrapid appraisal for such purposes. I was raised in the mountains of SE Alaska at Juneau. I currentlylive on the fringe of the Cascades, in Vancouver, Washington (nearPortland, OR). Contact address: Don Messerschmidt * 13215-C8 SE Mill Plain, 189 * Vancouver, WA 98684 (USA) * e-mail: mx@e-z.net * tel/fax:360/256-8596. Name: Kim O'Neil/John Mock Date: Mon, 13 Jan 1997 05:45:32 -0800 (PST) From: "Kim O'Neil/John Mock" 102631.3570@CompuServe.COM Last year in Pakistan I was conducting research under a Fulbright DDRA grant on oral composition in the Wakhi community of Gojal tehsil of Pakistan's Northern Areas. The previous year, my wife, Kimberely O'Neil, and I worked as consultants on Ecotourism and Biodiversity for IUCN-Pakistan, and produced an 80-page report. The report is available from IUCN-Pakistan. Another large project my wife and I recently completed is a guidebook to trekking in northern Pakistan. Would you please post this notice to mtnforum, as it would be of interest to subscribers? Thanks. John Mock & Kim O'Neil _______________________________________ "Trekking in the Karakoram & Hindukush", by John Mock and Kimberley O'Neil. Lonely Planet Publications: Hawthorn, Australia. 1st edition. 332 pages. ISBN 0 86442 360 8. $16.95, available as of November 1996. email contact: info@lonelyplanet.com This is the most comprehensive trekking guidebook available, with over 90 route descriptions, 38 maps, illustrated flora and fauna sections, guidelines forenvironmentally responsible trekking, a language section covering Urdu and six other local languages, and background notes on history and culture. Name: Roger Morefield Date: Mon, 6 Jan 1997 11:48:22 -0800 (PST) From: Roger Morefield mofield@basil.stthom.edu Howdy! I am Roger Morefield, and I teach economics in a smallprivate university in Houston, the University of Saint Thomas. I don't have strong environmental credentials, as my PhD. work in economicsrelates more to applied microeconomics and history of political economy. However, in the past year I have been working to develop someareas of research interest in environmental economics, and business and the environment. I tend to lurk on some of these environmentaldiscussion lists, not contributing much but actively monitoring the threads of discussion. I am a native of the mountains of SouthwesternVirginia, so my interest was piqued when I saw the post announcing this list. For those of you with some knowledge to share, what are the "hot" issues right now? What special attention or expertise is required bymountain ecosystems that distinguishes them from other kinds of systems? Thanks in advance for your responses - I look forward to reading andlearning from them. Roger M. Dr. Roger Morefield, Associate Professor of Economics Cameron School of Business University of Saint Thomas 3800 Montrose Boulevard Houston, TX 77006 (713) 525-2121 Office (713) 525-2110 Fax E-Mail: mofield@basil.stthom.edu Name: Renzo Motta Date: Tue, 03 Dec 1996 21:39:04 +0100 From: Renzo Motta rmotta.selv@iol.it Dear forumnites, I am a 36 years old researcher. I am working at the University of Turin andI am a forester. My scientific interest are in three topics strictly related: - Forest-wildlife relationships in the mountain forests. Wild ungulatesimpact on the forest regeneration process and on the dynamics of thesubalpine forests, wildlife requirements relative to forest stands. - Silviculture and Ecology of the mountain forests. Disturbance history,regeneration process, silvicultural methods in alpine subalpine forests. - Dendroecology at upper forest limits. I am working in the Italian alpine environment both in the western and inthe eastern Alps and I'm involved in regional and European projects. I amlooking for connections with people that work on the same subjects in other mountain areas (especially Himalaya and Andes) for information exchange, visits and new projects. Renzo Motta ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| Renzo MOTTA Dep. AGROSELVITER Univ. of Turin Via L. Da Vinci 44 I - 10095 GRUGLIASCO Italy Tel. ++39.11.4115270 Fax ++39.11.4113487 Mobile 0338.7260670 Email rmotta.selv@iol.it ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| Name: TMI's Mountain Forum Staff Date: January 7, 1997 From: jespie@mountain.org Hello Everyone, We would like to take this opportunity to introduce the staff atThe Mountain Institute who are currently working on Mountain Forumrelated projects--primarily convening the Interim FacilitatingCommittee, acting as the Forum's Global Node and implementing theInformation Server Node. INTERIM FACILITATING COMMITTEE CONVENER Jason Espie has been instrumental in coordinating Mountain Agendarelated activities for The Mountain Institute (TMI) since May of1994. He is currently the Mountain Agenda Program Officer, withresponsibility for convening the Mountain Forum's InitialOrganizing Committee, overseeing the implementation of theInformation Server Node, and is the Forum's Global Nodecoordinator. Prior to 1994 he worked as an outdoor, environmentaleducation instructor in TMI's Appalachian Program. INFORMATION SERVER NODE -- DISCUSSION LIST MODERATOR Elizabeth Byers is employed part-time as the electronic discussionlist moderator for the Mountain Forum. Her background is inmountain hydrology, with additional experience in community-basedbiodiversity conservation, mountain-specific gender issues, andgeographic information systems. PROGRAM ASSISTANT Christine Poulson has been with the Mountain Forum since August, 1996. Her major responsibility is to maintain the Forum's database and update the Web page. Christine's previous work was with an organization that supports the inclusion of women in the development of their countries. INFORMATION SERVER NODE -- SYSTEM ANALYSTS We currently have a part-time person who designs and provides technical assistance for the MountainForum's electronic networking services. Dan O'Brien is an information technology consultant with extensiveexperience in helping design international connections to theInternet. Dan is also available to help answer Mountain Forum relatedtechnical queries. He will be responding to E-mail messagessent to mfsupport@mtnforum.org INFORMATION DISSEMINATION AND COORDINATION Lynelle Preston is serving as a part time informationdissemination and coordination position for the Mountain Forum,primarily responsible for co-moderating focused electronicconferences, building on-line resource database and otherinformation coordination activities. Lynelle was instrumental incontent moderating and synthesizing the successful "Paying forMountains" e-conference. We all wish to extend our warmest welcome to the Mountain Forum.We look forward to your active participation, and respectfullyrequest your honest input, suggestions and contributions. Our goalis to create and provide a useful service to the wide variety ofmountain peoples, cultures and their environments. Very Sincerely, Jason ------------------------------------------------------------ Jason Espie Mountain Agenda Program Officer The Mountain Institute Main & Dogwood Streets, PO Box 907 Franklin, WV 26807 USA Tel: +1-304-358-2401 / Fax: +1-304-358-2400 E-mail: jespie@igc.apc.org Web Pages: http://www.mountain.org The Mountain Institute http://www.mtnforum.org Mountain Forum ------------------------------------------------------------ Name: Malcolm (Mac) Odell Web Home Page: www.mountain.org Date: Tue, 6 Aug 1996 12:50:07 -0700 (PDT) From: macodell@igc.apc.org I am Malcolm (Mac) Odell, with The Mountain Institute's Makalu-BarunNational Park & Conservation Area Project (MBCP), working with BrianPeniston (Nepal) and Bob Davis and Gabriel Campbell(US) from whomForum members have already heard. My duties now are to support fieldoperations, particularly those related to community development, culturalconservation, and eco-tourism. These are three areas that we see as integrallyrelated to our tasks of advancing mountain cultures and protecting mountainenvironments. Personally, I also see these to be three key components inaddressing the issues at the heart of this dialog on 'paying for the mountains.' Previously I served as a Peace Corps volunteer in Nepal, 1962-67,including two y ears when I was fortunate enough to be the firstvolunteer posted in the high mountains, living for 2 years in Solu-Khumbuwhen it was an exceedingly poor, remote, and seldom visited area. I thinksome 65 travelers made it to Namche during the year I lived there. Seeing thepotential for tourism, and believing that it should be controlled directlyby the local people, I also helped arrange training in Switzerlandfor the first Sherpa eco-tourism entrepreneur, who later started the firstNepali-owned trekking agency. Name: Bikash Pandey Date: July 13, 1996 From:bpandey@garnet.berkeley.edu Hello everyone, My name is Bikash Pandey. I am currently a student at the Energy &ResourcesProgram at UC Berkeley. I am from Nepal and have been workingthere for thelast ten years to promote rural electrification through village levelmicro-hydro schemes. I first worked with the Development andConsultingServices out of Butwal and later with the Intermediate TechnologyDevelopment Group in Kathmandu. Recently, I was also involved aspart of anNGO "Alliance for Energy" in campaigning against the Arun IIIhydroelectricproject proposed in Eastern Nepal. I am interested in ways to help mountain communities (in theHimalayas andelse where) become self sufficient in clean, renewable energy. One keyaspect of this is finding creative funding mechanisms to make thishappen;another is encouraging government policies that are conducive tothis; andyet a third is having access to appropriate technologies. I aminterested inall three and would particularly like to hear the experience ofothers thatwork on issues of energy in mountain communities. Bikash Pandey 830 Gooding Drive Albany, CA 94706, USA tel: (510) 524-0590 fax: (510) 642-1085 e-mail: bpandey@garnet.berkeley.edu Name: Jacopo Pasotti Date: Date: Fri, 31 Jan 1997 12:17:10 -0800 (PST) From: pob266@pobox.infomark.it I am a 27 years old geomorphologist graduated in Milan (Italy) in July 1994. Since I graduated I have been working in geoenvironmental topics in mountainareas; in particular my interests are in geoenvironmental hazards forecastingand geomorphological mapping. These interests have roots both in my passionin mountain, snow, alpinism, and in my concerning in nature observation. During my master thesis research I spent two years in the Central Alps. Theaim of the research was to assess and map permafrost occurrence in mountainregions. To achieve this aim I made use of several methodologies employingboth direct (e.g. holes) and indirect (e.g. geophysics, Basal Temperature ofSnow cover measurements, temperature of springs...) measurements. Theresearch was conducted both in winter and in summer time. I spent longperiods at altitude higher than 2500 a.s.l. in glacial and periglacialenvironment where, with a colleague of mine, I carried out fieldmeasurements in and around several rockglaciers. This direct contact with such environment led me to go further ingeomorphological research and in exploration in mountain regions of othercountries, and I seized the opportunity to work with Professor Petru Urdeaof the University of Timisoara, Romania, thanks to a grant provided by theItalian Foreign Affairs Ministry. In Romania I faced a culture withdifferent cultural and historical tradition; there I projected and carriedthrough a research designed to find a relation on regional scale between airtemperature annual trends and ground temperature in the Carpathians. Inspite of the poor resources available I achieved successful resultscooperating with local scholars in a friendly and highly motivated team withwhom I am still in contact. >From April to October 1996, I worked in Belgium within the research team ofthe Agricultural Engineering Land Management Laboratory (RVL) in Gent. AtRVL I computed a model for soil erosion assessment making use of GIStechnologies, whose final report on the complete procedure followed I cansend on request. This experience allowed me acquire skills in masteringARC/INFO, ARC/VIEW, IDRISI and some database software systems as DB IV andACCESS. During November, December and part of January I collaborated with RemoteSense Data Engineering, a company which develops a specific GIS softwarepackage called Cartha and which makes use of remote sensed data. I am particularly eager to widen my experience in geoenvironmental hazardsassessment in mountain regions making use of GIS techniques, remote andfield data capture. I would like to be involved in a long-term researchwithin a research team. My sojourns in both European and non-European countries have fostered myenthusiasm in collaborating with different cultures I and have strengthenedmy collaboration skills. That's all! Best Regards, Jacopo. Name: Ana Maria Ponce Date: July 12, 1996 From: A.PONCE@CGNET.COM My name is Ana Maria Ponce. I work at the International PotatoCenter (CIP) since 1987 and support CONDESAN's telecommunication network: INFOANDINA since 1995. INFOANDINA is promoting the creation of electronic discussionlists in the Andean Region, such as the TELESIG list moderated by ABTEMA (Asociacion Boliviana para Teledeteccion y Medio Ambiente) in LaPaz. I also moderate the INFOANDINA-IPM initiative for Integrated Pest Management and distance learning pilot project at CIP. I am also the Mountain Forum contact person for networking in Latin America, and recently sent over 100 invitation letters to contactpersons in this part of the world, via regular mail and e-mail. We arereceiving responses from people interested in participating in the MFInitiative, and will keep them aware of the activities promoted by the MountainForum. Eng. Ana Maria Ponce CIP/CONDESAN P.O.Box 1558 Lima 100, Peru A.Ponce@cgnet.com Name: Phil Powers Date: July 18, 1996 From: phil_powers@nols.edu My name is Phil Powers. I am the Development and PartnershipsDirector at theNational Outdoor Leadership School in Lander, Wyoming. We teachwildernessskills and leadership with an emphasis on conservation in manydifferentenvironments including the mountains of Alaska, Washington,Wyoming, Arizona, India, Patagonia, Kenya, and British Columbia. Ihave been a very active climber and mountaineer for 20 years. In partnership with the main U.S. federal land managementagencies, we havedeveloped a conservation curriculum called Leave No Trace whichmight beinteresting to some of the forum participants. Phil Powers, Director Development and Partnerships National Outdoor Leadership School 288 Main Street Lander, WY 82520 (w) 307-332-1297 (f) 307-332-8811 e-mail ppowers@nols.edu Name: Jorge Recharte Date: July 12, 1996 From: recharte@pddsflac.ecx.ec Hola! I am writing from Quito Ecuador. I am an anthropologist from Peru, working in Ecuador since January 1994 as coordinator of the "Programa en Sociadades de Montan~a y Desarrollo Sustentable" at the Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales (FLACSO-Ecuador). I work as part of a 6 persons team that works in mountain sites in 4 protected areas that include large portions of high altitude mountains. Our team works in each one of these site as part of larger consortiums and programs of research and development. Before coming to Ecuador I worked for the International Potato Center (CIP) in Lima, Peru, in a project devoted to promoting potato seed multiplication schemes for small farmers in different Andean regions of Peru. For my doctoral dissertation I had the fortune of working in a gorgeous mountain region of southeastern Peru (3,500 - 4,500 masl), close to the Bolivian border, studying the connections between traditional agriculture and off-farm income produced by migration to gold mines. I was born in the FLAT lands of the Peruvian desert but I have now spent most of my professional life at high altitudes enjoying these great skies and views... Looking forward to join the discussion group, ----Jorge Recharte ___________________________________________________________ Jorge Recharte Programa en Sociedades de Montan~a y Desarrollo Sustentable - FLACSO INTERNET: recharte@pddsflac.ecx.ec o recharte@pddsflac.ecx.apc.org Direcci'on: Gral. Ulpiano Paez # 118 y Av. Patria, Casilla 17-11-06362, Quito, Ecuador Telefono: (593 2) 542 714 / 542 716 Fax: (593 2) 566 139 Name: Delfi Roca Date: August 14, 1996 From: delfiroc@correu.solucions.ad Saludos para todos, Mi nombre es Roca, Delfi Roca. Tengo 36 aos, varn y vivo en los Pirineos, frontera natural entre Francia y Espaa, en un pas llamado Andorra (470 km2). Nuestra lengua oficial es el cataln. (My name is Roca, Delfi Roca. I am a 36 year old man and I live in the Pyrenees, the natural frontier between France and Spain in a country called Andorra (470 km2). Our official language is catalan.) Trabajo como director de una ONG de protecin de los animales, las plantas y el medio ambiente llamada APAPMA. Contamos con unos 900 socios para una poblacin en el pas de 55.000 habitantes. (I work as director of an NGO that works to protect animals, plants and the environment. It is called APAPMA. We have 900 colleagues for a country populated with 55,000 people.) Uno de mis mayores deseos es conseguir que un desarrollo sostenible efectivo para las zonas de montaa sea una realidad lo mas pronto posible. La experiencia andorrana en este sentido es totalmente negativa. recibimos la visita, por motivos comerciales de 8 millones de turistas al ao. Es un buen ejemplo de como no deben hacersemuchas cosas. Es, por tanto, una base de datos de errores a evitar por otras comunidades que no estn en el nivel de desarrollo economico de la nuestra, si aspiran a ello. (One of my biggest wishes is the attainment of sustainable development for mountain regions as soon as possible. The Andorran experience is totally negative. We receive tourists, for commercial reasons, of 8 million people each year. It's a good example of how many things should not be done. There are many mistakes that could be avoided by other communities that are not at the same economic level as ours, but who aspire to get there.) Estar leyendo vuestros mensajes y intentar dar mi opinion si veoque en alguna experiencia se corre el peligro de equivocarse como hicimos nosotros, aunque nuestro ejemplo es muy difcil de reproducir enotros lugares del planeta. (I will be reading your messages and I will intend to give my opinion if I see the danger in making a mistake that we have made, although our example is very difficult to reproduce in other places on the planet.) Escribo en castellano porque, aunque lo leo, escribiendo mi ingls no es muy correcto, y me ofrezco para ayudar los mails en castellano, si a Elyzabeth o Lynelle les parece bien. (I write in castellano because, althouigh I read English, I have more trouble writing it. I offer my services to help with Spanish-speaking members if Elizabeth and Lynelle think that is a good idea). Adeu, Delfi Name: Jamie Ross Date: Thu, 6 Feb 1997 09:39:07 -0800 (PST) From: Jamie Ross 3jdr6@qlink.queensu.ca My name is Jamie Ross and I'm a Master's student in the Department ofGeography at Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, Canada. My work iscentred on an analysis of the processes and rates of sediment transportand deposition in a middle mountain watershed in the Nepal Himalaya. Ihave spent two field seasons in the Phewa Tal watershed over the past yearlooking at the impacts of monsoon vs. non-monsoon weather conditions onprocesses of sediment mobilisation, transport and delivery to thereservoir. The study has involved the collection of numerous sediment coresamples, discharge data, and lake water column data in order to determinethe relationships between climate, river discharge, suspended sedimentloads, lake stratification and mixing patterns and sedimentation. Aside from research, my interests in mountain environments lie inrecreation in the form of climbing, trekking etc. I amfortunate in that I will be able to combine these interests in an "environmental expedition" to Mt. Everest in the spring of '98. Thepurpose of the expedition will be to remove much of the waste accumulatingat base camp and those camps above it, that has been left by previousexpeditions. Work will also be aimed at assessing the current situation atbase camp and implementing alternatives that will help to mitigate thepresently severe ecological impacts that arise as a result of largenumbers of climbers and trekkers visiting each year. I look forward to becoming involved in discussions with other forummembers and would welcome anyone who is interested to contact me regardingresearch, recreation or both. Sincerely, Jamie Ross Name:Veneeta Singha From: veneeta@w43p_3.icimod.org.np HI, I'm Veneeta Singha from Kathmandu, Nepal and I'm actually involvedin Mtn Forum work here at ICIMOD. Well, so much for now. CIAO, Veneeta Name: Paul Swider Date: August 14, 1996 From: paul@dobrich.uspc.bg I am a US Peace Corps volunteer working on business development inBulgaria.I do extensive work with the tourist industry here and havenumerous contacts.Before you fumble for an atlas, Bulgaria is located north ofGreece, west ofTurkey, south of Romania and east of Yugoslavia (but no warshere). It has alovely coastline on the Black Sea. It has spectacular moutains. Ithas acommunist past, for those interested in politics. It has a mucholder and moreforgotten past dating to 6,000 BC. It has played a significantthough littlestudied part in all civilization, including if not especiallyWestern Civ.It has a fascinating culture, varied geography and unique place inhistory.It has a stable political situation with no threat of armed violence.It is seeking cooperation with the Western world in many ways. Ithas anunstable economy but that serves you well as it makes dollars andother hardcurrency *very* attractive and very strong. Stronger every day.There are many tourism possibilities here, from conventionalvacations atseaside resorts to truly wilderness excursions to cultural andacademic trips.In the first instance, I cannot sugar-coat the resorts: this isnot Club Med,though Club Med does own a resort very near where I work and sendsthousands ofFrench tourists here every year. Bulgarian resorts are nice but alittle datedin their accoutrements. If you want the Hyatt, don't come here.But if you wantto see someplace truly interesting on many levels -- and on thecheap --book your flights now. As far as other options, these become ever moreattractive as those interested in somewhat more adventuroustourism are lesslikely to mind missing a few stars in the rating. Some ideas forwhich I have*real* contacts ready to do business: -- archeological tours. the oldest necropolis in the world (I amtold) iswithin a 20-minute drive from my office; there are Turkish, Roman,Thracianand older ruins dating to civilizations the layperson does notunderstand.there are expert academics waiting to show off their treasures. -- wilderness trips. from canoe trips (on fairly placid riversthrough grandgorges, past castles and amongst charming villages) to huntingtrips (gun, bowand photo) to survival camps, there are excellently trained peoplehere callingme weekly to find out what we can arrange. make a suggestion andwe can finda way. -- cultural tourism. this country is officially more than 1,300years old. Though there are aspects of life here that are frustrating, thereare alsothings to see and learn. fascinating details stemming from700-plus years ofoccupation (Bulgarians shake their heads for "yes" because theMuslim OttomanTurks used to question the Bulgarians' faith by asking if theywere Christianwhile holding a sabre pointed up beneath their chins; nodding"yes" was nota survival strategy) make this a trove of discoveries of whichWesternersknow little. if you like, we can send you off the beaten path tovillagesand hamlets where the way of life hasn't changed in hundreds of years,despite numerous conquerors. I could go on and I will if you like but I am pushing both spacelimits andyour attention spans. Suffice to say if you are interested insomething outof the ordinary that will teach you more than you imagined and atlittlereal cost, this is an excellent opportunity. And not as blind alead as itmight sound because I will do what I can to guarantee thesearrangements areall safe, legitimate and worthwhile. I am trying to help development;my carelessness for a moment could undo years of work and I know that. Curious about any of the above? Feel free to write early and often. Thanks for your patience, Paul Swider US Peace Corps Dobrich, Bulgaria (motto: Where Tservice is Tsar) paul@dobrich.uspc.bg Name: Miriam Torres Date: July 15, 1996 From: miriam@tmi.org.pe Hi everybody, Hola todos! I'm Miriam Torres, from Huaraz, Peru. I work at The Andean Program of The Mountain Institute, which is based in Huaraz, the main town near Huascaran National Park, a mountain protected area which includes the highest part of the Cordillera Blanca, at the Central Peruvian Andes. TMI is working here since last August. Our largest project here 'till now is the Tourism Management Plan for Huascaran NP. Also we has as a principal objetive to stregthening local organizations, communities and governamental agencies to plan and manage community based conservation projects. Best regards, los mejores saludos a todos Name: Juha I. Uitto Web Home Page:URL: http://sunsite.sut.ac.jp/island Date: Wed, 13 Nov 1996 10:18:45 -0500 From: Juha I. Uitto Since 1990, I have been working as Academic Officer at the United Nations University headquarters in Tokyo, Japan. I am in charge of planning and management of the University's esearch and training programme in the field of environment.One of UNU's major projects in this field is 'Mountain Ecologyand Sustainable Development,' implemented jointly with theInternational Mountain Society (IMS) since 1978. More information on this, as well as other UNU initiatives in environmental fields, can be found on our homepage. A native of Finland, I received my B.Sc. (1981) and M.Sc. (1982) in Geography from the University of Helsinki, and my Ph.D.from the Department of Social and Economic Geography at theUniversity of Lund in Sweden (1989). From 1984 to 1987I worked at the International Fund for Agricultural Development(IFAD) and after that at the Scandinavian Institute of AfricanStudies. I've also acted as a consultant to Scandinavian aidagencies, as well as IFAD, working in Zambia, Kenya and Nepal. My recent publications include: 'The Salween River: Is International Development Possible?" Asia Pacific Viewpoint, Vol. 37, No. 3, 271-284 (1996) [co-authored with Glen Paoletto] 'Sustaining the Future: Economic, Social, and Environmental Change in Sub-Saharan Africa.' United Nations University Press (1996) [co-edited with George Benneh and William B. Morgan] 'Environment, Biodiversity, and Agricultural Change in West Africa.' United Nations University Press (1996) [co-edited with Edwin A. Gyasi] 'Management of Inland Lakes for Peace in Central Asia and Middle East.' Journal of Arid Land Studies, 5S, 5-8 (1995) [co-authored with Masahiro Murakami and Iwao Kobori] Name: Martijn van Beek Date: Wed, 13 Nov 1996 11:06:59 CET From: "Martijn van Beek" ETNOMVB@moes.hum.aau.dk Here's a few words about myself. I am currently asst. prof. ('adjunkt') at the Department of Ethnography and Social Anthropology at Aarhus University in Denmark. A Dutch citizen, I received my Ph.D. this spring from Cornell University for a dissertation on contemporary Ladakhi politics and development entitled 'Identity Fetishism and the Art of Representation'. Since 1985 I have been engaged in research and have worked with NGOs in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir in the Western Himalaya. My current research interests continue to focus on issues related to social and economic change, 'sustainable development', and the politics of identity in Ladakh and the wider Himalayan region. More specifically, I am interested in the implications of the changing location of Ladakh (as locally and externally perceived, through infrastructural and 'virtual' linking, positioning, and embedding) for processes and practices of development and livelihoods in general, and local and extra-local responses to and involvement in such changes (e.g. through politics, representation, formulations of demands and strategies, etc.). I strive to combine my academic pursuits with more immediately engaged and policy-oriented practices, generally of a less formal nature. I look forward to participating in discussions and activities related to the Mountain Forum. Martijn van Beek Adjunkt Dept. of Etnography and Social Anthropology Aarhus University Moesgaard DK-8270 Hoejbjerg DENMARK Ph: +45 89 42 46 70 fax: +45 86 27 07 08 Name: Ben Wang Date: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 10:57:39 -0500 (EST) From: Ben Wang I was born in Taiwan but have been living in the U.S. for 16 years. Iam just finishing up a master's program in Natural Resource Planning atthe University of Vermont. Future plans may lead me to China to pursueproject implementation or grassroots work. My favorite mountains (so far) are in the Sierra Nevada in California. Name: Tom Warren Date: Thu, 30 Jan 1997 08:36:42 -0800 (PST) From: T. Warren j.t.j.warren@bio.uio.no Dear Mountain Forum Members, My name is Tom Warren. I am an American living in Norway, and I am thedirector of the University of Oslo/University of Bergen's Mountain ResearchStation at Finse in the central part of southern Norway. My interest in mountains began in the Appalachian Mountains of NorthCarolina (USA) where I grew up, continued in the Rockies in western Montana(USA) where I completed my B.Sc. in wildlife biology at the Univ. ofMontana, and is now focused primarily on the mountains of Northern Europe,especially those here in Norway, where I've completed an M.Sc. and Ph.D. interrestrial ecology and zoology, respectively. Much of my work/interest is in the area of resource management, which ofcourse includes many human dimensions. I've worked mostly on predation onlivestock by large carnivores (in Norway that means brown bear, wolverine,wolf and lynx), as well as conflicts between wild reindeer hunters/managersand sheep grazing interests in the mountains of southern Norway. As thedirector of the mountain research station, I am fortunate to live and workfor long periods above the treeline (which in Norway at 60 degrees N is"only" 1000-1200 a.s.l.). I look forward to participating in the Mountain Forum. Tom Warren Biological Institute Box 1050, Blindern University of Oslo 0316 Oslo T. +47 22 85 47 94 F. +47 22 85 46 05 e. jerryt@bio.uio.no Name: Emily Yeh Date: Mon, 14 Oct 1996 00:47:19 -0700 From: mleyeh@violet.berkeley.edu Hi, I'm a PhD student at the Energy and Resources Group, UC Berkeley. I'minterested in natural resource management and meeting rural energyneeds in mountainous areas, particularly in Tibetan areas of the PRC.I'm interested in finding out what the current debates are; and alsojust getting a better grasp on who is doing what work, where (sincethis is all kind of new to me) -emily yeh Return to the Introductions Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised August 1996WT01-B09-204IA008-000077-B038-180http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/archives.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071847 text/html 2535HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:19:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2364Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:16 GMT  The Active Mountain Archive Index The Active Mountain Archives The following is a listing of the available Active Mountain Archive sections: MOUNTAIN FORUM LOGO CONTEST- The Mountain Forum Needs a Logo! Search the Active Mountain Archives- Perform full-text searches of the mailing list archives. Introductions- Here you'll find an archive of the introductions from our International group. Organizations of the Mountain Forum- See how we're put together. Discussion Threads- View the mailing list archives in month-by-month fashion. Bibliographies and Listings of Available Publications Available in October: Survey Results Members of the Mountain Forum Case Studies Stories Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised September 1996WT01-B09-205IA008-000077-B039-28http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/eurongoreco.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071917 text/html 20996HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:19:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 20824Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:57 GMT  NGO Recommendations to the European Union The European NGO Consultation on SustainableMountain Development: Recommendations of NGOs and Mountain Populations toGovernments and to the European Union Recommendations of NGOs and mountain populationsto governments and to the European Union These recommendations were issued by the European NGOConsultation on Sustainable Mountain Development which took place inToulouse, France, on 4-7 July 1996, in the framework of the implementationof Agenda 21, Chapter 13. Considering : the term sustainable development, defined in the report of the worldcommission for environment and development (Brundtland report) as"development that meets the needs of the present without compromising theability of future generations to meet their own needs" ; the importance of mountains in the global ecosystem, as a source ofwater, energy and biological diversity, and a source of such key resourcesas minerals, forest and agricultural products and of recreationalopportunity ; that about 10 per cent of the world's population depends directly onmountain resources, and a much larger percentage draws on mountainresources ; the characteristics and specific problems of mountain regions, in termsof economic difficulties and the fragility of the environment (altitude,relief, climatic conditions...) ; the diversity of mountains at a European scale ; the commitment of governments to act in favour of sustainable developmentof mountain regions, formalised in chapter 13 of Agenda 21 arising from theconference of Rio in 1992, and the present intergovernmental workingprocess leading up to the world conference on mountain areas in 1997 . Taking into account : the European Consultation by the means of a questionnaire which had beentranslated in 16 languages and sent to more than 5000 NGOs in 45 Europeancountries, and, in particular, the response rate of nearly 19 %, reflectingthe major interest of NGOs and populations in the subject of sustainablemountain development ; the opinions and wishes expressed, and in particular : that the majority of the NGOs consider that nothing has changed since theconference of Rio, concerning mountain regions ; that the most efficient defenders of mountain interests are theinhabitants and the NGOs, and that they are badly represented in thedecision making bodies of European countries ; that sustainable mountain development needs first and foremost aconcerted action between all actors involved, and interregional andinternational cooperation, especially in the case of transborder massifs ; that specific laws for mountains should be created where they do not exist ; that human activity may cause considerable damage to the environment inmountain areas, and that the current measures for environmental protectionare insufficient ; that the road system in mountain areas is considered for the most partadequate or satisfactory. Taking into account the results of the survey of concerned NGOs andpopulations of all European countries, the delegates of the Conference onSustainable Mountain Development which took place in Toulouse, France, on4-7 July 1996, representing a range of interests from across society(associations for nature protection, socio-professional organisations,cultural and sporting associations...) and coming from 24 Europeancountries,recommend the following specific policies and actions in support ofmountain areas. The delegates recommend In matters of general policy to support multidisciplinary research in mountain areas, in order toassess the state of European mountains and the impact to date and potentialimpact of climate change on these zones ; to clearly define criteria for good and bad practices in sustainablemountain development, to identify examples of good practice and to launchand support a series of pilot projects ; to promote the implementation of Agenda 21, by integrating the specificneeds of mountain areas into regional, national and European policies andby defining specific commitments and responsibilities, taking into accountinter alias the proposed European Charter of Mountain Regions, the AlpineConvention and the Charter for the Protection of the Pyrenees ; to introduce a trans-sectoral approach to management of mountain regions,adjusted to the great diversity of mountains and taking into accountinteractions between mountains, lowlands and seas ; to give more power to regional authorities in matters of sustainabledevelopment and to establish and implement, by consulting all interestgroups of the area concerned, a regional sustainable development plan foreach mountain region which analyses the state of the environmental,socio economic and cultural quality of the region, the driving forcesbehind barriers to sustainability, the ecological and economic impacts ofpressures on the region and the present policy outcomes ; to reinforce interregional, interministerial and internationalcooperation, which is indispensable for attaining sustainable mountaindevelopment ; to create, harmonise and implement legislation on the protection ofenvironment, to monitor sources of pollution and to introduce detailedassessment procedures, in order to avoid investment that doesn't respectthe principles of sustainability ; to reform the structural funds of the European Union, by redirectingfunds towards the ecological development of mountain regions adopting atranssectoral approach and to create a structure for offering financialsupport for sustainable mountain development in relevant regions outsidethe European Union ; to take into consideration the special problems of mountain areasaffected by war, in particular humanitarian problems, and to work towardspeace in these regions ; that the European Union adopts a directive with a view to promotingsustainable mountain development. In relation to Tourism and the Conservation of the Mountain Heritage to establish specific mountain tourism laws and policies, based on theprinciples of sustainable development ; to develop a "gentle" tourism based on promoting opportunity for informalrecreation that enhances the natural and cultural heritage, respects theenvironment, is based on local populations and facilities (especially inmatters of accommodation), favours other traditional activities (especiallycraft working) and provides a genuine supplementary income to localpopulations and communes ; to develop codes of good practice for particular mountain activities andto promote these as international standards, aiming to make visitors, aswell as the local people, aware of the importance of mountains as anatural, cultural and recreational resource ; to develop and implement area plans with a view to achieving sustainablemountain tourism, favouring integrated action, taking into account theassessment of carrying capacity and ensuring the freedom of access ; to monitor the environmental impact of tourism in sensitive zones, toidentify areas where there is a real or potential conflict between theneeds of mountain protection and those of mountain tourism (construction ofroads, skilifts, buildings...). Artificial snow making should be limitedwhere it would cause negative impacts on the environment ; to develop a European Charter for Mountain Tourism reflecting the searchfor an equilibrium between the needs of the natural environment and thoseof tourism development. The Charter could include the concept of a "Label"for quality mountain tourism and standards for pollution control,environmental quality etc... ; to consider favourable tax policies (e.g. tax-free zones) for small orlocal organisations working on mountain tourism respecting environment andto publicise any such support . In relation to Agriculture and Forests in Mountain Areas to support and develop small-scale mixed agriculture (combining farming,forestry and livestock raising) and multiple employment, based on respectfor the environment, which assumes a particular economic and socialimportance in mountain areas and an importance in terms of the conservationof landscapes and heritage ; to sustain, enhance or create a policy of support and compensation forthe handicaps of altitude and slope, remunerating the maintenance andmanagement of the landscape, opportunities for informal recreation andsupporting the integration of buildings which are in keeping with thelandscape. Such support may take the form of direct aid, reductions andexemptions from land and other taxes, reduced interest rates for loans... ; to promote solidarity between lowland and mountain areas and to changethe fund allocation of the European Union so as to provide greater supportfor extensive grassland farming in mountains, for example by flat-rate aidto farmers ; to evaluate the harmful effects that current policies often produce inmountain areas (farmland concentration, farmland abandonment, dairyquotas...), and to modify their orientation with a view to sustainabledevelopment ; to remunerate at a fair price and to foster the development ofhigh-quality products often based on traditional know how, and inparticular organic agriculture, in order to supply local markets and theever-increasing demand from urban consumers; national and Europeanlegislation and regulations should provide for such products to bedistinguished in the market-place, for example by creating labels orappellations ; to ensure the stringent health regulations applying to these products arewell adapted to and set within reach of small production and processingfacilities ; to promote innovative solutions for better management of farm land ownership ; to implement the recommendations of the intergovernmental conference ofHelsinki, and in particular the management and use of forests in a way thatmaintains their biological diversity, their capacity for regeneration andtheir ecological, recreational and economic functions. In matters of Planning and Infrastructure to undertake land management trying to avoid urban over-concentration andto maintain viable populations in mountain areas centred on existingvillages; that a management and development plan should be established for eachmountain massif and its communities or districts, with full publicparticipation, respecting the natural and cultural heritage includinghabitat, air, water and soil quality and the tranquillity of mountain areas; to promote the grouping together of mountain communes in order to providethem with enough weight to have responsibility for development andmanagement planning ; that the European Union and national, regional and local authoritiesguarantee the assessment of the environmental impact of all projects, rightfrom the initial phase of their conception, involving the participation oflocal authorities, NGOs, local inhabitants and independent experts, and thestudy of alternative projects and solutions and any necessary accompanyingmeasures. Such assessments should be undertaken with a strategicperspective to take account of incremental development ; old projectsshould be re-evaluated ; for major projects, to undertake a rigorous public examination of theneed for the development and of alternative means of meeting any provenneed ; that an effort should be taken in order to restrict growth in theconsumption of energy, products and raw material, and to develop recyclingof materials, in order to reduce damaging impacts on mountain areas ; that the real cost of each mode of transport should be assessed,including the social and ecological costs, and to switch transport,particularly through traffic (international transit), to rail transport andpiggyback routes, by : using taxation and traffic restrictions, in order to reduce the modes oftransport that cause the most pollution and environmental nuisances ; limiting drastically the building of new roads and motorways, inparticular new cross mountain axes; an exception may be made in specificcases, for example to permit commercial relations in Eastern Europeancountries ; to modify the system of direct and indirect subsidies of governments andthe European Union affecting the process of production (from theexploitation of resources to the manufacture of final products), in orderto avoid superfluous traffic ; to reduce the nuisance caused by air traffic over and through themountains to a level that is bearable to inhabitants and the environment,by restricting or banning tourist transport (propeller aircraft,ultralights...) ; that technical systems such as telecommunications and teleworking shouldbe developed in order to reduce the current huge increase in the mobilityof people and goods ; to strengthen and to implement more effectively the system forcontrolling European funds, in order to ensure projects respect theenvironment and to block those that do not ; that mountain populations and authorities should receive compensation forinfrastructure and services used by visitors and lowland inhabitants, witha view to the principles of sustainable development defined above ; to take into account the need of mountain inhabitants for affordable housing. The delegates request the Governments and the European Union officially toacknowledge the rights of mountain populations and the role of local,regional, national and international NGOs. They request : to promote education and raise awareness of sustainable development amongall sectors of the population, to make sure that the right of free accessto information is respected, and to establish such laws in countries wherethey do not exist ; to ensure the participation of NGOs and concerned populations throughoutdecision making (planning agreement, establishment, follow-up and control)of all projects linked to sustainable mountain development, in particularthrough the dissemination of information and formal public hearings ; to promote mediation as a means of overcoming conflicts, in view of itsflexibility, speed and efficacy ; to ensure that any member of the public is able to take legal action tooppose major projects with serious environmental consequences ; to make available funds for the activities of NGOs involved infacilitating sustainable mountain development, and to recognise theimportant role of local organisations ; to promote the introduction of formal partnership structures ; The delegates express clearly the need for setting up a Network ofParticipants in Sustainable Mountain Development in Europe, in order toexchange information and experiences, and request support, especiallyfinancial support, to promote that exchange network between mountain NGOsand other actors concerned. The delegates ask that a follow up commission be set up to monitor theresults and impacts of the intergovernmental conference of Trento, in orderto evaluate measures adopted. NGOs should be properly represented in this commission. Conference on Sustainable Mountain DevelopmentToulouse, France, 4, 5, 6 and 7 July 1996 Participation list Forum i pavarur i gruas shqiptare, Albania Bashkimi i Koperuesve Agrare RR. , Albania Association Splologique Albanaise, Albania Progreshirinor, Albania Association pour la Protection des Animaux, des Plantes et del'Environnement, Andorra CIPRA sterreich, Austria Naturfreunde International, Austria Bureau Europen de l'Environnement, Belgium Association Sarajevo, Bosnia Mouvement cologique de Bosnie, Bosnia Fdration Intereco, Bulgaria Skautski turisticheski Klub, Bulgaria Interecoclub, Bulgaria Hrvatski Planinarski Savez, Croatia Eko Usmjereni Razvos , Croatia Association Nationale des Elus de la Montagne, France Fdration de Chasse de l'Arige, France France Nature Environnement, France Agence Rgionale Pour l'Environnement Midi-Pyrnes , France Association Franaise du Pastoralisme, France Association de Vingrau, France Rseau Espaces Protgs Alpins, France Fdration Franaise d'Economie Montagnarde, France Association Ecologie Bigorre, France Conseil International Associatif pour la Protection des Pyrnes, France -Spain - Andorra Fdration Francaise de Randonne Pdestre, France Icalpe, France Association Acte, France Fundation Udabno, Georgia Sustainable Tourism Center, Georgia Recherche Protection et Promotion de l'Olympe, Greece Association "Achelos" of Pindos, Greece Central and East European Working Group for the Enhancement ofBiodiversity, Hungary Eletfa Krnyezetvedo Szvetseg, Hungary Biokultura Association, Hungary Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe, Hungary Udaras na Gaeltachta , Ireland Irish Uplands Forum, Ireland Centre International pour l'Ecologie Alpine, Italy Drustvo na zastita na pticite, Macedonia Dvizenje na ekologistite namakedonia, Macedonia Stowarzyszenie "Klub Zdanie", Poland Romanian Association of Nature Lovers, Romania Organisatia Studentilor Silvicultori Silva, Romania Clubul de Ecologie si Turism Montan Albamont, Romania MAB - Headquarter in Russia and CIS, Russia Eurasian Mountain Center, Russia Nadcia Ekolgia & Zivot, Slovakia Spolocnost pre trvalo udrzatel'ny zivot v SR, Slovakia Zvz pol'nohospodarskych druzstiev Slovenskej Republiky, Slovakia Greenway , Slovakia Slovensko Ekolsko Gibanje , Slovenia Fundacion Ecologia y Desarrollo, Spain Federacin de Entidades Excursionistas de Catalunya, Spain Movimento Ecoloxista da Limia, Spain Asociacion de Mulleres Rurais "Virgen de los Dolores" O Savinao, Spain Communaut de Travail des Pyrnes, Spain - France - Andorra Schweizerische Arbeitsgemeinschaft fr die Berggebiete, Switzerland Initiative des Alpes, Switzerland Karadeniz in zelliklerini Koruma Kulb, Turkey The Turkish Foundation for Combatting Soil Erosion, for Reforestation andthe Protection of Natural Habitats, Turkey IUCN, United Kingdom Scottish Natural Heritage, United Kingdom World Wide Fund for Nature - Scotland, United Kingdom Council for National Parks, United Kingdom Karpatska Shkola, Ukraine Euromontana, Europe Association Europenne des Elus de la Montagne, Europe Secretary of the NGO Consultation ARPE 14 rue de Tivoli 31 068 Toulouse France E-Mail: Arpemp@mipnet.fr until 18 October 1996: Tl.: (33) 61.33.50.79, Fax (33) 61.33.53.11. after 18 October 1996: Tl.: (33) 05.61.33.50.79, Fax (33)05.61.33.53.11. CIAPP 14 rue de Tivoli 31 068 Toulouse France E-Mail:Ciapp@starnet.unisoft.fr until 18 October 1996: Tl.: (33) 61.33.50.88, Fax (33) 61.33.55.10. after 18 October 1996: Tl.: (33) 05.61.33.50.88, Fax (33)05.61.33.55.10. Return to the Regional Pages Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-206IA008-000077-B039-53http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/eurongofr.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071937 text/html 21665HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:19:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21493Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:58 GMT Recommandations des O.N.G. et des populations de montagne aux gouvernements et  l'Union Europenne  La Confrence Europenne des ONG sur le Dveloppement Durablede la Montagne: Recommandations des ONG et des populations de la montagneaux gouvernements et  l'Union Europenne Ces recommandations sont issues de la ConfrenceEuropenne des ONG sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne qui s'esttenue  Toulouse, France, du 4 au 7 juillet 1996, dans le cadre de la miseen oeuvre du chapitre 13 de l'Agenda 21 Considrant : la notion de "dveloppement durable", dfinie dans le rapport de la commission mondiale sur l'environnement et le dveloppement (rapport Brundtland) comme "un dveloppement apte  rpondre aux besoins du prsent sans compromettre la possibilit de rpondre aux besoins des gnrations  venir" ; l'importance des montagnes dans l'cosystme mondial, comme rservoir d'eau, d'nergie et de diversit biologique, de ressources essentielles telles que les minraux, les produits forestiers et agricoles, mais aussi comme espace de loisirs ; qu'environ 10 % de la population est dpendante des ressources des montagnes, et qu'une proportion beaucoup plus grande prlve des ressources ; les caractristiques et problmes spcifiques des rgions de montagne, en termes de difficults conomiques et de fragilit de l'environnement (altitude, relief, conditions climatiques...) la diversit des montagnes  l'chelle europenne ; l'engagement des gouvernements d'agir en vue d'un dveloppement durable des zones de montagne, formalis dans le chapitre 13 de l'Agenda 21, labor lors de la confrence de Rio de 1992, ainsi que le processus intergouvernemental actuellement en cours en vue de la tenue de la confrence mondiale de la montagne en 1997. Compte tenu : de la Consultation Europenne au moyen d'un questionnaire traduit en 16 langues et diffus auprs de plus de 5000 ONG dans 45 pays europens, et notamment du taux de rponse de presque 19 %, tmoignant de l'intrt majeur que les ONG et les populations portent au sujet du dveloppement durable des montagnes ; des opinions et souhaits exprims, soulignant en particulier : que les ONG estiment en grande majorit que rien n'a chang pour les zones de montagnes depuis la confrence de Rio ; que les meilleurs dfenseurs des intrts de la montagne sont les habitants et les ONG, et qu'ils sont mal reprsents dans les instances des pays europens ; que le dveloppement durable de la montagne ncessite prioritairement une concertation entre tous les acteurs impliqus et qu'une coopration interrgionale et internationale est indispensable, notamment dans le cas des massifs transfrontaliers ; qu'il faut crer des lois spcifiques  la montagne l o elles n'existent pas ; que des dangers importants lis aux activits humaines menacent l'environnement en montagne, et que les mesures actuellement prises en matire de protection sont insuffisantes ; que le rseau routier en montagne est considr comme suffisant ou satisfaisant par la majorit des intresss. Tenant compte des rsultats de l'enqute mene auprs des ONG et des populations concernes de toute l'Europe, les dlgus participant aux Assises sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne, runis  Toulouse (France) du 4 au 7 Juillet 1996, reprsentant les diffrentes composantes de la socit civile (associations de protection de la nature, organisations socio-professionnelles, associations culturelles et sportives...), et venant de 24 pays d'Europe, recommandent des politiques et des actions spcifiques en faveur de la montagne. les dlgus recommandent En matire de politique gnrale de soutenir une recherche pluridisciplinaire sur les rgions de montagne, afin d'valuer leur tat, et l'impact actuel et potentiel du changement climatique sur ces zones ; de dfinir clairement les critres de bons et de mauvais usages en matire de dveloppement durable, de rechercher des bonnes pratiques, de lancer et de soutenir une srie de projets pilotes ; de promouvoir la mise en oeuvre de l'Agenda 21 et de prendre en compte, entre autre, les propositions de la Charte Europenne des Rgions de Montagne, de la Convention Alpine et de la Charte pour la Protection des Pyrnes, en intgrant les besoins spcifiques des rgions de montagne dans les politiques rgionales, nationales et europennes et en dfinissant des engagements et des responsabilits concrtes ; d'introduire une approche trans-sectorielle dans la gestion des rgions de montagne, adapte  la trs grande diversit des montagnes et prenant en compte les interactions entre montagnes, plaines et mers ; de renforcer le pouvoir des rgions en matire de dveloppement durable et d'laborer, par la consultation des groupes d'intrt dans les zones concernes, des plans rgionaux de dveloppement durable des zones de montagne qui analyse la qualit culturelle, socio-conomique et environnementale de la rgion, les forces qui s'opposent  la durabilit, les impacts cologiques et conomiques des pressions sur les rgions et les rponses fournies par les politiques actuelles ; de renforcer la coopration interrgionale, interministrielle et internationale indispensable au dveloppement durable des montagnes ; de crer, d'harmoniser et d'appliquer la lgislation sur la protection de l'environnement, de surveiller les sources de pollution, et d'laborer des normes en matire de contrle afin d'viter tout investissement qui ne respecte pas les principes du dveloppement durable ; de raliser une rforme des fonds structurels de l'Union Europenne, en mettant en place un fonds spcial pour le dveloppement cologique des rgions de montagne et de crer ou adapter, pour les rgions appartenant  des pays hors Union Europenne, des structures de soutien financier ; de prendre en considration les problmes particuliers et, en priorit, les problmes humanitaires des zones de montagne affectes par la guerre et d'assurer la paix dans ces rgions . que l'Union Europenne adopte une directive en faveur d'un dveloppement durable des rgions de montagne. En matire de tourisme et de conservation du patrimoine en montagne d'laborer des politiques et des lois spcifiques au tourisme en montagne, bases sur les principes du dveloppement durable ; de dvelopper un tourisme doux bas sur la promotion d'un tourisme de dcouverte qui valorise le terroir, respecte l'environnement, s'appuie sur les populations et les moyens disponibles localement (notamment en matire d'habitat), favorise le dveloppement des activits traditionnelles (notamment l'artisanat) et apporte un revenu complmentaire pour les populations et les collectivits locales ; d'laborer un code de bonne conduite pour certaines activits de montagne, et de le promouvoir en tant que standard international, facilitant ainsi la prise de conscience, par le visiteur tranger ainsi que par la population locale, de l'importance de la montagne en tant qu'espace naturel, culturel et de loisirs ; de raliser et d'appliquer des plans de zones en vue d'un dveloppement raisonn du tourisme de montagne, favorisant des actions intgres, prenant en compte, entre autres, la capacit d'accueil et veillant au droit d'accs aux espaces ; de surveiller l'impact du tourisme sur l'environnement dans les zones sensibles et d'identifier les zones o il y a un conflit rel ou potentiel entre le besoin de la protection de la montagne et les activits touristiques (construction de routes, tlphriques, btiments...). L'enneigement artificiel doit tre limit l o il peut causer des impacts ngatifs sur l'environnement ; d'laborer une Charte Europenne pour le Tourisme en Montagne cherchant un quilibre entre la protection de l'environnement et le dveloppement du tourisme; une telle charte pourrait inclure le concept de "Label" pour un tourisme de montagne de qualit et englober des normes en matire de contrle de pollution, de qualit de l'environnement, etc... ; d'envisager des politiques fiscales favorables (des zones dtaxes par exemple) pour les petites et moyennes organisations spcialises dans le tourisme de montagne respectueuses de l'environnement et de les faire connatre. En matire d'agriculture et de fort en montagne de soutenir et de dvelopper une agriculture paysanne, agro-sylvo-pastorale, pluriactive, respectueuse de l'environnement, qui revt en montagne une importance en termes conomiques, sociaux et de conservation des paysages et du patrimoine ; de maintenir, d'amliorer ou de crer une politique de soutien et de compensation des handicaps lis  l'altitude et  la pente, de rmunrer les fonctions d'entretien de l'espace et d'accueil d'un tourisme de dcouverte et de soutenir l'intgration des btiments dans le paysage, par des aides directes aux revenus, des diminutions ou suppressions de taxes, d'impts fonciers, des rductions des taux d'intrts des prts... ; de dvelopper la solidarit entre les zones de plaine et de montagne, et de modifier la rpartition des crdits de l'Union Europenne, afin de soutenir davantage l'agriculture herbagre extensive en montagne, grce, par exemple,  une aide fixe  l'exploitation ; d'valuer les effets ngatifs que la politique actuelle produit souvent en montagne (remembrements, abandons de terres, quotas laitiers...), et de modifier ses orientations en termes de dveloppement durable ; de remunrer  juste prix et de favoriser la production de produits de qualit issus souvent d'un savoir faire traditionnel, et notamment de l'agriculture biologique, afin de satisfaire les marchs locaux et la demande de plus en plus forte des consommateurs urbains ; les lgislations et les rglementations nationales et europennes doivent permettre de les identifier sur le march, par exemple par la cration de labels ou d'appellations ; de crer pour ces productions des rglementations sanitaires rigoureuses, adaptes qui soient  la porte des petits ateliers de production ou de transformation ; de rechercher des solutions novatrices pour une meilleure matrise du foncier agricole ; d'appliquer des recommandations de la confrence intergouvernementale d'Helsinki, et notamment la gestion et l'utilisation des forts de manire  maintenir leur diversit biologique, leur capacit de rgnration et leurs fonctions cologique, touristique et conomique ; En matire de planification et d'infrastructures de participer  l'amnagement du territoire cherchant  viter la surconcentration urbaine et  maintenir la population en zones de montagne, en s'appuyant sur le bti existant ; qu'un schma directeur d'amnagement du territoire soit tabli, pour tout massif montagneux et ses communes,  partir d'une large consultation, respectant le patrimoine naturel et culturel, et en particulier l'habitat, la qualit de l'air, de l'eau et du sol et le calme des rgions de montagne; que soit dvelopp le regroupement de communes de montagne, pour obtenir un poids suffisant dans l'exercice de leurs comptences en matire d'amnagement du territoire et de dveloppement ; que l'Union Europenne et les diffrentes administrations nationales, rgionales et locales garantissent l'valuation de l'impact environnemental de tout projet d'amnagement ds la phase initiale de conception, ainsi que la participation des pouvoirs locaux, des ONG, des citoyens et des experts indpendants, et l'tude de projets et solutions alternatives et des mesures d'accompagnement ncessaires. Ces valuations doivent tre effectues dans une perspective stratgique tenant compte d'un dveloppement progressif ; les projets dj tudis sont  rvaluer. les projects importants doivent tre examins rigoureusement en vue d'valuer leur necessit relle et la possibilit de rpondre  un besoin prouv par des moyens alternatifs ; qu'un effort soit entrepris afin de rduire la croissance de la consommation d'nergie, de produits et de matires premires et de dvelopper le recyclage, en vue d'une diminution des impacts ngatifs sur les rgions de montagne ; que le cot rel de chaque moyen de transport, incluant les cots sociaux et cologiques, soit valu et que le transport, notamment le transit international, soit dirig vers le transport ferroviaire, plus particulirement vers le ferroutage et le transport combin, en utilisant la voie fiscale et en instaurant des restrictions de circulation, afin de rduire l'importance des moyens de tranport les plus polluants, nuisant  l'environnement ; limitant de faon draconienne la construction de nouvelles routes et autoroutes, surtout de grands axes de transit routier  travers les montagnes, sauf dans les cas motivs, p. ex. pour permettre les relations commerciales dans les pays de l'Est ; que les aides directes et indirectes des Etats et de l'Union Europenne intervenant dans le processus de production (de l'exploitation de matire premire  la ralisation de produits finis) soient rvises, afin de limiter des transports superflus ; que les atteintes dues au trafic arien par dessus et dans les massifs soient rduites  un niveau supportable pour les habitants et l'environnement, en limitant, voire en interdisant les transports touristiques (hlicoptre, ULM...) ; que soient dvelopps les moyens techniques (communication, tltravail, etc...) pour rduire la croissance norme actuelle de mobilit de personnes et de marchandises ; de renforcer et d'appliquer le systme de contrle des fonds europens afin d'assurer que les projets respectent l'environnement et de bloquer les subventions dans le cas contraire ; que les populations de montagne et les collectivits locales reoivent des compensations pour les infrastructures et les services qui profitent aux visiteurs et aux populations des plaines, dans le contexte du dveloppement durable prcdemment dfini ; que les besoins de logements  prix raisonnable pour les habitants de la montagne fassent l'objet de mesures adaptes. Les dlgus demandent  l'Union Europenne et aux Gouvernements Europens de reconnatre officiellement les droits des populations de montagne et le rle des ONG locales, rgionales, nationales et internationales. Ils demandent : de promouvoir l'ducation et la sensibilisation de toutes les catgories de la population au dveloppement durable, de veiller au respect du droit  l'accs  l'information et de mettre en place une telle lgislation dans les pays o elle n'existe pas encore ; d'assurer la participation des ONG et des populations concernes au processus d'laboration, de concertation, de mise en oeuvre, de suivi et de contrle de tout projet de dveloppement durable, en particulier par la diffusion de l'information et l'organisation d'enqutes publiques; qu'une mdiation soit dveloppe chaque fois que ncessaire pour rsoudre les conflits, compte tenu de sa flexibilit, sa rapidit et son efficacit ; de garantir la possibilit pour tout citoyen de recourir  la voie judiciaire pour s'opposer  un projet peu respectueux de l'environnement ; de mettre des fonds  disposition des ONG pour leurs activits en matire de dveloppement durable, et de reconnatre le rle important des organisations locales ; de promouvoir la mise en place de structures de partenariats formels. Ils expriment clairement le besoin de crer un rseau des acteurs du dveloppement durable des montagnes d'Europe, en vue d'changer des informations et des expriences et sollicitent un soutien, notamment financier, afin de promouvoir ce rseau d'changes entre les ONG de montagne et d'autres acteurs concerns. Les dlgus revendiquent la mise en place d'une commission de suivi de la confrence intergouvernementale de Trento, ayant pour objectif l'valuation des engagements qui y seront pris. Dans cette commission, les ONG demandent  tre reprsentes de manire satisfaisante. Les Assises du Dveloppement Durable de la MontagneToulouse, France, 4, 5, 6 et 7 juillet 1996 Liste des participants Forum i pavarur i gruas shqiptare, Albania Bashkimi i Koperuesve Agrare RR. , Albania Association Splologique Albanaise, Albania Progreshirinor, Albania Association pour la Protection des Animaux, des Plantes et de l'Environnement, Andorra CIPRA sterreich, Austria Naturfreunde International, Austria Bureau Europen de l'Environnement, Belgium Association Sarajevo, Bosnia Mouvement cologique de Bosnie, Bosnia Fdration Intereco, Bulgaria Skautski turisticheski Klub, Bulgaria Interecoclub, Bulgaria Hrvatski Planinarski Savez, Croatia Eko Usmjereni Razvos , Croatia Association Nationale des Elus de la Montagne, France Fdration de Chasse de l'Arige, France France Nature Environnement, France Agence Rgionale Pour l'Environnement Midi-Pyrnes , France Association Franaise du Pastoralisme, France Association de Vingrau, France Rseau Espaces Protgs Alpins, France Fdration Franaise d'Economie Montagnarde, France Association Ecologie Bigorre, France Conseil International Associatif pour la Protection des Pyrnes, France - Spain - Andorra Fdration Francaise de Randonne Pdestre, France Icalpe, France Association Acte, France Fundation Udabno, Georgia Sustainable Tourism Center, Georgia Recherche Protection et Promotion de l'Olympe, Greece Association "Achelos" of Pindos, Greece Central and East European Working Group for the Enhancement of Biodiversity, Hungary Eletfa Krnyezetvedo Szvetseg, Hungary Biokultura Association, Hungary Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe, Hungary Udaras na Gaeltachta , Ireland Irish Uplands Forum, Ireland Centre International pour l'Ecologie Alpine, Italy Drustvo na zastita na pticite, Macedonia Dvizenje na ekologistite namakedonia, Macedonia Stowarzyszenie "Klub Zdanie", Poland Romanian Association of Nature Lovers, Romania Organisatia Studentilor Silvicultori Silva, Romania Clubul de Ecologie si Turism Montan Albamont, Romania MAB - Headquarter in Russia and CIS, Russia Eurasian Mountain Center, Russia Nadcia Ekolgia & Zivot, Slovakia Spolocnost pre trvalo udrzatel'ny zivot v SR, Slovakia Zvz pol'nohospodarskych druzstiev Slovenskej Republiky, Slovakia Greenway , Slovakia Slovensko Ekolsko Gibanje , Slovenia Fundacion Ecologia y Desarrollo, Spain Federacin de Entidades Excursionistas de Catalunya, Spain Movimento Ecoloxista da Limia, Spain Asociacion de Mulleres Rurais "Virgen de los Dolores" O Savinao, Spain Communaut de Travail des Pyrnes, Spain - France - Andorra Schweizerische Arbeitsgemeinschaft fr die Berggebiete, Switzerland Initiative des Alpes, Switzerland Karadeniz in zelliklerini Koruma Kulb, Turkey The Turkish Foundation for Combatting Soil Erosion, for Reforestation and the Protection of Natural Habitats, Turkey IUCN, United Kingdom Scottish Natural Heritage, United Kingdom World Wide Fund for Nature - Scotland, United Kingdom Council for National Parks, United Kingdom Karpatska Shkola, Ukraine Euromontana, Europe Association Europenne des Elus de la Montagne, Europe Secrtariat de la consultation des ONG ARPE, 14 rue de Tivoli, 31 068 Toulouse, France, E-Mail: Arpemp@mipnet.fr jusqu'au 18 Octobre 1996: Tl.: (33) 61.33.50.79, Fax (33) 61.33.53.11. aprs le 18 Octobre 1996: Tl.: (33) 05.61.33.50.79, Fax (33) 05.61.33.53.11. CIAPP, 14 rue de Tivoli, 31 068 Toulouse, France, E-Mail: Ciapp@starnet.unisoft.fr jusqu'au 18 Octobre 1996: Tl.: (33) 61.33.50.88, Fax (33) 61.33.55.10. aprs le 18 Octobre 1996: Tl.: (33) 05.61.33.50.88, Fax (33) 05.61.33.55.10. Return to the Regional Pages Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-207IA008-000077-B039-80http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/europengo.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071946 text/html 6540HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:20:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6369Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:59 GMT  The European Consultation of NGO and Populations The European Consultation of NGO and Populations on Sustainable Mountain Development General information: In June 1992, at the Conference at Rio, called the "Earth Summit", the countries unanimously adopted Agenda 21, a plan for action into the 21st century. The specific problems of the mountain regions were addressed in Chapter 13 of this document, giving recommendations for the management of fragile ecosystems with a view to the sustainable development of mountains. Since that time, mountain regions have become a major field of attention for the United Nations. In regard to the implementation of the recommendations, and in preparation of the special session of the UN which is scheduled for 1997, several European intergovernmental consultations were organized. The European consultation took place April 22 - 26 in Aviemore, Scotland (first session) and October 7-11 in Trento, Italy (second session). The coordination of this conference was carried out by the European Programme of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) and by the International Centre for Alpine Environments (ICALPE). Simultaneously with this intergovernmental working process, the FAO wished to record the perceptions and the opinions of the mountain populations. For this reason, a European consultation of populations and NGOs concerned with the sustainable development of mountains took place. Objectives Organized by the Regional Agency for the Environment of Midi-Pyrnes, France (ARPE*) under the patronage of the CTP* and in cooperation with the CIAPP*, this consultation made it possible for NGOs to take part actively in the European intergovernmental process. The opinion of those who live in and who are concerned with the mountains is particularly important in that process. Their perception of the mountain populations, their reflections and their knowledge are indispensable in considering the current problems, and in defining possible development strategies and proposing concrete actions. The global objectives of the NGO consultation, as a part of the intergovernmental process, were: to strengthen collective concern about the value of mountains, to gain a better understanding of the major issues to be considered in regard to sustainable mountain development, to propose strategies of sustainable development for the mountains of Europe. The specific objectives of the consultation were : to rise awareness of the populations in favor of sustainable mountain development to work out proposals which will be presented to the representatives of governments at the second session of the Intergovernmental Conference in Trento. to think about the creation of a "mountain network" favoring the exchange of information and experience between the actors involved. Countries and populations concerned The consultation of NGOs concerned not only the European countries and regions with mountains (see map), but also the lowlands. Indeed, the mountains are important for the populations of lowlands in regard to the supply of water, mineral resources, fuel wood and wood for construction, farming products, energy, and so on. On the other hand, mountains are a privileged site for leisure activities. For this reason, the consultation wanted to touch not only the mountain inhabitants, but also the "users" of mountain resources. In this way, all kinds of NGOs involved at a local, regional, national or international level in mountain development, of all European countries, were consulted: associations for nature protection, socio-professional organizations, cultural and sporting associations... The two phases of the consultation First phase: the inquiry The inquiry was intended to inform the NGOs about the specific problems in mountains but also to record the opinion of the populations concerned. Translated in 16 languages and sent to more than 5000 NGOs in 45 European countries, it was the main element of mobilization: 928 NGOs have replied to the inquiry, corresponding to a response rate of nearly 19 % Phase 2: The Conference - Toulouse (4, 5, 6 and 7-July 1996) The conference was composed of plenary sessions and of working sessions. The topics of the working sessions correspond to the 4 major concerns of NGOs pointed out by the inquiry: NGOs as key participants in sustainable mountain development; tourism and the conservation of the mountain heritage; the roles of agriculture and forests; and planning and infrastructure. The recommendations worked out during the meeting were presented at the Intergovernmental Conference in Trento, in October 1996. *ARPE: created in 1990, the Regional Agency for the Environment is responsible for the promotion of environmental issues and of sustainable development by the means of rising public awareness, of prevention, of research, of conservation and of promotion of the natural heritage. *CTP : an interregional association, the Work Community of the Pyrenees concerns the Perennial regions in France and Spain, and the state of Andorra. Since 1993, it has been involved in the search for sustainable development to the massif. *CIAPP: the International Associated Council for the Protection of the Pyrenees combines since 1989 the federations and associations that work in the three Pyrenean countries (France, Spain, Andorra) towards the protection of the massif. For further information please contact the secretariat of the NGO Consultation: ARPE, 14 rue de Tivoli, 31 068 Toulouse, France E-Mail: Arpemp@mipnet.fr Tel.: (33) 05.61.33.50.79, Fax (33) 05.61.33.53.11. CIAPP, 14 rue de Tivoli, 31 068 Toulouse, France E-Mail: Ciapp@starnet.unisoft.fr Tel.: (33) 05.61.33.50.88, Fax (33) 05.61.33.55.10. WT01-B09-208IA008-000077-B039-109http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/regions/europengofr.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072000 text/html 6930HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:20:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6759Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:16:58 GMT  La Consultation Europenne des ONG et des Populations sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne La Consultation Europenne des ONG et des Populations sur le Dveloppement Durable de la Montagne Le contexte gnral Lors du "Sommet Plante Terre"  Rio en 1992, les tats ont adopt  l'unanimit l'Agenda 21, un plan d'action pour le 21me sicle. Les problmes et enjeux de la montagne ont fait l'objet de recommandations spcifiques dveloppes dans le chapitre 13, intitul: "Grer les cosystmes fragiles : dveloppement durable de la montagne". Depuis lors, les zones de montagne constituent un sujet de rflexion et de travail prioritaire pour les Nations Unies. Dans le cadre de la mise en oeuvre des ces recommandations et afin de prparer la session spciale de l'ONU prvue en 1997, une srie de consultations intergouvernementales ont t fixes. Celle concernant l'Europe s'est droul en deux temps : Aviemore en cosse du 22 au 26 avril 1996 puis  Trento en Italie du 7 au 11 octobre 1996. La coordination de cette confrence a t confie conjointement au Programme Europen de l'Union Internationale de Conservation de la Nature (UICN) et au Centre International pour l'Environnement Alpin (ICALPE). La FAO, charge du suivi de ces travaux, a souhait recueillir galement les perceptions et souhaits des populations de montagne. C'est la raison pour laquelle une consultation des Organisations Non Gouvernementales (ONG) a t ralise en parallle  la consultation intergouvernementale. Les objectifs Organise par l'Agence Rgionale Pour l'Environnement de Midi-Pyrnes, France (ARPE*) avec le parrainage de la CTP* et en partenariat avec le CIAPP*, la consultation a permis aux ONG de participer activement  la rflexion engage au niveau intergouvernemental. En effet la contribution de ceux qui vivent en montagne ou encore de ceux qui s'y intressent est, dans ce processus, d'un intrt majeur. Leur perception de l'espace montagnard, leur rflexion, leur connaissance sont indispensables pour reprer les difficults actuelles, dfinir les stratgies possibles et proposer des actions concrtes. Les objectifs gnraux de la consultation qui s'inscrivent dans ceux de la confrence intergouvernementale visaient  favoriser une conscience collective de la valeur de la montagne, obtenir une meilleure comprhension des problmes  prendre en compte pour un dveloppement durable de la montagne, laborer des stratgies de dveloppement durable pour les montagnes d'Europe. Quant aux objectifs spcifiques, ils visaient  : mobiliser les populations en faveur du dveloppement durable de la montagne, laborer des propositions  soumettre aux reprsentants des gouvernements  l'occasion de la 2me session de travail de la confrence intergouvernementale de Trento ; rflchir sur l'organisation d'un rseau "montagne" afin de favoriser les changes d'informations et d'expriences entre les acteurs concerns. Pays et populations concerns La consultation des ONG n'a concern non seulement les pays et rgions europens qui comportent des zones de montagne, mais aussi les rgions et pays situs en aval. En effet les montagnes participent de la vie des populations de plaine  travers l'approvisionnement en eau, en lments nutritifs, en minraux, en bois de coupe et de chauffe, en produits agricoles, en nergie hydrolectrique... et constituent des lieux privilgis de loisirs. Ainsi donc, la consultation a vis, trs prcisment, les habitants de la montagne, mais aussi des "utilisateurs" des ressources disponibles. C'est la raison pour laquelle ont t consultes les ONG de tous les pays de l'Europe, reprsentant la socit civile dans ces diffrentes composantes, qu'il s'agisse d'associations de protection de la nature, d'organisations socio-professionnelles, culturelles, sportives..., qu'elles agissent au niveau local, national ou international. Les deux phases de la consultation Phase 1 : L'enqute Son objet tait d'informer et d'interpeller les ONG sur les problmatiques actuelles des zones de montagne mais aussi de recueillir les opinions des populations concernes. Traduite en 16 langues et diffuse auprs de plus de 5000 ONG rparties dans 45 pays, elle a constitu l'lment fort de la mobilisation: 928 ONG ont rpondu  l'enqute, ce qui correspond  un taux de rponse de presque 19 %. Phase 2 : Les assises - Toulouse 4, 5 , 6 et 7 juillet 1996 Les Assises ont t organises autour de sances plnires et de travaux en atelier. Les thmes de travail retenues correspondaient aux 4 grandes proccupations des ONG qui se sont dgages de l'enqute: les ONG comme acteurs-cls dans le dveloppement durable, tourisme et conservation du patrimoine, le rle de l'agriculture et de la fort, et planification et infrastructures. Les recommandations labores  cette occasion ont t soutenues  la confrence intergouvernementale de Trento en octobre 1996. ARPE: Cre en 1990, l'Agence Rgionale Pour l'Environnement de Midi-Pyrnes est charge de promouvoir la valorisation de l'environnement et le dveloppement durable par des action de sensibilisation, de prvention, de recherche, de conservation et de mise en valeur du patrimoine naturel. CTP.: Organisme interrgional de coopration, la Communaut de Travail des Pyrnes associe les rgions pyrnennes franaises, espagnoles et l'Etat d'Andorre. Depuis 1993, elle s'est engage dans une rflexion sur le dveloppement durable du massif. CIAPP: Le Conseil International Associatif pour la Protection des Pyrnes regroupe depuis 1989 les fdrations et associations qui oeuvrent dans les trois Etats pyrnens (France, Espagne, Andorre) pour la protection du massif. Pour plus d'informations veuillez contacter le secrtariat de la Consultation des ONG : ARPE, 14 rue de Tivoli, 31 068 Toulouse, France E-Mail: Arpemp@mipnet.fr Tel.: 33 - 5 -61.33.50.79, Fax 33 - 5 - 61.33.53.11. CIAPP, 14 rue de Tivoli, 31 068 Toulouse, France E-Mail: Ciapp@starnet.unisoft.fr Tel.: 33 - 5 - 61.33.50.88, Fax 33 - 5 -61.33.55.10. WT01-B09-209IA008-000077-B039-128http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/intros/intrform.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072008 text/html 1133HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:20:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 963Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:19 GMT Introduction Form Submit your introduction to the Mountain Forum Use this form to submit your introduction to us, or send mail to usat mfsupport@mntforum.org. E-mail address : Name: Please describe yourself  use as many rows as you need: URL(s): WT01-B09-210IA008-000077-B039-161http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/resources/chp13.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072022 text/html 20266HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:20:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 20094Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:12 GMT  Report of the 1992 UN Conference on The Environment and Development, Chapter 13 of Agenda 21 Distr. GENERAL A/CONF.151/26 (Vol. II) 13 August 1992 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992) Chapter 13 MANAGING FRAGILE ECOSYSTEMS: SUSTAINABLE MOUNTAIN DEVELOPMENT INTRODUCTION 13.1. Mountains are an important source of water, energy andbiological diversity. Furthermore, they are a source of such keyresources as minerals, forest products and agricultural productsand of recreation. As a major ecosystem representing the complexand interrelated ecology of our planet, mountain environments areessential to the survival of the global ecosystem. Mountainecosystems are, however, rapidly changing. They are susceptibleto accelerated soil erosion, landslides and rapid loss of habitatand genetic diversity. On the human side, there is widespreadpoverty among mountain inhabitants and loss of indigenousknowledge. As a result, most global mountain areas areexperiencing environmental degradation. Hence, the propermanagement of mountain resources and socio-economic development ofthe people deserves immediate action. 13.2. About 10 per cent of the world's population depends onmountain resources. A much larger percentage draws on othermountain resources, including and especially water. Mountains area storehouse of biological diversity and endangered species. 13.3. Two programme areas are included in this chapter to furtherelaborate the problem of fragile ecosystems with regard to allmountains of the world. These are: (a) Generating and strengthening knowledge about the ecologyand sustainable development of mountain ecosystems; (b) Promoting integrated watershed development andalternative livelihood opportunities. PROGRAMME AREAS A. Generating and strengthening knowledge about theecology and sustainable development of mountain ecosystems Basis for action 13.4. Mountains are highly vulnerable to human and naturalecological imbalance. Mountains are the areas most sensitive toall climatic changes in the atmosphere. Specific information onecology, natural resource potential and socio-economic activitiesis essential. Mountain and hillside areas hold a rich variety ofecological systems. Because of their vertical dimensions,mountains create gradients of temperature, precipitation andinsolation. A given mountain slope may include several climaticsystems - such as tropical, subtropical, temperate and alpine -each of which represents a microcosm of a larger habitatdiversity. There is, however, a lack of knowledge of mountainecosystems. The creation of a global mountain database istherefore vital for launching programmes that contribute to thesustainable development of mountain ecosystems. Objectives 13.5. The objectives of this programme area are: (a) To undertake a survey of the different forms of soils,forest, water use, crop, plant and animal resources of mountainecosystems, taking into account the work of existing internationaland regional organizations; (b) To maintain and generate database and information systemsto facilitate the integrated management and environmentalassessment of mountain ecosystems, taking into account the work ofexisting international and regional organizations; (c) To improve and build the existing land/water ecologicalknowledge base regarding technologies and agricultural andconservation practices in the mountain regions of the world, withthe participation of local communities; (d) To create and strengthen the communications network andinformation clearing-house for existing organizations concernedwith mountain issues; (e) To improve coordination of regional efforts to protectfragile mountain ecosystems through the consideration ofappropriate mechanisms, including regional legal and otherinstruments; (f) To generate information to establish databases andinformation systems to facilitate an evaluation of environmentalrisks and natural disasters in mountain ecosystems. Activities (a) Management-related activities 13.6. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Strengthen existing institutions or establish new ones atlocal, national and regional levels to generate amultidisciplinary land/water ecological knowledge base on mountainecosystems; (b) Promote national policies that would provide incentivesto local people for the use and transfer of environment-friendlytechnologies and farming and conservation practices; (c) Build up the knowledge base and understanding by creatingmechanisms for cooperation and information exchange among nationaland regional institutions working on fragile ecosystems; (d) Encourage policies that would provide incentives tofarmers and local people to undertake conservation andregenerative measures; (e) Diversify mountain economies, inter alia, by creatingand/or strengthening tourism, in accordance with integratedmanagement of mountain areas; (f) Integrate all forest, rangeland and wildlife activitiesin such a way that specific mountain ecosystems are maintained; (g) Establish appropriate natural reserves in representativespecies-rich sites and areas. (b) Data and information 13.7. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Maintain and establish meteorological, hydrological andphysical monitoring analysis and capabilities that would encompassthe climatic diversity as well as water distribution of variousmountain regions of the world; (b) Build an inventory of different forms of soils, forests,water use, and crop, plant and animal genetic resources, givingpriority to those under threat of extinction. Genetic resourcesshould be protected in situ by maintaining and establishingprotected areas and improving traditional farming and animalhusbandry activities and establishing programmes for evaluatingthe potential value of the resources; (c) Identify hazardous areas that are most vulnerable toerosion, floods, landslides, earthquakes, snow avalanches andother natural hazards; (d) Identify mountain areas threatened by air pollution fromneighbouring industrial and urban areas. (c) International and regional cooperation 13.8. National Governments and intergovernmental organizationsshould: (a) Coordinate regional and international cooperation andfacilitate an exchange of information and experience among thespecialized agencies, the World Bank, IFAD and other internationaland regional organizations, national Governments, researchinstitutions and non-governmental organizations working onmountain development; (b) Encourage regional, national and international networkingof people's initiatives and the activities of international,regional and local non-governmental organizations working onmountain development, such as the United Nations University (UNU),the Woodland Mountain Institutes (WMI), the International Centerfor Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), the InternationalMountain Society (IMS), the African Mountain Association and theAndean Mountain Association, besides supporting thoseorganizations in exchange of information and experience; (c) Protect Fragile Mountain Ecosystem through theconsideration of appropriate mechanisms including regional legaland other instruments. Means of implementation (a) Financing and cost evaluation 13.9. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average totalannual cost (1993-2000) of implementing the activities of thisprogramme to be about $50 million from the international communityon grant or concessional terms. These are indicative andorder-of-magnitude estimates only and have not been reviewed byGovernments. Actual costs and financial terms, including any thatare non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specificstrategies and programmes Governments decide upon for implementation. (b) Scientific and technological means 13.10. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, shouldstrengthen scientific research and technological developmentprogrammes, including diffusion through national and regionalinstitutions, particularly in meteorology, hydrology, forestry,soil sciences and plant sciences. (c) Human resource development 13.11. Governments at the appropriate level, and with the supportof the relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Launch training and extension programmes inenvironmentally appropriate technologies and practices that wouldbe suitable to mountain ecosystems; (b) Support higher education through fellowships and researchgrants for environmental studies in mountains and hill areas,particularly for candidates from indigenous mountain populations; (c) Undertake environmental education for farmers, inparticular for women, to help the rural population betterunderstand the ecological issues regarding the sustainabledevelopment of mountain ecosystems. (d) Capacity-building 13.12. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, shouldbuild up national and regional institutional bases that couldcarry out research, training and dissemination of information onthe sustainable development of the economies of fragile ecosystems. B. Promoting integrated watershed development andalternative livelihood opportunities Basis for action 13.13. Nearly half of the world's population is affected invarious ways by mountain ecology and the degradation of watershedareas. About 10 per cent of the Earth's population lives inmountain areas with higher slopes, while about 40 per centoccupies the adjacent medium- and lower-watershed areas. Thereare serious problems of ecological deterioration in thesewatershed areas. For example, in the hillside areas of the Andeancountries of South America a large portion of the farmingpopulation is now faced with a rapid deterioration of landresources. Similarly, the mountain and upland areas of theHimalayas, South-East Asia and East and Central Africa, which makevital contributions to agricultural production, are threatened bycultivation of marginal lands due to expanding population. Inmany areas this is accompanied by excessive livestock grazing,deforestation and loss of biomass cover. 13.14. Soil erosion can have a devastating impact on the vastnumbers of rural people who depend on rainfed agriculture in themountain and hillside areas. Poverty, unemployment, poor healthand bad sanitation are widespread. Promoting integrated watersheddevelopment programmes through effective participation of localpeople is a key to preventing further ecological imbalance. Anintegrated approach is needed for conserving, upgrading and usingthe natural resource base of land, water, plant, animal and humanresources. In addition, promoting alternative livelihoodopportunities, particularly through development of employmentschemes that increase the productive base, will have a significantrole in improving the standard of living among the large ruralpopulation living in mountain ecosystems. Objectives 13.15. The objectives of this programme area are: (a) By the year 2000, to develop appropriate land-useplanning and management for both arable and non-arable land inmountain-fed watershed areas to prevent soil erosion, increasebiomass production and maintain the ecological balance; (b) To promote income-generating activities, such assustainable tourism, fisheries and environmentally sound mining,and to improve infrastructure and social services, in particularto protect the livelihoods of local communities and indigenous people; (c) To develop technical and institutional arrangements foraffected countries to mitigate the effects of natural disastersthrough hazard-prevention measures, risk zoning, early-warningsystems, evacuation plans and emergency supplies. Activities (a) Management-related activities 13.16. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Undertake measures to prevent soil erosion and promoteerosion-control activities in all sectors; (b) Establish task forces or watershed developmentcommittees, complementing existing institutions, to coordinateintegrated services to support local initiatives in animalhusbandry, forestry, horticulture and rural development at alladministrative levels; (c) Enhance popular participation in the management of localresources through appropriate legislation; (d) Support non-governmental organizations and other privategroups assisting local organizations and communities in thepreparation of projects that would enhance participatorydevelopment of local people; (e) Provide mechanisms to preserve threatened areas thatcould protect wildlife, conserve biological diversity or serve asnational parks; (f) Develop national policies that would provide incentivesto farmers and local people to undertake conservation measures andto useenvironment-friendly technologies; (g) Undertake income-generating activities in cottage andagro-processing industries, such as the cultivation and processingof medicinal and aromatic plants; (h) Undertake the above activities, taking into account theneed for full participation of women, including indigenous peopleand local communities, in development. (b) Data and information 13.17. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Maintain and establish systematic observation andevaluation capacities at the national, state or provincial levelto generate information for daily operations and to assess theenvironmental and socio-economic impacts of projects; (b) Generate data on alternative livelihoods and diversifiedproduction systems at the village level on annual and tree crops,livestock, poultry, beekeeping, fisheries, village industries,markets, transport and income-earning opportunities, taking fullyinto account the role of women and integrating them into theplanning and implementation process. (c) International and regional cooperation 13.18. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Strengthen the role of appropriate international researchand training institutes such as the Consultative Group onInternational Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR) and theInternational Board for Soil Research and Management (IBSRAM), aswell as regional research centres, such as the Woodland MountainInstitutes and the International Center for Integrated MountainDevelopment, in undertaking applied research relevant to watersheddevelopment; (b) Promote regional cooperation and exchange of data andinformation among countries sharing the same mountain ranges andriver basins, particularly those affected by mountain disastersand floods; (c) Maintain and establish partnerships with non-governmentalorganizations and other private groups working in watersheddevelopment. Means of implementation (a) Financial and cost evaluation 13.19. The Conference secretariat has estimated the average totalannual cost (1993-2000) of implementing the activities of thisprogramme to be about $13 billion, including about $1.9 billionfrom the international community on grant or concessional terms.These are indicative and order-of-magnitude estimates only andhave not been reviewed by Governments. Actual costs and financialterms, including any that are non-concessional, will depend upon,inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes Governmentsdecide upon for implementation. 13.20. Financing for the promotion of alternative livelihoods inmountain ecosystems should be viewed as part of a country'santi-poverty or alternative livelihoods programme, which is alsodiscussed in chapter 3 (Combating poverty) and chapter 14(Promoting sustainable agriculture and rural development) ofAgenda 21. (b) Scientific and technical means 13.21. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Consider undertaking pilot projects that combineenvironmental protection and development functions with particularemphasis on some of the traditional environmental managementpractices or systems that have a good impact on the environment; (b) Generate technologies for specific watershed and farmconditions through a participatory approach involving local menand women, researchers and extension agents who will carry outexperiments and trials on farm conditions; (c) Promote technologies of vegetative conservation measuresfor erosion prevention, in situ moisture management, improvedcropping technology, fodder production and agroforestry that arelow-cost, simple and easily adopted by local people. (c) Human resource development 13.22. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, should: (a) Promote a multidisciplinary and cross-sectoral approachin training and the dissemination of knowledge to local people ona wide range of issues, such as household production systems,conservation and utilization of arable and non-arable land,treatment of drainage lines and recharging of groundwater,livestock management, fisheries, agroforestry and horticulture; (b) Develop human resources by providing access to education,health, energy and infrastructure; (c) Promote local awareness and preparedness for disasterprevention and mitigation, combined with the latest availabletechnology for early warning and forecasting. Capacity-building 13.23. Governments at the appropriate level, with the support ofthe relevant international and regional organizations, shoulddevelop and strengthen national centres for watershed managementto encourage a comprehensive approach to the environmental,socio-economic, technological, legislative, financial andadministrative aspects and provide support to policy makers,administrators, field staff and farmers for watershed development. 13.24. The private sector and local communities, in cooperationwith national Governments, should promote local infrastructuredevelopment, including communication networks, mini- ormicro-hydro development to support cottage industries, and accessto markets. END OF CHAPTER 13 .WT01-B09-211IA008-000077-B039-201http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/resources/uncsdapr.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072042 text/html 88410HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:20:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 88238Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:11 GMT "UNCSD Report on Chapter 13 of Agenda 21, April, 1995" UNCSD Report on Chapter 13 of Agenda 21, April, 1995 *************************************************************** This document has been made available in electronic format by the UnitedNations. Reproduction and dissemination of the document - in electronicand/or printed format - is encouraged, provided acknowledgement is made of therole of the United Nations in making it available. ****************************************************************** UNITED NATIONS Distr. GENERAL E/CN.17/1995/5 10 February 1995 ORIGINAL: ENGLISH COMMISSION ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Third session 11-28 April 1995 REVIEW OF SECTORAL CLUSTERS, SECOND PHASE: LAND, DESERTIFICATION, FORESTS AND BIODIVERSITY Managing fragile ecosystems: sustainable mountain development Report of the Secretary-General CONTENTS Paragraphs Page INTRODUCTION ................................................. 1 - 4 5 I. GENERAL OVERVIEW ....................................... 5 - 14 6 A. Mountain issues, identified gaps and opportunities for action ......................................... 5 - 9 6 B. Difficulties encountered ........................... 10 7 C. Time-frame ......................................... 11 7 D. Development models ................................. 12 - 14 8 II. REVIEW OF PROGRESS ACHIEVED, MAIN POLICY ISSUES AND EXPERIENCES ............................................ 15 - 93 8 A. Country experiences ................................ 15 - 29 8 1. Developed countries ............................ 15 - 22 8 2. Developing countries ........................... 23 - 27 10 3. Countries with economies in transition ......... 28 - 29 11 B. Experience of major groups and non-governmental organizations ...................................... 30 - 46 11 1. Farmers ........................................ 30 - 33 11 2. Women, children and youth ...................... 34 - 40 12 3. Indigenous people .............................. 41 - 42 13 4. Non-governmental organizations ................. 43 - 46 14 C. Matters related to finance and technology .......... 47 - 67 15 1. Finance ........................................ 47 - 56 15 2. Technology ..................................... 57 - 67 17 D. Recent developments and experiences in international cooperation ........................................ 68 - 93 19 1. Intergovernmental processes .................... 68 - 70 19 2. Organizations of the United Nations system ..... 71 - 86 19 3. Organizations outside the United Nations system 87 - 93 23 III. CONCLUSIONS AND PROPOSALS FOR ACTION ................... 94 - 107 24 A. Conclusions ........................................ 94 - 101 24 B. Proposals for action ............................... 102 - 107 26 ABBREVIATIONS CGIAR Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research CIFOR Centre for International Forestry Research CIP International Potato Centre of CGIAR CIMMYT International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre CNRS National Centre for Scientific Research of France CONDESAN Consortium for Research and Development in the Andean Ecoregion FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations GEF Global Environment Facility IACSD Inter-Agency Committee for Sustainable Development ICALPE International Centre for Alpine Environment ICIMOD International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development ICRAF International Centre for Research in Agroforestry ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics IDRC International Development Research Centre IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development ILCA International Livestock Centre for Africa ILO International Labour Organization IMS International Mountain Society IUCN The World Conservation Union IUFRO International Union of Forest Research Organizations MAB Man and the Biosphere programme NGO Non-governmental organization TFAP Tropical Forests Action Programme TMI The Mountain Institute (formerly Woodlands Mountain Institute) TSS-1 Technical support services at the programme level UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNICEF United Nations Children's Fund UNU United Nations University WCMC World Conservation Monitoring Centre INTRODUCTION 1. The present report describes the progress made in the implementation ofthe aims set out in chapter 13 of Agenda 21 (Managing fragile ecosystems: sustainable mountain development) 1/ since the United Nations Conference onEnvironment and Development (UNCED) in June 1992, and contains a set ofrecommendations for action. The report was prepared by the Food andAgriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) as Task Manager forchapter 13 of Agenda 21 in consultation with the United Nations Secretariatand in accordance with arrangements agreed to by the Inter-Agency Committee onSustainable Development (IACSD) at its fourth session. At the Conference,Governments recognized mountains as an important source of water, energy andbiological diversity, as well as a source of such key resources as minerals,forest products and agricultural products and of recreation. It was realizedthat mountain ecosystems were essential to the survival of the globalecosystem and that about 10 per cent of the world's population dependeddirectly on mountain resources, with a much larger percentage (estimated at40 per cent of the world's population) drawing on other mountain resources,including in particular water (it is estimated that mountains are the sourceof about 80 per cent of the world's water resources). 2. Chapter 13 of Agenda 21 contains two programme areas for action: (a) generating and strengthening knowledge about the ecology and sustainabledevelopment of mountain ecosystems; and (b) Promoting integrated watersheddevelopment and alternative livelihood opportunities. However, while the twoareas have their particular significance, in the present report they aretreated together, with special emphasis on the need for an integratedecosystems approach to sustainable mountain development. 3. The network established during the first ad hoc inter-agency meeting onchapter 13 of Agenda 21, held in Rome on 21 and 22 March 1994, has developed aset of proposals for action by United Nations organizations, as well as byinternational non-governmental organizations (NGOs) involved in sustainablemountain development. It has been generally agreed that a special effort willbe needed to move the "mountain agenda" higher on the international andnational development agendas. The above-mentioned NGOs have agreed torecognize chapter 13 of Agenda 21, as adopted by the Conference, as a basisfor action and to participate in mountain development programmes in a spiritof cooperation with Governments. With the encouragement of the United Nationsinter-agency group on mountains, a global conference of intergovernmental andnon-governmental organizations is to take place in February 1995, in additionto the series of regional intergovernmental consultations that began inDecember in the Asia and Pacific region and will continue in Latin America andthe Caribbean in April 1995. Consultations in Africa, Europe and NorthAmerica could take place later in 1995 and in 1996. 4. Although many important urban-based development activities occur inmountains, the present report concentrates mainly on new approaches concerningthe integrated management of the natural resource base, the interactionbetween rural mountain populations and resources in terms of sustainablelivelihoods, and efforts to ensure environmentally sound and sustainabledevelopment of mountain areas. I. GENERAL OVERVIEW A. Mountain issues, identified gaps and opportunities for action 5. Mountain ecosystems and environments are of critical importance as waterstores. They are often physically unstable (subject to earthquakes,landslides and volcanic and torrential phenomena) and sometimes plentiful inmineral resources. Biologically, mountain ecosystems are characterized byaltitudinal zonation and microclimatic "niches" generating a rich but fragilebiological diversity. Characteristically, human communities in mountains areself-reliant and have a detailed knowledge of the ecosystems on which theydepend and of how to utilize them. Cultural diversity and richness parallelthe biological diversity, and the specific sacred and/or religioussignificance of the mountains themselves is often a prominent culturalfeature. 6. The complexity and diversity of mountain ecosystems make it difficult togeneralize. The need for a comprehensive, interdisciplinary approach tosustainable mountain development with the effective participation andempowerment of mountain people has been recognized, as has the need to furtherincrease awareness at all levels of society of the importance of mountainecosystems, together with their problems and potential. The prevalence ofabsolute and relative poverty in mountainous regions and the downstreamconsequences of the degradation of mountain ecosystems are recognized as majorreasons for mobilizing international efforts to assist countries 2/ toformulate and implement strategies for sustainable mountain development. Apriority will be to develop and test potentially replicable models for ruralpoverty alleviation 3/ that can overcome the obstacles facing populations inupland areas and ease their transition to more sustainable livelihoods. Theseshould build on local knowledge, capacities and opportunities, suggesting inturn that for mountainous regions, multiple adaptive models are likely to bemore successful than approaches based on a uniform development paradigm. 7. There is a general lack of suitable institutional mechanisms to ensurean integrated approach, in view of the complexity of mountain ecosystems andthe socio-economic issues at stake. In addition, there is scope for improvedpolicy and legislation for mountain areas, as well as for training andcapacity-building, to make the implementation of chapter 13 of Agenda 21possible. The need for long-term projects and programmes and long-termmonitoring of their environmental benefits is emphasized. 8. Linkages between traditional knowledge and practices and their effect onecosystems should receive more attention. Linkages between data collectionand research, and the utilization and application of results needreinforcement. A recurrent issue is the plea for more action-oriented datacollection and research linked to specific pilot areas where differentgovernment agencies and non-governmental organizations could coordinateinterventions. Research should also be more responsive to the needs andaspirations of mountain populations. Improved information systems, networkingand accessible databases have been identified as a priority area for action. 9. Traditionally mountains have had their natural and human resourcesdrained to benefit the lowlands. At present, however, mountainous countriescan support their upland programmes to a greater degree by channelling somereturns from mountain-derived benefits (such as hydropower, mining, forestry,tourism), where appropriate, back into the uplands. The empowerment ofmountain communities, including increased control over local resourceconservation and management, in order to become more directly involved inincome-earning activities, is seen as a necessary step in a strategy forsustainable mountain development. B. Difficulties encountered 10. One of the main difficulties encountered so far is the failure to seemountain areas as something special, with a potential of their own andtherefore worthy of special attention. This is reflected in the lack ofmountain programmes of agencies, but maybe even more so at the national level,where it is still rare to find departments, programmes or legislation dealingin a comprehensive way with mountain issues. More often than not mountainareas and populations are at the "thin end" of general national programmes ofeducation, health, infrastructure and the like, mainly because the cost perperson of providing such services in remote mountain areas is above thenational average and therefore seen by sectoral agencies as uneconomical, andbecause of inadequate recognition of the value of mountain natural resources. Hence in addition to ongoing sectoral efforts there is a need forcomprehensive programmes, at the national and international levels, designedspecifically for mountain areas or, even better, originating in mountainareas. C. Time-frame 11. Mountain cultures are old, sometimes very old. National andinternational programmes in the mountains have been ongoing for decades. Itshould be stressed that international consultations on sustainable mountaindevelopment as a follow-up to UNCED will take time. The "mountain agenda"will therefore need special emphasis in order to realize the nationalplanning, legislation and investments called for, and even then only partialrealization of this critical agenda can be envisioned. Emphasis shouldtherefore be placed on the formulation and installation of flexible, long-term, support mechanisms, with the mountain populations themselves playing thelead role and determining the timetable. However, in such areas as povertyalleviation, management of natural resources and capacity-building,significant progress and greater support is urgently needed. D. Development models 12. The Consortium for Research and Development in the Andean Ecoregion(CONDESAN), has provided a novel approach to mountain development research bylooking at mountain issues in a comprehensive ecosystemic way and being opento different partners in a collaborative effort. Working at the local level,the approach is that of an "open consortium", involving a group of Andeangovernment agencies working together with one or several NGOs under thegeneral coordination of an informal "committee" in which all participatingorganizations are represented. 13. The Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) has gone through a seriesof revisions and modifications since being launched in 1985, but has proved tobe a survivor. It has so far involved more than 90 developing (notnecessarily tropical) countries. It has developed mechanisms forparticipatory programme development and public debates concerning thecontribution of the forestry sector to national development, which would besuitable for the formulation of mountain action programmes as well. 14. In addition to these two examples, a wealth of ongoing and recentoperational models for community-based natural resource conservation andmanagement are being introduced and tested. These include programmes ofnational and international NGOs, such as the King Mahendra Trust for NatureConservation (Nepal), the Aga Khan Rural Support Programme (Pakistan) and TheMountain Institute (TMI) (Himalayas and Andes); Intergovernmentalorganizations, such as FAO, the International Fund for AgriculturalDevelopment (IFAD), the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry(ICRAF) and the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development(ICIMOD); and many national Governments, with or without external support. II. REVIEW OF PROGRESS ACHIEVED, MAIN POLICY ISSUES AND EXPERIENCES A. Country experiences 1. Developed countries 15. In mountain areas, the main challenges faced by industrialized countriesrelate to depopulation, abandonment of sustainable systems of natural resourcemanagement (e.g., forests and mountain pastures), the increasing use of landfor recreational activities, and the provision of protection from naturalhazards. 16. Depopulation of mountain areas - in Europe, most notably in France andSpain - is often a result of the creation of economic opportunities in thelowland industrial and urban centres, combined with the failure to generatesufficient employment and improved livelihood opportunities in the mountains. In Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States of America, forexample, "modernization" in pastoral management has led to a withdrawal frommarginal range land and pasture land that are no longer needed or have becomeuneconomical to graze. 17. The process of depopulation is at present being reversed by importantinvestments in infrastructure for tourism and recreation. Some mountain areashave become attractive and expensive ski resorts (Aspen, Colorado, UnitedStates of America; Cortina d'Ampezzo, Italy) or popular to the point whereartificial snow and light (in Japan for example) must be provided for skiers24 hours a day in order to meet the demand. This in turn is leading to theneed to construct super highways, hotels, ski lifts and so forth and toreshape mountain slopes to make ski runs, thereby creating new environmentalpressures. 18. The shift from peasant agriculture to the tourist industry has led to ajump in demand for safety measures against natural phenomena. The originalpopulation would remain indoors during a blizzard and would be familiar withthe snow and weather conditions and the increased risk of avalanches. Themajority of mountain tourists however, require roads to remain open at alltimes, and are unaware of the rapid weather changes in mountains. Theinvestments in torrent and avalanche control measures to protect visitingtourists are many times greater than those needed to protect the originalpopulation. 19. At the same time it has become increasingly difficult to establish andmaintain stable forest and range vegetative cover with adequate protectivefunctions. Many mountain areas in industrialized countries were artificiallyafforested or reforested in the nineteenth century. Today these plantationsand the remaining more or less natural forests suffer from lack ofsilvicultural interventions, overmaturation and inadequate control ofexcessive wildlife populations (which, in addition to being a generallyuneconomical activity, is not appreciated by the general public), and newenvironmental conditions such as air pollution and the threat posed by climatechanges. 20. In view of the perceived threat to mountain forests, the Europeancountries participating in the Strasbourg Ministerial Conference on ForestProtection in Europe (1990) adopted a resolution on adapting the management ofmountain forests to new environmental conditions. This has led to closercollaboration among scientists, practitioners, administrators and legislatorson the protection and management of mountain forests, at both national andinternational levels, and to a review of legislation and increased funding insome countries. 21. So far, however, chapter 13 of Agenda 21 has not had a significantdirect influence on policies and programmes of developed countries. However,Japan enacted the "Law concerning the Promotion of the Improvement of BasicConditions of Agriculture, Forestry and other Businesses in Hilly andMountainous Areas" in June 1993, and Italy enacted the "New Law for MountainAreas" in January 1994. There is an increasing understanding inindustrialized countries of the need for maintaining mountain populationswhere they live, in order to ensure sustainable natural resource managementand production systems (through subsidies and provision of infrastructure andservices), preserve mountain cultures and traditions and prevent and combatforest fires. 22. Support for national development agendas had not yet materialized. Itis expected that the regional intergovernmental workshops planned inpreparation for a proposed world conference on sustainable mountaindevelopment in 1997 (see para. 75 below) will alert Governments and nationalagencies to the needs and potential for special national mountain agendas. Sofar chapter 13 of Agenda 21 has received very limited attention at nationallevel. 2. Developing countries 23. Two conditions make urban migration away from the mountains indeveloping countries very different from urban migration elsewhere. First,the weak economies of developing countries cannot absorb migrants, many ofwhom end up in peri-urban slums, and secondly, mountain population densitiesremain high (relative to carrying capacity and conservation needs) and in manycases are growing. 24. Developing country institutions dealing with mountain development arenew compared with, for example, some of the European torrent and avalanchecontrol services dating back more than 100 years. In addition they areusually understaffed and lack adequate long-term funding. 25. Exceptions to this general rule may be found in recent developments inColombia and Lesotho. In Colombia, the Regional Autonomous Corporations,created by Act No. 99 of 1993, have been made responsible for environmentalmanagement. The great majority of these Corporations are situated in theAndes, thus providing a high degree of autonomy to the mountain areas of thecountry. In Lesotho, the Highland Water Development Scheme, which involvesthe construction of four major dams and water conduits for the sale of waterto South Africa constitutes the most important investment and potentialsustainable income earner for the country, which is all mountainous. Thestate of Himachal Pradesh in India has made significant progress in economicdevelopment by transforming a subsistence food production economy into amarket economy based on opportunities for horticultural development in amountain environment. 26. Several developing countries have made significant progress inparticipatory rural development and watershed management in the uplands,compared with the industrialized countries in temperate zones. The mainreason is that the mountain areas in tropical and subtropical countries areoften densely populated in areas where farming, even at altitudes higher than3,000 metres above sea level, is still possible. The participatory techniquesin community forestry, soil and water conservation and watershed managementinclude grass-roots participation and bottom-up planning methods, which arecurrently being applied in a large number of programmes in a variety ofsituations. 4/ 27. In general, although a wide range of activities are ongoing in mountainareas in developing countries, few if any, can be considered as beinginitiated or strengthened as follow-up to chapter 13 of Agenda 21. On theother hand, several initiatives, although not a direct follow-up tochapter 13, have the potential to become the first steps towards acomprehensive "national mountain agenda". The Government of Viet Nam isdeveloping a strategy for the uplands and watersheds inhabited by ethnicminorities. Other countries have relevant past experiences such as Ethiopia(Highlands Rehabilitation), Morocco (rural development in the province ofAzilal), and Guinea (Fouta Djallon). Much remains to be done, however, tocreate awareness among developing country planners and policy makers of thepotential for mountain development and the specific requirements related tomountains. 3. Countries with economies in transition 28. The problems related to mountain areas of countries with economies intransition are in many ways similar to those of industrialized countries. Urban migration and neglect of forest management interventions, however, arefurther exacerbated by the very high levels of air pollution, structuralchanges that have affected institutional capacity, and limited experience withmultisectoral participatory planning. 29. As a follow-up to the Strasbourg and Helsinki Ministerial Conferences onForest Protection in Europe, the Czech Republic has convened two internationalmeetings on the protection of watershed forests affected by air pollution. In1993, acting on the recommendation of those meetings, the Government of Polandorganized a national conference on environmental threats to the WesternSudeten forests. A proposal has been made to establish a centre for therestoration of degraded mountain environments in Hercynian mountains. B. Experience of major groups and non-governmental organizations 1. Farmers 30. Farmers in the mountains include members of indigenous communities andsubsistence farmers practising shifting cultivation. There are small-scalefamily farms, medium- and large-scale plantations (forest, fruit trees) andlivestock farms and enterprises. Geographically consolidated mountain farmunits with legal title to land are relatively rare. Instead, the income ofthe farm family is generally based on a great variety of activities, includinglivestock, mixed cropping from several small scattered plots, gathering offorest products, hunting and fishing, off-farm employment, cottage industriesand handicrafts and tourism. 31. Because of the multi-faceted sources of income of mountain farmers,traditional sectoral extension services have not usually reached them, eitherbecause of their remoteness and scattered locations, or because the productionunits in each production line (coffee, tea, grains, livestock, fruit) areconsidered too small. In addition, because of the generally insecure incomeand land tenure situation, they have not usually qualified for normal creditschemes. Mountain farming furthermore relies on the exploitation of highlyvariable and complex ecological niches, where local knowledge is oftensuperior to what extension agents can offer based on research and experiencederived from extensive lowland farming systems. Without increased researchgeared to their specific requirements (such as the work carried out by theInternational Potato Centre (CIP) of the Consultative Group on InternationalAgricultural Research (CGIAR), among others), mountain production systems areunlikely to benefit from further extension services. 32. Some progress is being made to overcome the above problems throughspecial upland integrated development programmes involving group credits,multi-purpose extension agents at the village level, forest occupancyagreements, farmers' associations and the like. Much needs to be done,however, to further develop promising experiences of past and existing pilotschemes and demonstration projects, and apply the lessons learnt. 33. The dramatic increases in agricultural production following the "greenrevolution" and the privatization of agriculture in countries with centrallyplanned economies have not significantly benefited mountain farmers. Theagricultural services and secure land tenure available to lowland farmers aregenerally not available to upland farmers, whose needs are different. Much ofthe green revolution technology does not work properly in uplands and in areaslacking improved access. Although a few practices, such as stall feeding ofanimals, planting of leguminous trees and vegetative barriers against erosion,have general application, local solutions of an integrated nature are usuallyrequired. 2. Women, children and youth 34. The number of migrant labourers originating in mountain areas -practically every family in the Atlas Mountains of Morocco and in the MalotiMountains of Lesotho has a male family member working elsewhere - and the highbirth rates in some already densely populated mountain areas (the Andes andthe Himalayas in particular) make women a particularly important group to beinvolved in the design and implementation of mountain development programmes. 35. Frequently, when the male head of household is away, the women who areleft behind to manage the family, the animals and the land do not have thenecessary authority to make decisions. In other situations, women cannotparticipate in meetings away from the home or find it impossible to face theprospect of further investment of their time and efforts because they arealready overloaded with responsibilities. 36. Some Governments and development agencies are starting to address theseissues by making sure that women participate in programme design from the veryearly stages, although they often fail to make adequate provision for theadditional initial efforts, and therefore costs. On the other hand, mountainwomen, once organized, and perceiving that they are able to benefit, are oftenvery active in development activities despite their busy schedule. Increasedsensitivity to gender issues among development workers and experts is urgentlyrequired. 37. The FAO/Italy Interregional Project for Participatory UplandConservation and Development commenced work simultaneously in five countriesin 1991 (Bolivia, Burundi, Nepal, Pakistan and Rwanda). In all cases theinternational project design team consisted of a male and a female member, andhad a period of three months in which to design the project, in consultationwith the watershed populations following a participatory rural appraisal inorder to ensure adequate representation by all groups. During the first two-year phase of the programme, this led to a series of local initiatives, whichduring the following three-year phase are being closely monitored and aregradually finding their niche in the evolving multi-stakeholder plan for thewatershed. This process represents a complete turnaround from traditionalregional planning by government agencies in order to define action programmesoften seen as of low priority by the local people. 38. The general situation remains, however, in which mountain families aresplit for long periods because of the need for income from outside employment. Young people are leaving the mountains to look for a better future elsewhereor are involved in such activities as herding, mining or forestry, which takethem away from home for extended periods. Children at an early age are forcedto attend to grazing livestock, fetching water, fuelwood and fodder, andlooking after younger siblings, instead of attending school (if a schoolexists). As a result, school drop-out rates are exceedingly high in mountainregions. The challenge in basic education programmes is to adopt approachesthat recognize these realities and design programmes that are relevant to thelocal situation. Not enough has been done to help children and youth torecognize the potentials and constraints of their environment and to takeaction, together with teachers and parents, for achieving a better livelihood. 39. Although the World Bank in one of its recent annual reports hasidentified rural women in developing countries as the investment target withthe highest potential, financial and other allocations to women, particularlyto women in the mountains, remain totally inadequate. The difficulties andobstacles to achieving a greater role for mountain women, a greatercontribution from them and their overall participation are formidable. Girlsare not encouraged to pursue education beyond primary school and, because oftheir multiple responsibilities, often remain illiterate as well as culturallyconstrained in making their opinions known when men are present. Manymountain women speak only the local language, which is often not the officiallanguage of the nation let alone an international language. Therecommendations of the International Conference on Population and Developmentspecifying measures to be taken for the empowerment, equity and equality ofwomen, and to eliminate discrimination against the girl child, represent themost recent international agreements concerning the status of girls andwomen. 5/ They should also be implemented in mountain areas. 40. While the involvement of mountain women in the process of achievingsustainable development is strategically important and can be cost-effective,in many cases completely new ways of working with communities are needed. Participatory methods in soil conservation and community forestry increasinglyinclude drawing, dancing and performing plays, which enable women to expresstheir opinions and needs. Further development and large-scale application ofsuch methods are seen as indispensable if real progress is to be achieved. 3. Indigenous people 41. Armed conflicts and other problems involving mountain communities havebeen given extensive coverage by the mass media and with it some attention tothe issue of mountain development as well as the situation of indigenousmountain populations. However, although armed conflicts make more headlinesand indeed represent immense human suffering, it is probably the more gradualencroachment on the mountains by displaced lowland people that has had themost serious impact on indigenous mountain communities over the past fourdecades. The devastating effects of short-fallow shifting cultivation areoften not the work of mountain people, but of landless lowland farmers movingfarther up into mountain areas as squatters in search of "unoccupied" land andapplying lowland production techniques unsuited to complex upland realms. 42. Sustainable mountain development in many places has to start with achange in attitude towards indigenous people and in the way they are treated. Their right to the land should be recognized, as should their knowledge of thespecial living conditions and natural resource management in the mountains. They should be protected from exploitation by drug dealers, tourist operatorsand guerrilla movements. In many countries this involves extremely sensitiveissues. However, some progress is being made involving official granting ofland titles, granting of partial autonomy, teaching in local languages and soforth. New development models involving indigenous mountain people areappearing; they are badly needed. 4. Non-governmental organizations 43. Non-governmental organizations, including the International MountainSociety (IMS), and people with close NGO contacts working in intergovernmentalinstitutions such as ICIMOD were instrumental and in some instances played adecisive role in ensuring that a special chapter on mountains (chapter 13) wasincluded in Agenda 21 and approved by UNCED. This is recognized inchapter 13, in which it is stated that national Governments andintergovernmental organizations should: "(a) Coordinate regional and international cooperation and facilitate an exchange of information and experience among the specialized agencies, the World Bank, IFAD and other international and regional organizations, national Governments, research institutions and non-governmental organizations working on mountain development; (b) Encourage regional, national and international networking of people's initiatives and the activities of international, regional and local non-governmental organizations working on mountain development, such as the United Nations University (UNU), the Woodlands Mountain Institute (WMI), the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), the International Mountain Society (IMS), the African Mountain Association and the Andean Mountain Association, besides supporting those organizations in exchange of information and experience". 6/ 44. International NGOs, such as the World Conservation Union (IUCN), supportnational and local activities ranging from the formulation of nationalenvironmental and forestry action plans, and the establishment of protectedareas and national parks, to indigenous people and local user groups, amongothers. This work is carried out in collaboration with Governments andintergovernmental organizations, as well as with national and local NGOs. 45. National level NGOs play an increasingly important role in mountaindevelopment programmes. The Aga Khan Rural Support Programme in Pakistan, theKing Mahendra Trust for Nature Conservation in Nepal, and the Fundacio'nPeruana para la Conservacio'n de la Naturaleza in Peru are but a few examples. 46. The number of local NGOs supporting mountain communities has greatlyincreased, as recognition of and hence support for, their role has gainedground. The increased flow of information to and between local level NGOs hasimproved the quality of their activities and, in many instances, has helped toclarify their partnership role in development efforts alongside decentralizedgovernment agencies. C. Matters related to finance and technology 1. Finance 47. Sustainable mountain development is still almost entirely financed on anad hoc project rather than programme basis. Mountains have not yet been theobject of special financial mechanisms, although such arrangements would beentirely justified. Mountains do not have an equivalent to the TFAP or aninternational convention with a financing mechanism such as the GlobalEnvironment Facility (GEF). The many attempts to link the construction oflarge dams and the sale of hydroelectricity and irrigation water with thefinancing of integrated watershed conservation and development have remainedlargely frustrated. Recently, however, both the Inter-American DevelopmentBank and the World Bank have become increasingly interested in environmentalissues related to natural resources conservation (forests and water) inwatershed and mountain areas. 48. Mountain areas are very often poor, not because they do not produce, butbecause they do not obtain a fair price for their products and services. These include water, forest products and services, tourism and recreation,mining, special upland crops, fruits and animal products (ranging from milkand cheese to clothing and carpets). 49. One of the main sustainable sources of income for mountain areas wouldappear to be based on new developments concerning water tariffs. Lesotho isat present engaged in a major highland water scheme that will enable thecountry to sell water to South Africa. This will be one of the first cases ofa major financial arrangement in which the value of water as a scarce naturalresource will be recognized. Most existing water tariffs are based only onthe need to recover the costs of dam construction and delivery systems forexample, water being considered a free - unlimited - natural resource. 50. Colombia has for several years applied a financial mechanism forwatershed management and upland rural electrification based on a special taxof 4 per cent (now changed to 6 per cent) on the bulk sale ofhydroelectricity. 51. At the national level, a new and hard look needs to be taken at theoverall flow of resources and services to and from mountain areas, includingwater, forest and range products, labour, and government services. New orrevised water tariffs, forest and mining royalties, grazing rights and leases,marketing of medicinal herbs and other non-wood forest products, fees foraccess to national parks and licences for tourism operations are all possibleincome earners for development action benefiting mountain communities, whichwould in turn allow these communities to invest in, and not receive asgovernment hand-outs, housing, communication, roads, education and nutrition. 52. Mountain areas can benefit, and in some cases are benefiting, fromprogrammes financed by GEF. GEF, however, is not at present oriented towardsmountain development as such, although the international conventions onclimate change and biological diversity are important in relation to mountainareas. Other categories eligible for GEF financing, such as internationalwaters and land degradation, are often also pertinent to mountains. Furtherconsideration should be given to financing relevant aspects of mountaindevelopment programmes by GEF or other financial mechanisms. 53. In relation to Capacity 21 the special programme of the United NationsDevelopment Programme (UNDP) for strengthening country capacity for theimplementation of UNCED decisions), the creation or strengthening of regionaland national capacity for the identification and formulation of sustainablemountain development programmes is badly needed. 54. Technical support services at the programme level (TSS-1), a newfinancial mechanism for UNDP-financing of technical support provided by UnitedNations specialized agencies, is a potentially useful mechanism for theformulation of mountain development programmes. A UNDP/FAO TSS-1 project inViet Nam on Watershed Management and Ethnic Minorities, has been useful inimproving the design of participatory watershed management projects. 55. Whether it be done in relation to GEF or as part of TFAP on Capacity 21,for example, there is a real and urgent need to define and create specialfinancial facilities for sustainable mountain development. Such financingneed not necessarily involve huge amounts of funding but should be long term,dependable and flexible. As the present report demonstrates, many nationaland international organizations have programmes in mountain areas, and in facta great deal of money is already being spent on activities involving mountainareas. What appears to be needed is a more systematic approach to investmentin mountain areas - in short, programmes involving mountains should besupplemented with "mountain programmes". 56. As a starting point it is proposed to establish one or several "mountainfacilities", as small grants funds or multi-donor trust funds, for example. This would allow mountainous developing countries to identify action requiredunder a "national mountain development action programme" and to seekinternational support for the implementation of such a programme. In theimmediate future, increased international funding would be needed to establishpilot projects under such national programmes and significantly increasesupport for applied and operational research in mountain areas, national andinternational networking, communication, exchange of experiences and the like. Long-term commitments might be generated through the formulation andnegotiation of a non-legally binding mountain charter and through regional orsubregional mountain conventions. 2. Technology 57. Mountain areas have benefited from the preparation and implementation ofnational forestry master plans or national forestry action plans in theframework of TFAP, the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) programme of the UnitedNations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), nationalenvironmental action plans and the FAO International Scheme for Conservationand Rehabilitation of African Lands, for example. However, without a specificfocus on mountain issues, mountain areas often find themselves at the back ofthe queue, with the possible exception of forestry activities, when programmeimplementation gets under way because of the difficulty of access, lack ofbasic information (soil surveys, socio-economic parameters) and the need forlocal comprehensive solutions based on slow participatory processes. 58. Available sources of information on appropriate technology to promotethe sustainable development of mountain areas include libraries and databasesof FAO, ICIMOD, CIP and other centres of CGIAR, and the World ConservationMonitoring Centre (WCMC). The existing information is accessible to, but notwidely disseminated in, developing countries. 59. Road construction in mountain areas, although recognized as a majorenvironmental problem, is still of an unsatisfactory quality in mostdeveloping countries. The difference between construction standards ofmountain roads in industrialized countries and those in developing countriesis greater than would be expected from the differences in costs. Thesituation is compounded by the fact that poorly constructed mountain roadsusually require much higher maintenance costs, and are often ecologically andeven culturally damaging. 60. Mining in mountain areas, while potentially an important income-earner,has a history of negative environmental and social impacts. Often mountaincommunities do not have the necessary financial and technical capacity toestablish and manage mining operations, and yet as labourers, mountain peoplesuffer the adverse health impacts of hazardous working conditions, as well asthe consequences of the strong fluctuations in demand and prices of metals andminerals on the world market. Progress is needed in three areas: ensuringthat an increasing share of mining royalties benefits the local populations;increased social security and health benefits for mining workers; and themitigation of environmental impacts of mining operations. 61. Urban development in the mountains presents special challenges regardingwater supply, air pollution and sewage and waste disposal, among other things. Lack of space may force construction on unstable sites or in areas that shouldbe conserved for water supply catchments on routing of flood waters. This inturn may increase the adverse impact of phenomena such as landslides,mudflows, flash floods or prolonged drought. 62. Traditional irrigation technology in mountain areas has been eclipsed bymodern dam construction and the rapid development of large downstreamirrigation schemes, generally inappropriate for mountain areas. There is anurgent need to rediscover and re-apply such traditional technologies as theAndean irrigation techniques developed by the Incas as well as mountaincivilizations in other regions. Generally speaking, irrigation in themountains, based on small-scale appropriate technology, is far moresustainable than the large-scale irrigation schemes in hot climatesdownstream, with the possible exception of the flood-irrigated lowlands inmonsoon climates in Asia. 63. A major development in government policy concerning mountain communitiesis the increased understanding of the importance of local control over naturalresource management and security of resources, especially land tenure, as themain incentives for investment in environmentally sound technologies andimproved land husbandry. Much needs to be done, however, before theconfidence mountain people lost because of past policies of sweepingnationalizations, concessions to outsiders with limited control and punitiveattitudes towards small farmers practising hillside agriculture can becompletely restored. 64. Tourism in mountain areas is still far from fulfilling its potentialcontribution to the local mountain economies. Positive examples exist inAustria (Tyrol) and in Italy (Trento Autonomous Province) and other mountainareas where the benefits of tourism have had a direct impact on the localhousehold economies, and have practically eliminated poverty in such areas. In other areas, tourism has had severe social and cultural as well asecological impacts. Bhutan is seeking to keep tourism within ecologically andculturally "safe limits" by, among other things, restricting the number ofvisitors. Regarding developing countries in general, it is worth rememberingthat (a) not all mountain areas benefit from tourism - it cannot, therefore,be considered a solution available to all mountain communities - and (b)institutional and financial mechanisms are usually insufficient to ensurelocal participation in and control over the "tourist industry" in thecommunity. 65. While it is true in general that development, in order to achievesustainability, should take a new and careful look at traditional cultures,practices and skills, this is particularly so in mountain ecosystems andcultures. The attraction of mountain tourism is mainly based on two aspects: the mountain landscape and the culture of the people. The cultural knowledgeof mountain people includes engineering (construction of houses, trails,bridges, terraces, irrigation canals, water harvesting and spreading systems);animal husbandry (sheep, goats, camels, yaks and llamas and their products,including clothing, carpets and cheese), traditional dress, dances, songs,musical instruments; rules and regulations for local government and land andwater allocation; traditional medicines, medicinal herbs; forest and rangeproducts, including a wide range of food sources (mushrooms, berries, roots,leaves, tubers). Sustainable development of mountain ecosystems must build onthis knowledge, bearing in mind three aspects: the richness of accumulatedtraditional mountain cultures; the rate at which this knowledge isdisappearing; and the need for the application of state-of-the-art technology(in communication, mountain engineering, energy, risk mapping and earlywarning systems, local resource management and local government) to enablemountain communities to make a "leap forward", applying modern technology withas much as possible of the traditional culture still intact. 66. Some progress has been made. Government and development agencies areincreasingly aware that the limiting factors in sustainable mountaindevelopment are not only lack of "assistance" (technical, medical, food), butalso lack of "empowerment" (land titles, local autonomy, generation ofincome). Some Governments have not only restored land titles to indigenousmountain communities, but have also paid compensation for past damages (in thecase of the Pueblo of Zuni in the United States of America, for example). 67. A wealth of new research collaboration involving cooperativearrangements between international institutions and local researchorganizations has appeared in recent years. CONDESAN is one example. Othersinclude the use of Worldwatch Institute volunteers in mountain ecologyresearch in Eastern Europe; and the work carried out by TMI in Bolivia, China,Nepal and Peru; the collaboration between the United Nations University (UNU)and IMS and the establishment and strengthening of regional mountainassociations. On the intergovernmental side, the creation of ICIMOD in 1983,the recent establishment of the Centre for International Forestry Research(CIFOR), at Bogor, Indonesia, the African Highlands programme of ICRAF and thespecial emphasis on mountains in the programmes of CIP open up newpossibilities for support for local mountain research. D. Recent developments and experiences in international cooperation 1. Intergovernmental processes 68. Several European countries are in the process of revising their forestlaws and regulations, especially regarding mountain forests. The StrasbourgMinisterial Conference on Forest Protection in Europe (1990) adopted aresolution on adapting the management of mountain forests to new environmentalconditions. A permanent institutional mechanism for follow-up to thisresolution, coordinated by Portugal, has been found in the FAO EuropeanForestry Commission Working Party on the Management of Mountain Watersheds. This Working Party, established 42 years ago, with a broad mandate forintegrated development in mountain areas in Europe, has the potential ofbecoming a useful regional vehicle for various aspects of chapter 13 as well. 69. The Alpine Convention, including a Protocol on Mountain Forests, hasbeen negotiated and is now being ratified by Austria, France, Germany, Italy,Liechtenstein, Monaco, Slovenia, Switzerland and the European Union. TheCouncil of Europe is preparing a "European Charter for the Mountain Regions". 70. As recommended by the first ad hoc inter-agency meeting on chapter 13 ofAgenda 21 (Rome, March 1994), a series of regional intergovernmentalconsultations on the follow-up to chapter 13 are to take place during theperiod 1994-1996. ICIMOD organized the Regional Conference on SustainableDevelopment of Fragile Mountain Areas in Asia in December 1994. The regionalmeeting for Latin America and the Caribbean is to be organized by CIP inApril 1995. The regional meeting for Africa is tentatively scheduled forOctober 1995. 2. Organizations of the United Nations system 71. The agencies and organizations present at the first ad hoc inter-agencymeeting had generally one thing in common: they all had important activitiesin mountain areas but no mountain programme as such. This is especially truefor the United Nations organizations including FAO, IFAD, the United NationsEnvironment Programme (UNEP), UNESCO, the United Nations Children's Fund(UNICEF) and the World Bank, with the exception of UNU, and for theInternational Union of Forest Research Organizations, an NGO. Organizationswith a focus on mountains are those created around mountain issues. Theyinclude ICIMOD and CIP and such NGOs as IMS and TMI. Among institutions witha significant interest in mountains, but not present at the inter-agencymeeting are IUCN (which has had a Mountain Initiative since 1991), theInternational Development Research Centre (IDRC), the International Academy ofthe Environment, regional international development banks, regional mountainassociations, ICRAF and UNDP. 72. The organizations present at the inter-agency meeting agreed toestablish an E-mail Network on Mountains, as called for by IACSD. This hassince been extended to constitute a more complete group of internationalorganizations concerned with the follow-up to chapter 13. 73. Based on the recommendation of the inter-agency meeting, TMI convened anNGO Planning Workshop on the Mountain Agenda in West Virginia, United Statesof America, from 22 to 26 July 1994. 74. FAO has established a Steering Committee on Environment and SustainableDevelopment to, among other things, coordinate follow-up for the chapters andactivities of UNCED for which FAO is responsible as Task Manager. Forchapter 13, a focal point in the Forestry Department has been designated andan Interdepartmental Mountain Group has been established with theparticipation of nine divisions in addition to the Forestry Department.75. The first action by FAO, in its role as Task Manager, was to convene thead hoc inter-agency meeting on chapter 13 (Rome, 21 and 22 March 1994). Themeeting was attended by representatives of 13 agencies and non-governmentalorganizations. 7/ The meeting agreed that it would be necessary to make aspecial effort to move the issue of fragile mountain ecosystems and the"mountain agenda" higher on the international and national developmentagendas. It was also noted that no readily available or additional resourceshad been earmarked for immediate action, as called for in chapter 13. Themeeting therefore proposed a series of activities aimed at raising awarenessand moving mountain issues higher on the international development agenda. FAO, as Task Manager, was requested to seek donor support for preparatoryconsultations within a steering committee, as well as a series of regionalworkshops leading to a world conference on sustainable mountain development tobe held in late 1995 or early 1996 (now proposed by FAO for 1997). NGOs wereencouraged to establish cooperative mechanisms among themselves for thefurther development of chapter 13 and to make proposals to the Commission onSustainable Development at its third session, in April 1995. 76. Examples of past and ongoing action in mountain areas carried out byintergovernmental organizations are given below. 77. Within the CGIAR system, CIP has been designated to coordinate thefollow-up of chapter 13. CONDESAN is a participatory research consortium forthe identification, promotion, implementation and monitoring of collaborativeactivities, including training and information functions. INFOANDINA is thecommunication and information exchange system of CONDESAN, reaching 70,000people world wide. 78. FAO is assisting a large number of mountainous countries by providingpolicy advice, technical assistance and training. This includes programmes onpeople's participation, with particular attention to the role of women. Sophisticated methodologies have been developed - for example, to match cropsto different ecological conditions and to manipulate the vast amount of dataon soils, climate and vegetation of mountain areas. Participatory approachesare being developed in soil conservation and land rehabilitation, communityforestry and watershed management and other activities related to uplandconservation and development in mountain areas. FAO's Agricultural ServicesDivision together with ICIMOD organized the International Workshop onEvolution of Hills and Mountain Farming Systems: Sustainable DevelopmentPolicy Implications in Nepal in October 1994. A similar meeting will beorganized in Ecuador in 1995 in collaboration with CIP. As Task Manager forchapter 13, FAO has established a focal point in its Forestry Department andset up an Interdepartmental Working Group. Pursuant to the recommendation ofthe first ad hoc inter-agency meeting, FAO's Director-General has called fordonors to support the proposed world conference on sustainable mountaindevelopment in 1997. 79. The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) is becominginvolved with mountain issues through projects dealing with water resourcesmanagement and the mitigation of flood disasters. A publication on humansettlement issues in the sustainable development of mountain areas is planned. 80. ICRAF is launching the African Highlands Ecoregional Initiative, withthe overall goal of helping communities in the densely populated andintensively cultivated highlands of eastern and central Africa, in order toalleviate poverty and related social and environmental problems. About 10national and international research institutions are involved in this projectincluding the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), basedin Mexico; CIP, based in Peru; the International Crops Research Institute forthe Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), based in India; and the InternationalLivestock Centre for Africa (ILCA), based in Ethiopia. 81. UNEP has been specially concerned with mountains since 1985 through itsprogramme on Andean ecosystem management and regional workshops on mountains. UNEP will contribute especially to chapter 13, programme area A, objective(b): "To maintain and generate database and information systems to facilitatethe integrated management and environmental assessment of mountainecosystems". It contributed to the NGO Planning Workshop on the MountainAgenda in July 1994 and the Regional Conference on Sustainable Development ofFragile Mountain Areas in Asia, organized by ICIMOD in December 1994 and willcontribute to the conference of intergovernmental and non-governmentalorganizations scheduled for February 1995 and other international meetings onsustainable mountain development. A publication in the EnvironmentalManagement Guidelines series, The Integrated Management of Mountain Ecosystemsis being finalized. 82. UNESCO contributed to the activities of the "mountain agenda" groupthrough a trust fund contribution from Germany. Activities in the field ofsustainable mountain development are mainly carried out within the frameworkof the MAB programme (more than 40 per cent of all biosphere reservesrecognized under MAB are located in mountain areas); the InternationalHydrological Programme (IHP), which addresses specifically the hydrology ofmountainous areas; earth science programmes such as the InternationalGeological Correlation Programme (IGCP), which focuses on geological factorscontrolling the global environment; and programmes related to theInternational Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, which address thevulnerability of, for example, landslide-prone areas using appropriatetechnologies such as remote sensing and geographic information systems. Asynthesis of MAB research in mountains of western and eastern Europe(including the former Soviet Union) was published in the third quarter of1994. A similar synthesis for tropical mountains is in preparation. 83. UNICEF is represented and active in many mountain countries, especiallybecause mountain people are amongst the most vulnerable, with high childmortality rates. A study on children and poverty in mountains is inpreparation. As a follow-up to Agenda 21, the UNICEF Executive Board, in1993, formally adopted a policy to integrate primary environmental care (PEC)in all UNICEF-assisted programmes. Special attention is to be devoted tomountain areas and other ecologically stressed and vulnerable areas, andgreater efforts are to be made in reaching the poorest, whose livelihood hasbeen seriously affected by resource degradation. 84. The UNU mountain programme was initiated in 1978 under the title"Project on highland-lowland interactive systems" and subsequently renamed"Mountain ecology and sustainable development". Its objectives are to trainscholars, carry out scholarly and applied research, disseminate results anddevelop an international mountain network. UNU was a major partner, togetherwith IMS, ICIMOD and others in the preparation and dissemination of the twomain publications on mountains issued in preparation for UNCED - The State ofthe World's Mountains: A Global Report, and An Appeal for the Mountains. 85. The mountain research initiated by UNU has involved extensive fieldstudies in the Himalayas, Thailand, south-west China, the Andes, Ethiopia andKenya. The work has included studies on natural and man-made mountainhazards, human impacts and human environmental perceptions. Each sub-projecthas also contributed to the training of young scholars in the host countries. Especially important is the series of challenges to conventional environmentalwisdom and the insistence on respect for the indigenous environmentalintelligence of the subsistence farmer. In particular, this has led to adeeper understanding of the relationship between deforestation in mountainareas by subsistence farmers (especially in the Himalayas) and downstreamdevastation on the plains (especially Gangetic India and Bangladesh). Thework has been backed up by a long series of regional and internationalconferences and training programmes, and the publication of their proceedingsin the UNU journal, Mountain Research and Development, and other forms. Thisenabled UNU, in conjunction with IMS, ICIMOD and others, with funding by theSwiss Development Cooperation, to formulate "Mountain Agenda 1992" and so playa major role in ensuring the passage of chapter 13 as part of Agenda 21. Theprimary ongoing activity involves a major study of a Central Asian mountaintransect, including the Pamirs-Tajikistan-Karakoram-Himalayas-TibetanPlateau-Hengduan Mountains. This is linked with work being undertaken by twomajor German programmes, the National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) ofFrance, ICIMOD, the Ford Foundation and UNICEF. 86. The World Bank is providing loans to Governments for carrying out about50 projects specifically in mountain areas, some of which are using highlyinnovative approaches. Three main areas of challenge have been identified: recognition of mountains as ecosystems; culture in mountain ecosystems; andfinance and support for action. 3. Organizations outside the United Nations system 87. The role of NGOs in the follow-up to chapter 13 was confirmed at thefirst ad hoc inter-agency meeting, which recommended that NGOs initiate aconsultative process on the "mountain agenda" and make proposals to theCommission on Sustainable Development. In response to that recommendation,TMI convened the NGO Workshop on the Mountain Agenda (West Virginia, UnitedStates of America, 22-26 July 1994), where detailed plans were made for aglobal conference of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations onthe follow-up to chapter 13, to be held at Lima in February 1995, in time tomake proposals for the third session of the Commission, in April 1995. TheWorkshop also concluded that NGOs would cooperate with Governments in theimplementation of chapter 13, as approved by UNCED. 88. It is anticipated that following the interest and constructivecommitment of international NGOs, national and local NGOs will become directlyinvolved in the follow-up to chapter 13. Their participation will beincreasingly important as implementation of decisions related to the chaptermoves from meeting rooms to the field. 89. The International Centre for Alpine Environment (ICALPE) is anindependent, international organization which, since 1987, constitutes apermanent scientific basis for research, management and policy actions onenvironmental and other matters in the mountain regions of Europe, includingeastern Europe and the Russian Federation. 90. ICIMOD has the potential to play a key role in implementing chapter 13. It has a strong regional focus (the Hindu Kush-Himalayas region), but a globalconceptual orientation. There is a high degree of coincidence between ICIMODactivities and Agenda 21. The Centre has stepped up the process of promotingcollaboration in many different fields of key importance to sustainablemountain development. In 1994 alone, 10 workshops and seminars were held,during which scientists and development workers from its eight membercountries identified key issues of common interest, and case studies,guidelines and manuals were developed as well as on-farm research anddemonstration sites in six countries of the Hindu Kush-Himalayas. Inconnection with its tenth anniversary, ICIMOD organized an InternationalSymposium on Mountain Environment and Development in December 1993. 91. IMS had a major role in the "mountain agenda" group promoting themountain cause and in the inclusion of the chapter on mountains in Agenda 21. Much of the present knowledge and clarifications in the discussion onmountains have been developed in partnership arrangements between IMS, UNU,IUCN, UNESCO and ICIMOD. The journal Mountain Research and Development andthe International Mountain Network Newsletter could be used as a basis forchapter 13 networks. The President of IMS is currently Chairman of theInternational Geographical Union's Commission on Mountain Geoecology. Ongoingactivities include involvement in a research pilot project of the YunnanAcademy of Social Sciences, China, with support from the Ford Foundation, andUNU/IMS support for the establishment and growth of regional mountainassociations: African Mountains Association, East Asia/Pacific MountainAssociation and Andean/Latin American Mountain Association. 92. IUCN is involved in supporting national and international mountaininitiatives, including the protection of mountain regions through theestablishment of national parks and other protected areas. Since 1991, it hashad a Vice-Chairman for Mountains in its Commission on National Parks andProtected Areas (covering a network of 180 managers and researchers) and astaff person with part-time responsibilities for mountains. Activitiesinclude support for the establishment of the Karakorum National Park inPakistan and the evaluation of several of the world's most outstandingmountain parks for inclusion in UNESCO's World Heritage List. The totalnumber of mountain protected areas on the List is now 31. 93. The programmes of TMI focus on ecosystem conservation, education andeconomic opportunity for mountain people and "sacred" mountains, linkingculture and natural resource management practices. The Institute wasestablished 20 years ago. Its main achievements are in the areas of base-linesurveys and biological databases; applied technology; people and wildlifeinteractions; mountain agriculture, non-timber forest resources and crafts;training and capacity-building; institutional development; cultural researchand preservation, including archaeology; and innovative partnership. TMIorganized the highly successful NGO Planning Workshop on the Mountain Agendain July 1994, laying the foundation for the global conference ofintergovernmental and non-governmental organizations in February 1995. III. CONCLUSIONS AND PROPOSALS FOR ACTION A. Conclusions 94. Chapter 13 of Agenda 21 (Managing fragile ecosystems: sustainablemountain development) is recognized, not only by Governments and inter-governmental organizations, but also by the international mountain NGOcommunity, as the basic plan of action for the "mountain agenda". 95. The ad hoc inter-agency meeting on chapter 13 convened by the TaskManager, FAO, in March 1994, and the NGO Planning Workshop on the MountainAgenda convened by TMI in July 1994, have produced a productive cooperativenetwork of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned withsustainable mountain development. There is agreement that a political andeconomic "mountain lobby" needs to be generated, enabling mountain people tofully demonstrate their potential contribution to sustainable development,with a thorough understanding of the specificity of mountain issues, similarto that for small island developing States. 96. The "mountain agenda" therefore includes the launching of a process ofpreparation of a number of initiatives, particularly through the organizationof regional consultations, leading to a major global consultation onsustainable mountain development, including a follow-up plan of action. Multi-donor support and host and sponsoring countries are needed. 97. One of the main difficulties encountered so far is the lack of adequaterecognition of mountain areas as something special, with common problems notshared by lowlands, and therefore worthy of special attention. The fragilityof mountain ecosystems and the adverse impact of the degradation of thoseecosystems on lowland populations have not been fully appreciated. This isreflected in the lack of mountain programmes of agencies, but maybe even moreso at the national level, where it is still rare to find departments,programmes or legislation, dealing in a comprehensive way with mountainissues. More often than not mountain areas and populations are at the "thinend" of general national programmes of education, health and infrastructure,mainly because the cost per person of providing such services in remotemountain areas is above the national average and therefore seen by sectoralagencies as uneconomical, and because mountain communities often lack thenecessary economic and political influence. 98. The empowerment, equity and equality of mountain women should receivepriority attention, together with improved services related to women'sspecific needs, reproductive health and nutrition; education aimed at closingexisting literacy gaps between boys and girls, and between men and women; andensuring women's access to development and technology transfer programmes. 99. Sustainable mountain development in many places has to start with achange in attitude towards indigenous people and in the way they are treated. Their right to the land should be recognized, as should their knowledge of thespecial living conditions and natural resource management in the mountains,and they should be protected from exploitation by extractive industries, drugdealers, tourist operators and guerrilla movements. The role of children andyouth in sustainable mountain development should also be recognized. Not onlywill they inherit the responsibility of looking after the environment in thefuture, but they can also be active supporters of today's endeavour. Theirinterests can best be served by employing a participatory approach thatinvolves them in the whole process of developing programmes and action plans. 100. A new and hard look needs to be taken at the overall flow of resourcesand services to and from mountain areas, including water, forest and rangeproducts, labour and government services. New or revised water tariffs,forest and mining royalties, grazing rights and leases, marketing of medicinalherbs and other non-wood forest products, fees for access to national parksand licences for tourism operations are all possible income earners formountain communities, which would in turn allow these communities to investin, and not receive as government hand-outs, housing, communications, roads,education and nutrition. Of special interest in financing mountaindevelopment is the increasing recognition of the economic value of water (inthis connection see chapter 18 of Agenda 21 and the Water Resources ManagementPolicy Papers of the World Bank). 101. Some progress has been made concerning the sustainability of developmentin mountain areas. Government and development agencies are increasingly awarethat the limiting factors in sustainable mountain development is not only lackof "assistance" (technical, medical, food) but also lack of "empowerment"(land titles, local autonomy, generation of income). There is a need toexamine the relationship of chapter 13 with other chapters of Agenda 21 and toanalyse the extent to which the concerns of mountain areas can be betterintegrated in the follow-up action on other chapters. Of equal importance isthe analysis of ongoing programmes of United Nations organizations, includingthe World Bank, the CGIAR centres and donor agencies to see how priorities formountain areas are reflected. B. Proposals for action 102. The main proposals for action were identified through a broadparticipatory process involving the major NGOs and were made in five areas inwhich progress is deemed to be urgently needed: eradicating poverty;strengthening a global information network and database; strengthening countrycapacity; raising awareness through the preparation and organization of aworld conference on sustainable mountain development; and formulating andnegotiating regional or subregional mountain conventions and possiblydeveloping a global mountain charter. 103. The estimated average total annual cost of implementing the activitiesof chapter 13 made by the Conference secretariat prior to the Conferenceshould be reviewed by Governments, leading to readily available or additionalresources being earmarked for immediate action, especially action directedtowards eradicating poverty. It may be recalled that there are already anumber of international, national and local organizations with a mandate insustainable mountain development, but with severe limitations of staff andfunding. Matching their institutional mandate, professional expertise andproved record with adequate financial support would have a direct measurableimpact in the short and medium term. 104. Support should be provided for strengthening a global informationnetwork and database, as outlined in chapter 13 of Agenda 21, programme area A(Generating and strengthening knowledge about the ecology and sustainabledevelopment of mountain ecosystems). A small secretariat should beestablished for this purpose. The proposed lead agency is UNU, incollaboration with FAO, IMS and TMI, among others. The network would providethe linkage between NGOs, regional mountain associations, mountain scholarsand academic institutions, and should ensure the process of bringing increasedunderstanding of mountain ecosystems, watershed processes andculture-development processes to decision makers and the public concerned. The network would also promote research and monitoring activities at thegrass-roots level. Databases would enable the preparation of atlases thathighlighted the global and regional role of mountain ecosystems. Supportwould be given to regional assessments and surveys, regional mountain databaseand information systems and regional action guidelines, as well as tomonitoring the state of the environment and development of the world'smountains. 105. Support should be provided for generating country capacity andformulating national mountain action programmes as outlined in chapter 13 ofAgenda 21, programme area B (Promoting integrated watershed development andalternative livelihood opportunities). Initially, a small-grants mountainfacility would be needed to assist countries in formulating and initiatingimplementation of sustainable mountain development programmes. Considerationshould be given to decentralizing decision-making and programme formulation tothe level of administrative units. Proposed lead agencies are FAO, UNDP,UNEP, UNICEF and bilateral donors. Primary environmental care on a watershedbasis could provide a conceptual framework, whereas the planning andformulation methodologies developed by TFAP could serve as a model for acountry-driven, multi-stakeholder, process-oriented, participatory approach. Increased funding for poverty alleviation as a first step towards sustainabledevelopment in mountains is urgently required. 106. The Commission on Sustainable Development may wish to urge interestedcountries and organizations to promote initiatives aimed at raising awareness,including the organization of a world conference on sustainable mountaindevelopment. Host country and sponsoring countries and agencies would need tobe identified. It is proposed that such a conference be held early in 1997. In preparation for the conference, regional intergovernmental workshops wouldbe organized. Non-governmental organizations would be actively involved inthe process. The three main objectives of the conference would be (a) tomobilize a political and economic "mountain lobby" capable of demonstrating toGovernments, policy makers and planners the potential contribution of mountainareas to national and regional development; (b) to introduce the financial andplanning instruments needed to incorporate mountain development into nationalplans and budgets; and (c) to examine the specific human, social andtechnological characteristics of mountain areas. 107. Support should be provided for the formulation, negotiation andimplementation of regional or subregional mountain conventions and possiblythe formulation of a global mountain charter. Notes 1/ Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment andDevelopment, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted bythe Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 andcorrigendum), resolution 1, annex II. 2/ Two main groups of mountainous countries should be considered inthis context - those where mountain people and mountain areas constitute themain focus of development (Bhutan, Lesotho, Nepal, Yemen), and those wheremountain people and mountain areas are only a part of the national socio-economic scene (China, Ethiopia, India). 3/ In terms of poverty and the impact of environmental degradation,children and women in poor mountain areas constitute the most disadvantagedand vulnerable groups. Statistical data point to some of the highest infantand maternal mortality rates in mountainous regions of developing countries. 4/ A special situation exists in eastern and southern Africa and on amore limited scale in other tropical mountainous countries, in the sense thatthe uplands, because of their favourable climates and fertile soils, have beenoccupied by wealthy farmers and farming enterprises. These include tea andcoffee estates, forest and fruit tree plantations and cattle and wildlifefarms. Long-term sustainability of development in such areas appears to belinked more to socio-political aspects than to environmental considerations,since these areas are not particularly fragile and soil erosion can be keptwithin acceptable limits. Provided politically acceptable land ownershippatterns and levels of employment can be maintained, these uplands have thepotential for very high production and income-generation levels and forplaying an important role in the national economy. 5/ Report of the International Conference on Population andDevelopment, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (A/CONF.171/13 and Add.1), chap. I,resolution 1, annex. 6/ Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment andDevelopment ..., resolution 1, annex II, para. 13.8. 7/ The complete list of agencies involved up to the time of reportingin the E-mail Network on Mountains and with identified focal points forfollow-up to chapter 13 include: ILO, UNESCO, World Bank, World MonetaryOrganization, IFAD, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, UnitedNations Conference on Trade and Development, UNDP, UNEP, UNICEF, World FoodProgramme, UNU, United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat),Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development of the UnitedNations Secretariat, African Development Bank, ICIMOD, IUCN, IUFRO, TMI, IMS,CIP/CGIAR, CIRAF, IDRC and African Mountain Association. In addition, anumber of universities and national NGOs participated in the NGO PlanningWorkshop on the Mountain Agenda convened by TMI in July 1994, including theInternational Academy of the Environment (Geneva), Worldwatch Institute,Office of the Governor of the Pueblo of Zuni (United States of America),University of Bern (Switzerland), Charles University of Prague (CzechRepublic), the University of San Andre's (La Paz, Bolivia), Earth Council (SanJose', Costa Rica), the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the South-East AsianMountain Association, the University of Oxford (United Kingdom of GreatBritain and Northern Ireland), King Mahendra Trust for Nature Conservation(Nepal), and the Fundacio'n Peruana para la Conservacio'n de la Naturaleza. The International Centre for Alpine Environment (ICALPE) is also activelyinvolved in international scientific cooperation on environmental issues inmountain areas in Europe. Policy and Law:Public Sector Policy and Law:Mountain Policy Recommendations General:General References Return to the Archives Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised October 1996WT01-B09-212IA008-000077-B039-331http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/reportspubs/parks.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072142 text/html 179582HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:21:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 179409Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:18:39 GMT "CNPPA's special Mountain issue of "Parks" "-Mtn-Forum Discussion Archive Article # PARKS Vol 6 No 1 - February 1996 - Mountain Protected Areas *************************************************** Note from the Mountain Forum moderator: The World Conservation Union's Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA) has generously offered to electronically share the special mountain issue of "PARKS" with the Mountain Forum. This is normally a paid subscription, and information on how to subscribe is given below. On behalf of the Mountain Forum, I would like to extend our sincere thanks to the CNPPA for allowing us to disseminate this important issue to our mountain constituency. *************************************************** PARKS The international journal for protected area managers PARKS was relaunched in 1994 to great acclaim. Published by theCommission on National Parks and Protected Areas (CNPPA) of IUCN - TheWorld Conservation Union, PARKS aims to strengthen internationalcollaboration among protected area professionals and to enhance theirrole, status and activities. PARKS is the leading global forum forinformation on issues relating to protected area establishment andmanagement. Each issue of PARKS focuses on a particular theme. For example, Vol 6includes: 1 Mountain Protected Areas 2 Climate Change and Protected Areas 3 Protected Areas in North Eurasia Biodiversity, sustainable development, ecotourism ... PARKS putsprotected areas at the forefront of contemporary environmental issues. PARKS is published three times a year, in February, June and October,and is produced and managed on behalf of CNPPA by the NatureConservation Bureau Ltd. ISSN: 0960-233X. Back issues are availableindividually (out of print issues are supplied as photocopies).To subscribe, or to obtain further details, contact the PARKS office: mail to:parks@naturebureau.co.uk By post: 36 Kingfisher Court, Hambridge Road, Newbury, RG14 5SJ, UK. Tel: +44 1635 550380 Fax: +44 1635 550230 Each subscription runs for a calendar year (three issues), and includespostage and packing. There is a reduced rate for multiple subscriptions.1-9 subscriptions: UK: pounds sterling 21.30 each Rest of Europe: pounds sterling 22.60 each Rest of world: pounds sterling 26.40 each 10+ subscriptions to a single address: UK: pounds sterling 15.30 each Rest of Europe: pounds sterling 16.60 each Rest of world: pounds sterling 20.40 each Payment can be accepted in UK pounds sterling, or by by Visa/Mastercard. ********************************************************** TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. Editorial- Lawrence S. Hamilton 2.The Role of Protected Areas in Sustainable Mountain Development - Lawrence S. Hamilton 3.The Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve: Conservation and Regional Sustainable Development - Enrique J. Jardel, Eduardo Santana C. and Sergio Graf 4.Argentera Nature Park: Scientific Research, Management and Transfrontier Cooperation- Patrizia Rossi 5.The Australian Alps National Parks and Protected Area Management - Graeme Worboys 6.Sacred Mountains: Implications for Protected Area Management - Edwin Bernbaum 7.Legal Brief - The Alpine Convention - A Promise for the Future? - Wolfgang E. Burhenne 8.Identifying the World's Most Outstanding Mountains - Jim Thorsell *********************************************************** Editorial LAWRENCE S. HAMILTON BECAUSE of their significant three-dimensional character, mountains andmountain ranges have a heterogeneity, a fragility, a climate, and arelative inaccessibility that present special problems in sustainabledevelopment. Moreover they are the living environment for some of theworld's most ancient and traditional peoples, whose rich cultures arebeing rapidly eroded. Biodiversity is high because of the variety ofspecialised habitats among the differing faces and altitudinal belts ofmountains. Endemism is also high for the same reason, and because manyfree-standing mountains are essentially islands. These characteristicsemphasise the need to have very large portions of our mountain heritagein effectively-managed protected areas, ranging from strict naturereserves to protected landscapes occupied by humans. IUCN has long been concerned about the mountain environment.Current action centres on the Commission for National Parks andProtected Areas (CNPPA), where since 1992 there has been a MountainTheme and a Vice-Chair for Mountains. The CNPPA Newsletter has amountain column, and a Mountain Protected Areas UPDATE is sent to 250scientists and managers. Funding is sought for a Mountain Task Force. The CNPPA Vice-Chair represented IUCN with partners who togethersucceeded in placing a document and supporting material before the EarthSummit, and the result was the adoption of a chapter on mountains inAgenda 21, supported by all nations. He, along with Jim Thorsell,represents IUCN in the Task Group formed by FAO to carry out the mandateof this chapter, a Mountain Agenda, and a series of significant meetingsand activities have been stimulated by this group. Coming up, forinstance, are intergovernmental mountain sustainability meetings inEurope (October 1996), Africa (June 1996) and North America (1997). Aglobal Mountain Forum for NGOs has been launched, sparked by theleadership of The Mountain Institute in the USA. Mountain Associationshave been formed for the Andes, Africa, East Asia and the Pacific,augmenting the existing International Centre for Integrated MountainDevelopment which serves the Himalayas, Hindu Kush and Karakoram.Interest in mountains finally seems to be crystallising and enteringpolitical consciousness. It is important in this sustainable developmentscenario that mountain protected areas play their needed role. Moreprotected areas of various categories are needed to fill in gaps inbiogeographic coverage and to link existing areas in conservationcorridors. In addition, improved management of existing areas is anecessary accompaniment. Some of the characteristics of mountain environments thatmandate special attention to these earth features are alluded to in theintroductory article of this issue of PARKS, along with some suggestedpriority topics for conservation action. Other articles deal with: WorldHeritage mountains; the sacred aspects of mountains; using the BiosphereReserve to achieve mountain conservation in Mexico; a fine example oftransfrontier cooperation between France and Italian protected areas;the contribution to parks management made by developments in theAustralian Alps; and an update on the innovative institutional (legal)device of the Alpine Convention in Europe. Readers who manage or research in mountain protected areas andwould like to join the Mountain Protected Area Network are invited tocontact the CNPPA Vice-Chair for Mountains, RR #3, Box 3010, Charlotte,Vermont 05445 USA (fax: 802 425 6509). ************************************************************* The role of protected areas in sustainable mountain development LAWRENCE S. HAMILTON Mountain regions seem to have common problems whether in Bolivia, Switzerland, Nepal or Uganda. To name a few, they seem characterised by: Interesting and threatened cultures or livelihood systems Narginalization economically, politically and in law enforcement Outflow of young people and the skilled or highly educated Outflow of raw materials to the lowlands Heterogeneous environments due to various elevation zones, directional exposures and soils, and thus not easily masterplanned by recipes which may work in the lowlands Ecologically sensitive to a high degree due to erosion, variable climate and extreme climate, and with slow recovery of fauna, vegetation or soils High incidence of natural hazards such as avalanches, lava flows, landslides, earthquakes, torrents and rock falls, due to vulcanism, tectonic and topographic processes. Any planning exercise for a mountain region as to guiding principles for sustainable development will be difficult because of the complexity of these problems. Nevertheless, the attempt to draw up such guidelines for harmonious accommodation between nature, culture and economic aspirations is a worthy one. What follows is at a sub-national regional scale for mountain environments in general, but the focus in examples is mostly on the Andes. WHEN CONFRONTED with the task of identifying 'beauty', it is generallyaccepted that 'beauty is in the eye of the beholder'. There is littleagreement,even when it comes to the natural beauty of the landscape. There is,however, much more consensus on what is ugly or discordant, or whatconstitutes a misfit in human society or in a landscape. Thus it wasthat a nationwide campaign for 'natural beauty', instigated by the wifeof the President of the United States (Mrs Johnson) in the 1960s,focused on reducing the amount of ugliness in the out-of-doors. One ofthe most visible targets was the outdoor advertising billboard, and I amhappy to be able to say that I live in a state (Vermont) that was one ofthe first to ban these visual blights on the landscape. I feel very much that we have the same problem in trying toidentify and describe 'sustainability', which is the current conceptualgoal for local, regional or national planning and development.Sustainability was the watchword coming from the Earth Charter, Agenda21 out of the UN Conference on Environment and Development in 1992, andthere is now a global Commission on Sustainable Development charged withguiding implementation of Agenda 21. The manual Caring for the Earth(IUCN/UNEP/WWF 1991) is subtitled "A Strategy for Sustainable Living".Yet there have been few, if any, successful identifications of when thehappy state of environmental sustainability has been reached (Carpenter1993 and 1995, Cocklin 1989, Orians 1990). But as is true with easierrecognition of the ugly or the misfit, it is far easier to identify andto measure unsustainability. Then by taking steps to reduce or eliminateit, to approach a harmonious situation of sustainable use of anenvironment such as one in the Andes. This I have called the 'back door'approach. I would like to explore how this approach might be applied infive aspects of mountain development, and then highlight eight key areasof a mountainous landscape which might receive priority attention giventhe fact that unlimited human and financial resources are not availableto tackle all elements and locations. In many mountain regional planning units there is an underlyingacceptance of the need for: 1) productive, healthy forests; 2) a systemof viable protected areas; 3) sustainable tourism; 4) production ofquality water; and 5) maintenance of cultural values and traditionallifestyles. Note that these aspects do not include mountain agricultureor grazing, but the same principle applies. Let me offer some briefcomments on recognising and reducing unsustainability in each of thesefacets of mountain development. Forest Health The term 'forest health' has come into vogue in the USA rather thanforest sustainability (Society of American Foresters 1994). My opinionhas been strengthened that recognising ill-health is easier, can oftenbe measured, and points toward action that leads to a healthy forest,i.e. a sustainable one. A major criterion would be abnormal reductionsin productivity. And here I mean production not only of wood (timber,fuelwood etc.), but of non-wood plant products such as fruits, medicinalplants, nuts, mushrooms, resins, bark (for Taxol or other products) etc.It should also include forest fauna ranging from game to be hunted, tonon-game for enjoyment or as part of the functioning ecosystem (e.g.ants and earthworms). Where these 'products' are harvested, carefulmonitoring of growth, yield and regeneration over long periods of timeis required in order to detect abnormal reduction, for there will alwaysbe fluctuations. Separating overharvest from natural fluctuation, or asCarpenter (1993) has put it "separating the signal from the backgroundnoise", is the tricky bit and requires all the skill that foresters canmuster. The extreme example of abnormal reduction would of course beloss or endangerment of a species, and this would indeed be a secondcriterion for an unhealthy forest. Early recognition of endangerment isrequired if appropriate health restorative measures are to be taken,e.g. concern about the welfare of the tree species Alerce Fitzroyacupressoides. A third criterionwould be soil erosion, focused on thatcaused by human activity in product removal. While some increase inerosion inevitably accompanies any product removal activity thatdestroys the ground cover or disturbs the soil, this must be held to aminimum, and promptly controlled if it is occurring. Guidelines forreducing the negative aspects of wood product removal have been producedand are available (see for instance Hamilton 1987). A fourth criterionwould be evidence of forest decline or death due to pests, or to airpollution from acid rain, photochemical smog or ozone. Air pollutiondamage is not yet a major problem in the Andes but it is in manymountain areas. Other criteria of ill-health would be high rates of nutrientloss (leaching or removal off-site by erosion, or by short-rotationtotal wood removal), and slow or incomplete recovery from disturbance(Smith 1984). Monitoring will detect these evidences of ill-health, andcuring them or preventing them moves us toward sustainability. Suchmonitoring and a concern for sustainability should characterise allForest Reserves or National Forests, as protected areas. A viable system of protected areas What would be a viable, adequate, sustainable system of protected areasin a region, a state or nation? There have been a number of yardsticksproposed having to do with adequate legislation, percentage of land areaprotected (not a good one), coverage of major environments or ecosystems(a very good one), an adequate protection staff, and so forth. However,it is easy to be complacent and be satisfied with a system thatsuperficially looks good on paper, but that has symptoms of ill-healthon the ground. It is therefore important to monitor, to research for theweak points, the signs of unravelling, the potential problems, and theninitiate course corrections in management or interpretation or policy. Afew examples might be illustrative. Increasing friction or conflict withneighbours shows up in many ways such as fires, poaching, illegal forestharvesting, vandalism, or anti-park sentiment that permeates localpolitics; these need to be addressed early on, possibly by greater localinvolvement in park planning or management, by effective communitymeetings, by identification of local benefits to the community and theninforming them, and so forth. A decline in top predators is usuallynoticeable as a symptom of failure (an inadequate protected area), but adecline in amphibians which are an important part of ecosystemfunctioning might escape notice unless monitoring is well done. Invasionby alien species that adversely impact native species is anotherindication of an unsustainable situation which needs to be addressed.Other problems such as trail erosion, air pollution damage, garbage orlitter, conflict between hikers and bikers, are all symptoms of anunsustainable situation, and need redress. Carrying capacity forvisitors is difficult to determine, but over-use and over-crowding arerecognisable. A very useful publication is IUCN's bulletin Guidelinesfor Mountain Protected Areas (Poore 1992), available in English, Spanishand Russian and in Japanese. Sustainable nature-based tourism Tourism has become one of the foremost economic activities around theworld. In developing countries alone tourism generated US$62.5 billionin 1990 (WTO 1991). In mountainous areas which have often beeneconomically, socially and politically marginalised with relation tolowland areas, tourism based on mountain scenic, biological, culturaland geological resources has often meant economic salvation. Income fromtourism in some mountainous nations is often the first or second earnerof foreign currency. Nepal in 1983 earned US$45 million from visitorsprimarily attracted by Himalayan geography, nature and culture, andRwanda's few mountain gorillas in Parc National des Volcans before therecent strife earned the country about US$1 million in entrance fees(WTO/UNEP 1992). Protected areas are the basis for much of the tourism-generated benefits (and disbenefits) in a region or nation, and indeed,under the best of conditions, tourism can serve as a self-financingmechanism for establishment and maintenance of protected areas rangingfrom national parks to cultural landscapes and natural monuments. Withinthe underfunded protected area system of Per, Huascarn National Park'sentire budget allocation from Lima is a return of 80% of the amountcollected by a US$1 equivalent entry fee per adult visitor at its twoprincipal entry stations (personal communication, Ren Valencia,Huascarn National Park 1995). It is therefore extremely important thatthe tourism/protected area situation be a sustainable relationship,achieving true 'ecotourism' (as the current buzz-word has it). Again, I believe that it is more pragmatic and easier to detectsignals of unsustainability. Adequate monitoring and research are keyactivities in this process. Many of the negative signals are relativelyobvious, such as declining visitor numbers (unless war, terrorism,visitor safety problems, economic downturns in the local, national orworld economies, and so forth, are producing a decline in several or allprotected areas). I will mention only a few that occur to me as needingmonitoring and early detection, followed by remedial action. If localpeople come to view protected areas as being only for the benefit offoreigners rather than also for themselves, the resentment spellstrouble. If governments in their desire to maximise economic returnsinitiate the hallmarks of mass tourism such as large resort hotels, golfcourses, false cultural extravaganzas and heavy-duty roads, there istrouble ahead for both the nature and culture bases of sustainableecotourism. Most of the signals of non-sustainability have to do withexceeding a certain carrying capacity, and managers and policy makersmust have the wisdom of Solomon to determine what the various thresholdsare for such aspects as: overcrowding (both quantitative andqualitative), noise, presence of human infrastructure, safety, andirreversible site damage. There are ways of increasing carrying capacitysuch as by geographic or time dispersal, good design, buffers, andmaking the off-season more attractive. But first one must recognise theproblem. Some useful indicators come from visitor satisfaction surveys,aberrant wild animal behaviour, vegetation or soil damage, rubbishaccumulation, and pollution of air or water (including loss of naturalsounds due to noise pollution). A very helpful analysis of protected area tourism has beenprepared with the assistance of IUCN by the World Tourism Organisationand the United Nations Environment Programme (WTO/UNEP 1992). A verysuccinct statement of Principles for Tourism in National Parks has beenpublished jointly by the English Tourist Board and the CountrysideCommission (ETB/CC 1989). Also helpful in fostering sustainable tourismare increasing distribution and use of visitor codes of conduct whichhave been produced by church groups (New Zealand), environmentalsocieties (USA) and tourism organisations (World Tourism Organisation). Water production Water is one of the most important products of mountain areas, whichgenerally receive greater rainfall or snowfall than surroundinglowlands. Mountains are water towers for human society. It is importantthat this production be maintained in quantity, timing and quality. Itis true that the natural regime often does not suit the majority ofpeople downstream in the lowlands, who may receive too much water attimes and too little at others. Interventions have therefore been madein the form of detention dams for flood reduction or for low flowaugmentation, and these are located in the mountain or foothill valleys.With human occupancy of natural flood plains and a complex system ofwater use in place for domestic, industrial, service, irrigation orother agricultural use, it is important that mountain land uses do notunduly impair this production system. Again we approach this from theback door by recognising symptoms of deterioration or damage, ratherthan of sustainability. Activities which drastically reduce vegetativeevapotranspiration (e.g. large scale clear-cutting of forest or landclearing) increase the quantity of water discharged in the stream orriver coming from the watershed. If low flow is the main problem, thismay be a good thing, but if flooding is a problem, the additional yieldcomes at flood time as well. On the other hand, cutting or clearing ofmountain cloud forests (selva de neblina, bosque de ceja) eliminates thecloud water capture function of these important forests, and results inless water available. These forests are particularly critical in theyungas and on the drier western side of the Andes (Stadtmller 1987).Activities that compact the soil surface, reducing infiltration into thesoil mantle, alter the timing of water flow from the watershed, andshorten the period between rain event and water discharge, thusaggravating flash floods. It is important to recognise that both ofthese effects on water yield diminish as the size of the watershedincreases. They may be very important in short, small watersheds such asthose coming west out of the Andes, but dwarfed by other factors inlarge basins such as the major Amazon tributaries. Perhaps the most important criterion of unsustainability is thepresence of human-induced sediment in water courses coming from themountains. Much sediment is natural erosion (e.g. natural streambank andchannel erosion), but sediment from human activities in the watershedadds an undue and largely avoidable burden. Sediment impairs the waterfor many uses such as drinking water, irrigation, and provision ofhabitat for fish and other aquatic organisms. It also reduces thestorage capacity of reservoirs, and eventually reaches the sea where itmay harm reefs and other marine life including near-shore fisheries. Again, stream monitoring should detect unnatural increases insediment load, given sufficient record of normal fluctuation, andinspection should reveal whether road construction, poor roadmaintenance, poor logging, overgrazing, non-soil conserving agricultureor building construction sites are the culprits causing watershed ill-health. Traditional Quechua terraces (andenes) were excellent, but inmany places have been abandoned. Monitoring should also include scrutinyfor abnormally high levels of nutrients from fertiliser, pesticides, andlead from automobiles. Since water is of such great importance tosociety, regional land use control mechanisms to prevent waterproduction impairment are often relatively easy to have authorised andimplemented. Watershed protected areas have a key role to play, and manymore of these are needed. Maintenance of culture and history The final facet that I wish to treat as being an important element ofsustainable and quality living in the Andes (or other similarmountainous regions) is that of maintaining the traditional culturalrichness and protecting the historic patrimony (e.g. pre-Columbian sitesand artifacts or traditional mountain livelihoods). While I indeed fullyrecognise and support this need with passion, it is not an area of thehuman state with which I as a mountain ecologist have as much expertiseas in the bio-physical sciences. If indeed the local communities of theregion are committed to slowing the rate of loss of their culturalvalues and traditional life styles and livelihood systems, and toprotecting historical structures, artifacts and sites, then I feel thesame approach of looking for signs of unsustainability is appropriate.This may be almost self-evident, since with historically valuablephysical material, conservators commonly do look for deterioration rotting timbers or missing roof tiles in buildings, air pollution damageto statuary, etc.  and take restorative steps, but hopefully alwaysstriving for authenticity. For cultural value erosion, however, the recognition is morecomplex, because change and transformation of many cultural values is anormal and probably necessary part of an evolving society. This may beespecially true in mountain cultures worldwide where there is a generaloutmigration of the skilled, the better-educated and the young, andwhere new technologies are being urged or thrust upon traditional landuse systems by developers and donors from the lowlands or the world'sfinancial centres. I must leave it to others skilled in sociology,anthropology, history or philosophy to identify the early warning signsof cultural ill-health and to propose remedial actions that areacceptable and desirable to the people involved. As an ecologist,however, I do know that if the forest and wildlife are productive andhealthy; if all is well with the water; if the agriculture 'fits' and isself-sustaining (not degrading the physical and human resources); ifthere are protected areas providing adequate nature protection, outdoorpeace and recreation; if there is also a viable and economicallyrewarding ecotourism; these can all help in concert to sustain many ofthe cultural values and traditional livelihood systems. But there arealso pitfalls, and there are examples where inappropriate tourismhastened the commercialisation or deterioration of a culture. Experts inthe behavioural and social sciences will be useful when working withcommunities to define and achieve their local goals. A few priority areas for sustainable regional development This article has so far emphasised the great importance of research andmonitoring to detect signs of unsustainability as a strategy for aharmonious mix of land or resource uses in a region. Let me at thispoint conclude with a 'short list' of nine key environment elements forspecial consideration, given that limited resources may restrict theability to tackle all elements of a regional mountainous landscapethrough a planning process. All of these require or benefit fromdesignation in some kind of protected area. 1. Maintaining traditional cultures One of the kinds of protected area recognised by IUCN is the protectedcultural landscape. This insufficiently used category provides supportfor mountain people whose lifestyle and very cultural underpinnings arebeing eroded, against their wishes, by exogenous forces of'development'. Governments can recognise by official designationmountain areas dedicated to maintaining the traditional land uses andcultural manifestations of long-term residents (many generations) orindigenous peoples. These are difficult areas to maintain effectively,but many are serving well, for instance Cevennes National Park inFrance's Massif Central. 2. Sacred sites A second kind of area needing protection in mountain areas in particularare those sites that have significant spiritual value. Every majorreligion and most cultures have had sacred mountains or holy hills. Onethinks easily of well-known Olympus, Zion, Ararat, Kailas, Fuji,Tongariro, Tai Shan, Kilimanjaro, San Francisco Peaks, Mount Ranier. Andwhere there were no mountains, as in the Nile Valley, the constructedpyramids were in the form of mountains as holy places for burial.Bernbaum, in his fine book Sacred Mountains of the World (1990), hasdocumented many of these special sites of worship, fear or inspiration.Pilgrimage is often a feature of these mountain sites. Perhaps thepilgrimages of alpinists to difficult summits has also something of thereverence and inspiration that makes these summits worthy of protection,e.g. K-2, the Matterhorn or Mount McKinley. While many sites reveredinternationally, nationally or locally have some de facto protection,this needs to be reinforced by legal protection as heritage sites orcultural natural monuments. 3. Habitats of rare and endangered species The habitats of rare and endangered species for any region, andespecially endemics to the region, need protection from both ethical andeconomic viewpoints. The conservation of the world's treasure house ofbiological diversity is increasingly being recognised as an imperative,even by politicians who have finally entered into a global Convention onthe Conservation of Biological Diversity. The high-elevation Polylepisforests in the Central Andes need conservation not only because patchesof these forests themselves are disappearing rapidly, but because theyare habitat for many endemic, rare and endangered species such as thegiant conebill Oreomanes fraseri (O'Neill 1992). In Chile, the relictspecies Cordillera cypress Austrocedrus chilensis needs emergencyprotection. The threatened Alerce or Chilean false larch Fitzroyacupressoides has been given some protection by having substantial standsincluded in the Alerce Andino National Park in Chile (Weber 1990). TheAndean spectacled bear Tremarctos ornatus needs protection throughoutits range, which probably no longer includes Argentina and SouthernBolivia. I agree with Dr E.O. Wilson who put it forcefully: "The worst thing that can happen  will happen in the 1980s  is notenergy depletion, economic collapse, limited nuclear war, or conquest bya totalitarian government. As terrible as these catastrophes would befor us, they can be repaired within a few generations. The one processongoing in the 1980s that will take millions of year to correct is theloss of genetic and species diversity by the destruction of naturalhabitats. This is the folly our descendants are least likely to forgiveus." (Wilson 1980.) Critical habitats for 'keystone' and 'flagship' species need to beidentified in a region, not neglecting plants or some of the lessattractive and less well-known small fauna species. Montane areas areoften the last bastions of wild nature in a sea of transformedlandscape, so the task of maintaining the natural heritage of a regionor a nation often falls mostly on the mountains. An adequate system ofprotected areas of various kinds, might well blanket most mountainareas. In the case of the continent-long Andean Cordillera, a corridorof linked protected areas of various kinds, such as forest reserves,national parks, wildlife sanctuaries and cultural protected landscapes,would offer needed opportunities for migration and gene-flow of thewonderful biodiversity of the Andes uplands. Such a linked network isbeing developed in the Appenines of Italy with Abruzzo National Park asthe nucleus. 4. Riparian buffer zones In my opinion, high on the list of the most important environments inany landscape, whether mountainous or not, are the riparian buffer zonesof watercourses. As Hamilton and Pearce (1986) have pointed out,maintenance of strips of natural vegetation along both sides of a streamor river has many important benefits: reduction of streambank erosion,trapping and immobilising sheetwash and rill sediments from up-slopeareas; trapping or filtering of nutrient and pesticide runoff from up-slope; moderation of light and temperature levels in the water to thebenefit of fish and other aquatic life; provision of cover for wildlifeneeding access to water; habitat corridors for terrestrial and avianwildlife that permit easier migration and gene flow. Moreover suchbuffer strips along the drainages give structure and pleasant pattern tothe mountain valley visual landscape. These riparian greenway corridorsare the natural skeleton on which the flesh of a region's intensive landuse is supported. 5. Summits It is almost axiomatic that mountain summits, the most highly visibleparts of a regional landscape, need special consideration. Yet, they arealso favourite sites for some kinds of specialised infrastructuredevelopments, many of them with high levels of direct economic benefit.Telecommunication devices, observatories, science complexes, ski-liftterminals, and revolving restaurants are among the degrading debris onmany of our summits. Their associated construction and servicing needssuch as roads, add to the problem (though helicopters and automaticequipment are reducing reliance on terrestrial access). While some ofthese developments are needed for science, communication, and economicuplift in a region, the identified sacred summits (using that word in abroad sense of all that is elevating of the human spirit) need to beprotected, and alternative sites found for these other enterprises1. 6. Unstable slopes and avalanche hazard areas Areas of soil or rock instability can and need to be identified andgiven special attention so that risk and damaging use can be prevented.Rock type, soil type, slope steepness, slope shape and rainfallerosivity are all identifiable factors determining whether an area isprone to surface erosion or mass movement (Megahan and King 1985). Suchareas should be mapped and zoned for special treatment, ranging fromtotal prohibition of use for areas of high landslide risk, toperformance standard controls for forestry, agriculture or buildings.There is a public welfare issue at stake here, since the off-siteimpacts of slope failure or severe surface erosion are visited onneighbours, public infrastructure or public resources such as watercourses. Closely related to this of course is identification of snowavalanche prone areas and the measures necessary to reduce risk ofdamage by controlling land use. Mountain hazard mapping, and then zoninghigh risk areas, are high on my list of priority actions. 7. Alpine grasslands and tundra When inappropriately used, high elevation grasslands and mountain tundrasuffer rapid land degradation. Moreover they are slow to recover inthese climatically 'tough' environments. They therefore need a highdegree of conservation. The concern might also extend to adjacent orrelated ecosystems such as shrublands and 'krummholz' which are alsovery fragile. Domestic livestock (particularly sheep and goats),tourists (and recreationists), and local populations living in thesehigh elevation environments are the principal damaging agents. In thedeveloped world's mountains, recreational motorised vehicles, hikers,trailbikers and pack-animal safaris are of concern. Andean llama havebeen introduced into the United States as replacements for pack horsesand mules where sustainable nature-based tourism is being practised.This is because of the lower adverse impact in both feeding andtrampling compaction in fragile mountain grasslands. In the Andes thepramo and puna environments suffer from unrestricted vehicle use,pasturing of livestock and pedestrian travel. More areas of these twoecosystems need to be brought under some kind of protection from theseimpactors. Globally, in existing mountain national parks and otherreserves, controlling visitor numbers and their travel pathways is animportant management feature. The IUCN booklet Guidelines for MountainProtected Areas (Poore 1992) addresses these problems. 8. Mountain cloud forests On the slopes (usually upper slopes) of many mountains, especially inthe tropics, occur important and unusual forest ecosystems known ascloud forests. Each language has its own nomenclature for thesealtitudinal belts: nebelwald, bosque de ceja de montaa, mossy forest,fort nphliphile, selva de neblina, and many others. Cloud forests occupy a relatively narrow altitudinal belt, butthe position of the belt varies widely. For large inland mountainsystems in the tropics (e.g. Andes, Rwenzoris) they may typically befound between 2,000 and 3,500 m; whereas in coastal and island mountainsthis zone may descend to 1,000 m (e.g. Hawai'i). On steep small islandsin very humid, equatorial conditions, a cloud forest may develop as lowas 500 m, or in rare cases 350 m (Gau in Fiji) (Hamilton et al. 1995).The horizontal snow interception by conifer needles and twigs in someCentral European mountains (e.g. Krokno4e), where an "anemo-orgraphicsystem" occurs at 1,0002,000 m, expressed as heavy "harvesting" of SO2and other pollutants, and resulting in forest decline, possiblyindicates a type of winter cloud forest in this geographic location?Cloud forests occur within a wide range of annual rainfall regimes(50010,000 mm/year) and year-round moisture to very seasonal. These interesting forests with their unusual physiognomy andphysiology capture 'occult' or horizontal precipitation by strippingwind-driven cloud, and add it to the vertical precipitation supply ofthe site. Evapo-transpiration rates are low in these forests, so thatthere is a net addition of moisture to the ground because of the trees,notwithstanding their use of soil water. Typical additions are between5% and 20% of ordinary rainfall, but in some unusual cases of lowrainfall, but cloud contact, additions can be more than 100% of rainfall(Bruijuzeel and Proctor 1995). If these forests are cut or cleared thiswater capture is lost, and the water budget for the watershed is therebyreduced. This has great significance for many communities in these lowrainfall areas. Moreover, their biodiversity importance is very high (Hamiltonet al. 1995), particularly since they are often the last remnants ofwild nature on heavily-used and often abused mountains. Endemism is highbecause these are specialised habitats that occur as restricted rangesfor many bird and other animal species (Long 1995). In Per forinstance, Leo (1995) has shown that a high percentage of all country-endemic vertebrate species is found in the montane cloud forest. For thethree groups of vertebrates that she analysed, of the 272 endemics inall of Per, 32% were found in cloud forest. On the basis of the aforementioned values alone, not to mentionthe other goods and services provided by these forests, they should begiven a high priority for conservation, and receive some kind ofprotected area status. A summary of the state of knowledge of tropicalmontane cloud forests has recently been produced by Hamilton et al.(1995). 9. Zones of quiet My ninth and final area of concern in this short list, is the impact ofnoise  unwanted sound. Planning for any region where the underpinningapproach is to highlight nature and culture should have a concern withnoise pollution. The auditory assault of today's consumer society is notonly impairing human hearing and causing human stress, but is destroyingthe song of the land whether it be the gurgle of a stream, a bird's songor the tinkling of cowbells. While the noise of transporting machines isunavoidable if people are to live in or visit a region, it need not beeverywhere, or the total level can be reduced in creative ways. Aconcentration on ecotourism rather than mass tourism already puts aregion well on the way to keeping the problem manageable. Positive steps need to be taken in these beautiful environments.Zones of quiet could be identified, delineated and maintained wherepilgrims of peace and quiet might find sanctuary from loud radios,vehicles and other jarring technological noise sources, including chainsaws. "Wilderness Areas" are now recognised as a special IUCN categoryof protected area (Category Ib) along with Strict Nature Reserve, andthe international criteria include: "outstanding opportunities forsolitude, enjoyed once the area has been reached, by simple, quiet, non-polluting and non-intrusive means of travel (i.e. non-motorised)". Thismay be difficult to achieve in a long-inhabited and long-used area suchas much of the Andes, but it can be perhaps achieved in small, specificareas to some degree. Even in areas of few or no inhabitants and noroads in some parts of the world, the ubiquitous helicopter toofrequently shatters tranquillity and nature, as it brings tourists in toview mountain areas of grandeur (e.g. Haleakala National Park and I havejust learned of problems at Machu Picchu, a site where contemplationshould be paramount). In a few areas aircraft overflights have beenbanned, and there are height restrictions in others. It is an increasingproblem, and solutions are more difficult in view of the usefulness ofhelicopters or off-road, all-terrain vehicles for rescue purposes inmountain areas. Nonetheless aircraft noise must be addressed along withother noise pollution sources. I have recently received from theInternational Union of Associations of Alpinism its October 1994resolution to all mountain governments with respect to control oftourism aircraft flights in mountain regions and they are very tough(UIAA 1994). Coda There are many other key environment elements of special consideration(e.g. glaciers and caves) in developing a regional plan for maintainingnature and culture, but space limitations preclude them. I haveemphasised the biophysical side and short-changed the cultural,historical and metaphysical side. This is only because I have noprofessional competence in these latter aspects of conservation. I havealso presented an overly-simplistic plea that because sustainability issuch a fuzzy goal, almost impossible of sure and measured achievement,that we adopt a policy of activism in reducing unsustainability, whichis much easier to recognise. In both parts of this article I havegeneralised to make the remarks applicable to planning for theconservation and eco-development of mountainous areas at a scalewithin a national, provincial, state or prefectural boundary withemphasis on the Andes. Bernbaum, E. 1990. Sacred Mountains of the World. Sierra Club Books, San Francicso. Bruijnzeel, L.A., and Proctor, J. 1995. Hydrology and biogeochemistry of tropical montane cloud forests: what do we really know? In: Tropical Montane Cloud Forests, eds. L.S. Hamilton, J.O. Juvik and F. N. Scatena, 3878. Springer-Verlag, New York. Carpenter, R.A. 1993. Measuring sustainability: spotting signals in the noise. Work in Progress of the United Nations University 14(2): 2. Carpenter, R.A. 1995. Limitations in measuring ecosystem sustainability. In: A Sustainable World, ed. T.C. Trzyna, 175197. World Conservation Union (IUCN), Gland. Cocklin, C.R. 1989. Methodological problems in evaluating sustainability. Environmental Conservation 16(4): 343351. ETB/CC. 1989. Principles for Tourism in National Parks. English Tourist Board, London; Countryside Commission, Cheltenham. Hamilton, L.S. 1987. Minimising the adverse impacts of harvesting in humid tropical forests. In: Ecological Development in the Humid Tropics, eds. A.E. Lugo, J.R. Clark and R.D. Child, 191235. Winrock International, Morrilton. Hamilton, L.S., and Pearce, A.J. 1986. Biophysical aspects in watershed management. In: Watershed Resources Management, eds. K.W. Easter, J.A. Dixon and M.H. Hufschmidt, 3352. Westview Press, Boulder. Hamilton, L.S., Juvik, J.O., and Scatena, F.N. (eds.) 1995. Tropical Montane Cloud Forests. Springer-Verlag, New York. IUCN/UNEP/WWF. 1991. Caring for the Earth: A Strategy for Sustainable Living. World Conservation Union (IUCN), Gland. Leo, M. 1995. The importance of tropical montane cloud forest for preserving vertebrate endemism in Peru: The Ro Abiseo National Park as a case study. In: Tropical Montane Cloud Forests, eds. L.S. Hamilton, J.O. Juvik and F. N. Scatena, 198211. Springer-Verla, New York. Megahan, W.F., and King, P.N. 1985. Identification of critical areas on forest lands for control of nonpoint sources of pollution. Environmental Management 9(1): 718. O'Neill, J.P. 1992. A general overview of the montane avifauna of Peru. Memrias del Museo de Histria Natural, UNMSM (Lima) 21: 4755. Orians, G.H. 1990. Ecological concepts of sustainability. Environment 32(9): 1015, 3439. Poore, D. (ed.) 1992. Guidelines for Mountain Protected Areas. World Conservation Union (IUCN), Gland. Schobinger, J. 1991. Sacrifices of the High Andes. Natural History 4/91: 6369. Smith, W.H. 1984. Ecosystem pathology: a new perspective for phytopathology. Forest Ecology and Management 9: 193219. Society of American Foresters. 1994. What is a healthy forest? Journal of Forestry 92(7). [Theme for entire issue, several articles.] Stadtmller, T. 1987. Cloud Forests in the Humid Tropics. United Nations University, Tokyo; Centro Agronmico Tropical de Investigacin y Enseanza, Turrialba. Weber, C.A. 1990. Chile. In: International Handbook of National Parks and Nature Reserves, ed. C.W. Allin, 83103. Greenwood Press, New York. WTO. 1991. Compendium of Tourism Statistics. World Tourism Organisation, Madrid. WTO/UNEP. 1992. Guidelines: Development of National Parks and Protected Areas for Tourism. World Tourism Organisation, Madrid, and United Nations Environment Programme. Professor (Emeritus) Lawrence Hamilton is Vice-Chair for Mountains inIUCN's Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas. He is apartner, with wife Linda, of Islands and Highlands EnvironmentalConsultancy, RR#3 Box 3010, Charlotte, Vermont 05445 USA. This paper isbased on a presentation in Huarina, Bolivia, at the InternationalSymposium on Sustainable Mountain Development: Managing FragileEcosystems in the Andes, 212 April, 1995. ************************************************************************ The Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve: conservation and regional sustainable development ENRIQUE J. JARDEL, EDUARDO SANTANA C. and SERGIO GRAF This presentation of the Sierra de Manantln considers the origin of the project, and gives a brief description of the environmental characteristics, social conditions and management problems of the area. The conceptual approach to management and how we are working to attain the goals of a biosphere reserve are described. Three main issues are discussed: the initial conditions that are determinant factors in conservation and development projects; the need to establish appropriate institutional mechanisms for land and resources management with a regional perspective beyond the protected area; and the need to develop a management approach with sufficient flexibility for implementing management programmes that assusre the conservation of biodiversity as well as the sustainable use of natural resources by local communit SIERRA DE MANANTLN Biosphere Reserve (SMBR) is located in the states ofJalisco and Colima in West-Central Mxico (see map). With over 2,700species of plants (40% endemic to Mxico) (Vzquez et al. 1995) and 560species of vertebrates, including 26% of all mammal and 33% of all birdspecies in Mxico (Jardel 1992), it is among the top protected areas inNorth America for biodiversity. The reserve covers 140,000 ha, ranging from 400 to 2,860 m abovesea level. Its topographic complexity, wide altitudinal gradient,latitudinal location, proximity to the Pacific Ocean, geologicalhistory, and also its long history of human occupation and naturalresource use, have interacted to create a very complex landscape. The Sierra de Manantln forests play an important role in theprotection of watersheds that supply water to over 400,000 people. Theforests also harbour important timber and non-timber resources, whichsupport the livelihood of people in the area and represent analternative for the future development of local communities. Agricultural fields and associated secondary vegetation inhillsides and small valleys in the Sierra also contain importantcomponents of biodiversity, comprising native landraces of cultivatedplants, their wild relatives and many other species of plants with localuses for food, medicines, and fodder, among others (Benz 1988, Benz etal. 1994). The creation of the SMBR led from the discovery of a wildrelative of corn, the teocinte Zea diploperennis (Iltis et al. 1979),that attracted international attention because of its potential use forthe genetic improvement of the second most important cereal in theworld. This perennial teocinte became a symbol of the need to conservewilderness areas for the genetic resources they contain. A smallprotected area, called Las Joyas Research Station, was established bythe University of Guadalajara with support from the Jalisco stategovernment, to protect the habitat of teocinte. This led to the creationof a local research centre that is part of the University ofGuadalajara, now known as the Manantln Institute of Ecology andConservation of Biodiversity. This institute has played a catalytic rolein the promotion of conservation actions in the Sierra de Manantln. As knowledge of the mountain range increased, the one-species-preservation approach developed into an ecosystem level approach wherethe whole mountain range and its watersheds were considered as anintegral conservation unit. This in turn evolved a social component whenit became evident that the peasant communities owned the land and havehistoric and cultural rights to use it. For the conservation project tobe successful the local communities had to benefit from the reserve, anda national park or natural reserve model of strict protection was notapplicable. The Manantln Institute generated the technical informationneeded to propose the creation of a biosphere reserve and generatedlocal, national and international support for this task. The reserve wascreated by the federal government in March 1987 and one year later wasincorporated in the MAB-UNESCO network of biosphere reserves. However, there is another history running parallel to thecreation of the Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve: the history ofthe struggle between local indigenous communities and private loggingcompanies for the control of land and forest resources. Since the early1900s foreign and national lumber companies began exploiting timber inthe forest of the Sierra de Manantln by basically stealing the forestresources from the indigenous communities. This process was interruptedby the Mexican Revolution and later by the Cristero War, but it resumedin the 1940s. The lumber companies exploited the old growth forests withgreat profits, leaving to the communities insignificant economicbenefits, impoverished forests, internal conflicts and corruption. Thelumber companies also interfered with the process of agrarian reform inthe region, creating additional conflicts of land tenure (Jardel et al.1989, 1992). In the late 1970s, a local peasant movement increased thestruggle against the powerful lumber companies. This resulted in theirsuffering greater persecution and repression, but they were able to stoplogging in parts of the Sierra de Manantln. The University ofGuadalajara's proposal to create a biosphere reserve was seen by thesesectors of the local communities as an opportunity to establishcommunication with the government agencies that had historically ignoredthem and also to gain an ally in their struggle to defend forestresources. Key groups in some communities supported the creation of thebiosphere reserve and defended the project against the reaction oflumber companies and local power groups affected by the decree. The Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve project is now basedon a model that attempts to integrate ecological conservation withregional sustainable development, based on active participation andcooperation among stakeholders, including local populations,governmental agencies and academic institutions (Jardel 1992, Graf etal. 1995, Santana et al. 1989). Environmental and social conditions The Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve is characterised by greatlandscape heterogeneity. There are two main landscape units: a west-central portion formed by igneous extrusive rock from the Tertiaryoverlaid on Cretaceous intrusive rocks and the eastern portion formed bycalcareous rocks, also Cretaceous, with strong karst development and nostreams or rivers. The west-central portion can be divided into four landscape sub-units: Highlands (2,3002,860 m) covered with fir-pine-oak forests incold-humid sites, pine forests in poor rocky soils and broadleavedforest in small valleys. Highly dissected mountain slopes covered by deciduous oakforests at low altitudes (1,0001,500 m) and pine-oak forests at higheraltitudes (1,5002,800 m). Sites with frequent fire disturbance orlandslides are dominated by pine forest, and deep ravines and valleysmaintain subtropical humid broadleaf forests. Hills and low mountains (4001,000 m) with shallow rocky soilsmaintain a vegetation complex that is dominated by deciduous oakforests, tropical deciduous forests and tropical subdeciduous forestsdepending on temperature and humidity conditions. A large part of thislandscape sub-unit is covered by agricultural fields, secondaryvegetation on fallow fields, pastures and forest fragments. Small inter-mountain valleys with deep soils that are dominatedby agricultural fields and secondary vegetation. The eastern portion is divided into two landscape sub-units: Plateau highlands dominated by humid oak forests, withpine-fir-oak forest in cold sites, subtropical humid broadleaf forest inravines on the western slope, oak-pine forests in the drier areas, andpine forests on poor soils or in areas with frequent disturbance by fireor landslides. Sides of the plateau with steep slopes and shallow soilsthat are covered with tropical deciduous forests andagricultural fields and bamboo thickets. Another landscape unit is the lower valley of the Ayuquilariver, an alluvial plain dominated by intensive agriculture, pasturesand relicts of riparian forests and subdeciduous tropical forests. Forest management in these conditions is difficult, because ofthe high environmental heterogeneity and the high species diversity ofthe forests (Jardel et al. 1995). For example, the forests include 11species of pines and 33 species of oaks, and more than 400 other speciesof trees (Vzquez et al. 1995). The creation of the reserve did not involve land expropriation.It was basically a huge zoning regulation that established land userestrictions. This is important considering that only 1% of the area isgovernment owned; 60% is communally owned land and 39% is privateproperty (Jardel et al. 1992). There are 26 agrarian communities andsome 80 private land owners. The population is dispersed in 79localities within the reserve (Graf and Rosales 1995). The reserve has 7,000 people living within its boundaries, butwe consider the population of the reserve to be some 33,000 peopleliving in agrarian communities that have rights over land within thereserve area. Approximately 50% of the private owners have land tenureconflicts with the local communities, and there are internal problemswithin the communities themselves (Jardel et al. 1992). Poverty is widespread, and within the state of Jalisco thereserve population has very high rates of infant mortality, incidence ofinfectious diseases, illiteracy and inadequate housing (Graf and Rosales1995). These conditions translate into high emigration rates and socialstrife. However, there are differences in standards of living withincommunities, as well as between communities and logging interests. Thedevelopment of cattle grazing in the forests has accentuated socialdifferences within the community. A few individuals have accumulatedwealth by increasing their cattle herds and this has allowed them tofence communal areas and expand the land they hold, transforming forestsand agricultural plots to pasture (Gerritsen 1994, Graf and Rosales1995, Graf 1992). These conditions occur in the context of a prolonged economiccrisis that has strongly affected the agricultural and forestry sectorsin Mxico, and is aggravated by the policies of structural adjustmentimplemented by the government under the pressure of internationalfinancial institutions and the influence of neoliberal ideology (Calva1994, Jardel 1995). Changes in public policies and economic conditionsgenerate pressure on natural resources, reinforce social differentiationprocesses and conflicts, and impose budget changes that affect technicalassistance programmes, research, education and other activities thatsupport conservation efforts. This also produces a shift fromtraditional crops to informal economic activities, such as illegallogging or marijuana and poppy cultivation, generating additionalpressure on resources. These conditions impose severe constraints onmany conservation and development projects. Management problems The reserve has many problems that are common to most protected areas ofMxico. These include: Transformation of forest cover to pastures and agriculturalplots. Erosion and low-productivity of hillside agricultural plots. Illegal logging. Excessive harvest of firewood. Poaching. Overgrazing and browsing in tropical forests. Forest fires. Past logging practices have produced a forest characterised byeven-aged young stands (Jardel 1991), with a scarcity of high qualitytimber for sawmilling. The forest products that can be generated havelow market prices, and there is therefore a need to invest in managementpractices to restore the forest to an adequate condition for production.The constraints of being situated within a biosphere reserve also imposeadditional costs of managing for the maintenance of biodiversity, a costthat traditional market mechanisms do not recognise. The creation of the biosphere reserve without changes in thetenure regime imposes a limitation of domain over land. Localpopulations still own the land but cannot harvest its resources in corezones and have conservation obligations but with no formal compensation.This is especially critical in those communities where all theirforested lands fell within core zones. For example the ejido of Barrancade la Naranjera is forced to protect the watershed in its land butcannot even use the water for irrigation, because all the water in theriver is piped for use at a sugar refining mill outside of the reserve,which maintains the regional economy. The ejido receive no compensationfor not using the forest and the water generated in its land. Another problem is the pollution caused outside the reserve by asugar mill and small cities along the Ayuquila river, posing problemsfor local communities that fish and use the water for irrigation(Santana et al. 1993). This problem has now become a major conflict, asthe local communities perceive that the sugar mill is not doing itsshare to diminish pollution and the government is not addressing theproblem. The present rigid zoning regulations restrict implementation ofthe management measures needed to restore sites affected by fires andpast logging activities. Also, they do not permit low-level traditionalextractive activities that are not damaging to the ecosystem, such ascollection of blackberries and mushrooms. Low-level hunting, a commonpractice among peasants, is compatible with the conservation goals, andyet cannot be implemented in the buffer zone. The prohibition of huntinglimits the possibility of managing this activity in a sustainable wayand promotes poaching. Even the conservation of species such as Zeadiploperennis involves active manipulation and disturbance that imitatestraditional shifting agricultural patterns (Benz et al. 1990). Legallythis cannot be done within the 'untouchable' core zone. The lack of presence of government agencies before and after thecreation of the reserve forced the Manantln Institute of Ecology tofill the existing institutional vacuum. This involved conducting generalenvironmental education programmes and publicising the creation of thereserve. It also involved holding participatory workshops in keycommunities in order to develop a 'map of the social needs' of thecommunity and initiate a small sustainable development programme. TheInstitute played the role of watchdog, manager, consulting authority andmany others, but without having the legal authority, budget or humanresources at the scale needed. Government agencies implemented regionalprogrammes without consulting each other or the local communities,resulting in many programmes working in opposite directions. Manyagencies did not even want to recognise the existence of the reserve. In 1993 the federal government began to take up its managementresponsibilities by establishing a directorship of the reserve,supported by GEF funds from the World Bank. This initiated aconsultation process between institutions and states to redefine themanagement of the reserve and to establish the priority conservation andsocial development guidelines and the responsible agents. The directorworks closely with the University of Guadalajara and the Secretary ofSocial Development (SEDESOL) to attack poverty and production problemsin the poorest communities of the reserve, and to develop acomprehensive conservation and development plan for the region. However, there is still a need to create an appropriatemechanism that incorporates the government agencies involved in themanagement of the reserve, as well as a providing a way for theparticipation of all the legitimate stakeholders of the area andallowing for formal conflict resolution processes and participativeplanning (Table 1). Table 1. Stakeholders involved in the Sierra de Manantln BiosphereReserve management process. Federal Government Secretary of Environment, Natural Resources and Fisheries State delegations: enforcement of law and public policies on naturalresource management and environmental protection. Directorship of the Reserve: coordination of natural resource managementand conservation programmes into the protected area. Secretary of Social Development Social development policies and public investmentprogrammes. State Governments (Jalisco and Colima) Secretary of Rural Development Agricultural and forest production programmes. State Commission of Ecology Environmental policies and programmes at the statelevel. Secretary of Public Education Educational programmes (including environmentaleducation in schools). Municipalities (7) counterparts of federal and state agencies in developmentprojects Agrarian communities (26) and private landowners (80) management of natural resources in their lands Local non-governmental organisations Indigenous Peoples Union of the Sierra de Manantln Community development and cultural and natural resourcemanagement projects. Academic institutions Manantlan Institute of Ecology  University of GuadalajaraCoordination of research and monitoring, professional training andenvironmental education, information systems for reserve management,technical advisor for communities and governmental agencies. Funding and conservation or development organisations Global Environment Facility, Overseas Development Administration, World Wildlife Fund, etc. Conceptual framework The reserve is now being developed under the following general concepts: 1. Ecological conservation and social development areintegrated as one whole management strategy. 2. Applied research and education will fill the gaps inknowledge of the ecological dynamics of a complex and heterogeneoussystem, as well as produce the necessary human resources to apply anadaptive management programme. 3. The reserve is an integral part of a regionaldevelopment programme, and land use is based on a zoning scheme wherecore zones of strict protection are surrounded by buffer zones withdifferent intensities of resource use and these in turn by transitionzones towards the surrounding region. Managers must dedicate as muchtime to working on development programmes outside the reserve as they doto resource protection within the strictly protected areas. 4. Community-based management is the basis for themanagement activities, linked to the sustainable use of resources inbuffer zones in order to protect the core zone effectively. 5. Since there are many stakeholders (Table 1) involved inthe management of land and natural resources in the reserve, theadministration will be achieved through a committee mechanism thatallows for coordination among governmental agencies, local authorities,scientific and educational institutions and NGOs, and has an integralconsulting process with the local communities of the differentmanagement units of the reserve. These mechanisms serve to enforcecommitments of government agencies and other actors in the region, andto mediate when conflicts arise. 6. The reserve is seen as an experimental model ofmanagement of an area for conservation and sustainable use of thenatural resources, an experiment whose failures and successes might beuseful in other regions of Mxico with similar environmental and socialconditions. All this is not just theory or a wish list. There are important,albeit small, advances in the implementation of this model in theregion. Some examples are: 1. The Manantln Institute manages the Las Joyas ResearchStation, which has allowed the establishment of long-term research andmonitoring projects and provides training and educational facilities. Atfirst, the Station generated problems with the local population, butonce programmes of technical assistance for forest management and ofland tenure conflict resolution were in place, the Station was seen as abenefit. It now employs people from neighbouring communities, permitspeasants to continue with controlled collection of blackberries in thearea, and provides logistical support during the fire fighting season.It serves to demonstrate successful management programmes such asrestoration of subtropical humid montane forests and recovery of locallythreatened wildlife species. This experience can now be applied to theoverall reserve programme. 2. In the ejido El Terrero, we have established aparticipatory development programme, the objective of which is toimprove a mismanaged and badly planned communal lumber mill. Achievingthis has involved a long-term commitment to community processes. Itincludes organisation and planning, renegotiating debts withgovernmental loan programmes, obtaining funds to modernise the mill andtraining people to manage it, and conducting research on forest dynamicsand silvicultural treatments to allow for sustainable harvest, so as toproduce the expected social and economic benefits in a way compatiblewith forest conservation. 3. In the ejido of Zenzontla, people depend on agricultureand cattle raising and there is strong pressure to convert the remainingdry tropical forest to pasture. Our programmes have concentrated onincreasing agricultural productivity and stability by implementing soilconservation practices on hill-side plots and introducing organicfarming practices. This not only reduces pressure on the forests, butalso reduces costs, as well as dependence from outside agents. 4. In the ejido Ayotitln, a region with a long history ofconflicts and disagreements over land tenure and the exploitation offorest resources and mines by outsiders, we are beginning with aprogramme of organic agriculture in cooperation with a localorganisation, the Indian People Union from the Sierra de Manantln. Wealso mediated with governmental agencies to reorient public investmentsin social services and productive activities in a way compatible withconservation goals. Perspectives In order to implement a project like the Sierra de Manantln BiosphereReserve there needs to be a clear understanding of the initialconditions that constitute the basic constraints for achievingconservation and development goals, as well as the scales at which theseconstraints operate. In this case the initial conditions at a locallevel are: Pressure over natural resources and unsustainable management. Extreme poverty and social differentiation processes. Social and land tenure conflicts. Absence of inter-institutional coordinating mechanisms. Those operating at national and international levels are: Economic crisis, being critical in the agricultural and forestrysectors. Fundamental contradictions between economic and environmentalpolicies. Based on this analysis we can define two main strategies foraction: Improvement of natural resource management. Promoting changes in policy and institutional organisation. Natural resource management includes protection, restoration andproduction. Priority actions include developing a regional land useplan, implementing more flexible approaches towards the managementprogramme, developing sustainable production systems for localdevelopment and for conservation of biodiversity in forest andagroecosystems, implement-ation of an interactive research-managementprogramme and enhancing management capabilities through education andtraining. Promoting public policy and institutional changes involvescreating an inter-institutional coordinating mechanism at the regionallevel, establishing conflict resolution mechanisms that are recognisedby all stakeholders (Table 1), assuring a regional and localparticipatory planning process, empowering local communities andorganisations to ensure democratic participation in decision-making andnegotiating processes, implementing environmental education programmesat different levels and to different sectors of society, and reorientingpublic policies and funding programmes to reflect real concern forsustainable development and conservation. References Benz, B.F. 1988. In situ conservation of the genus Zea in the Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve. In: Recent advances in the conservation and utilization of genetic resources. Proceedings of the Global Maize Germplasm Workshop, 5969. CIMMYT. Mxico, D.F. Benz, B.F., Snchez-Velsquez, L.R., and Santana-Michel, F. 1990. Ecology and ethnobotany of Zea diploperennis: preliminary investigations. Maydica 35: 8598. Benz, B.F., Santana M., F.,Pineda L., R., Cevallos E., J., Robles H., L., and De Niz L., D. 1994. Characterization of mestizo plant use in the Sierra de Manantln, Jalisco-Colima, Mxico. J. Ethnobiology 14(1):2341. Calva, J.L. 1994. El desastre agrcola de Mxico 19821989. In: M.J. Towney and A. Helwege (compilers), Modernizacin y estancamiento: la agricultura latinoamericana en los noventa. Fondo de Cultura Econmica. Mxico, D.F. Gerritsen, P. 1994. Styles of farming in the community of Cuzalapa, Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve, Mexico. Thesis. Wageningen Agricultural University. Wageningen, Netherlands. Graf M., S.H. 1992. Gestion des ressorces naturelles et organisations paysannes. Reserve de la Biosphere Sierra de Manantlan. Thesis. Centre National d'Etudes Agronomiques des Rgions Chaudes/Ecole Nationale de Genie Rurale, Eaux et Forts. Montpellier, France. Graf M., S.H., and Rosales-Adame, J.J. 1995. Diagnstico sociodemogrfico de la Sierra de Manantln y su regin de influencia. SEMARNAP/IMECBIO, unpublished report. Graf M., S., Santana C., E., Jardel P., E., and Benz, B.F. 1995. La Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln: un balance de ocho aos de gestin. Revista Universidad de Guadalajara, nmero especial: Conservacin biolgica en Mxico: 5560. Iltis, H.H., Doebley, J.R., Guzmn M., R., and Pazy, B. 1979. Zea diploperennis (Gramineae): a new teosinte from Mexico. Science 225: 186188. Jardel, E.J. 1991. Perturbaciones naturales y antropognicas y su influencia en la dinmica sucesional de los bosques de Las Joyas, Sierra de Manantln, Jalisco. Tiempos de Ciencia (Universidad de Guadalajara) 22: 926. Jardel, E.J. (Coord.) 1992. Estrategia para la conservacin de la Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln. Ed. Universidad de Guadalajara. Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mxico. Jardel, E.J. 1995. Las reas protegidas en la prctica: una discusin sobre conservacin biolgica y desarrollo sustentable. Revista Universidad de Guadalajara, nmero especial: Conservacin biolgica en Mxico: 2336. Jardel, E.J., Cuevas G., R., Len C., P., Len, M., Mariscal, G., Pineda-Lpez, R., Saldaa, A., Snchez-Velsquez, L.R. and Tllez, J. 1989. Conservacin y aprovechamiento de los recursos forestales de la Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln. Tiempos de Ciencia (Universidad de Guadalajara) 16: 1824. Jardel, E.J., Ezcurra, E., Santiago P., A.L., Ramrez R., M., and Cruz C., P. 1995. Sucesin forestal y dinmica del paisaje en la Sierra de Manantln. Paper presented at the Simposium on Forest dynamics: pattern and process. XIII Congreso Mexicano de Botnica. Cuernavaca, Mor. (unpublished). Jardel, E.J., Gutierrez N., R., and Len C., P. 1992. Conservacin de la biodiversidad biolgica y problemtica agraria en la Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln. In: Anaya L., A.L. (Coord.) Las Areas Naturales Protegidas en Mxico, 129151. UNAM/SEDUE/SEP. Mxico, D.F. Santana C., E., Guzmn M., R., and Jardel P., E. 1989. The Sierra de Manantln Biosphere Reserve: the difficult task of becoming a catalyst for regional sustained development. In: N.P. Gregg, S.L. Krugman and J.D. Woods (eds.). Proceedings of the Symposium on Biosphere Reserve. 4th. World Wilderness Congress, Estes Park, Colorado, 212222. US Dept. of the Interior, National Park Service. Atlanta, Georgia. Santana C., E., Navarro P., S., Martnez R., L.M., Aguirre G., A., Figueroa B., P., Aguilar G., C.C. 1993. Contaminacin, aprovechamiento y conservacin de los recursos acuticos del ro Ayuquila, Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln, Jalisco-Colima. Tiempos de Ciencia (Universidad de Guadalajara) 30: 2938. Vzquez G., J.A., Cuevas G., R., Cochrane, T.S., Iltis, H.H., Santana- Michel, F., and Guzmn H., L. 1995. Flora de Manantln. Plantas vasculares de la Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln. Sida, Botanical Miscellany 13. Forth Worth, Tx. 315p. Enrique J. Jardel1, Eduardo Santana C.1 and Sergio Graf21 Instituto Manantln de Ecologa y Conservacin de la Biodiversidad,Universidad de Guadalajara. Av. Independencia Nacional 151, Autln48900, Jalisco, Mxico. 2 Direccin de la Reserva de la Biosfera Sierra de Manantln, InstitutoNacional de Ecologa, Secretaria de Medio Ambiente, Recursos Naturales yPesca, Mxico. ****************************************************************** Argentera Nature Park: scientific research, management and transfrontier cooperation PATRIZIA ROSSI The Nature Park of Argentera (Italy) and National Park of Mercantour (France) together protect a total area of about 100,000 hectares corresponding to the Argentera-Mercantour Massif and its adjacent territories, in the heart of the Maritime Alps. From the historical and cultural point of view, and from the scientific and naturalistic one, thee two parks represent the two complementary parts of what can be considered the first international park of the Alps. They have been linked by a twining scheme since 1987 and are united by 33 km of common border. Moreover, they actively collaborate in wildlife management and in some important scientific projects. Their respective management agancies are completely independent from one another: one was created by the French Government, the other by the Italian Region of Piedmont. Nevertheless, their cooperation is very close and successful. From the conservation and protection point of view, both protected areas have quite strict regulations. This paper describes the legal status of the parks, their conservation and cultural interest, management for tourism, and some of the research undertaken, including successful reintroduction programmes for birds and mammals. ARGENTERA PARK, even though it is a Regional Park, has a set ofregulations that in most respects is similar to that of the "centralzone" of French National Parks. Within the Argentera Park, one strict nature reserve and threespecial nature reserves (see Map) were defined. One more reserve wascreated to protect an important Mediterranean biotope: the Juniperusphoenicea Reserve, outside the park territory but managed by the sameBoard. The Nature Park of Argentera covers nearly 26,000 hectares inthe Piedmontese province of Cuneo, including the upper Valle Gesso and asmall part of the Valletta di Aisone, in Valle Stura. It is the biggestregional park in Piedmont and one of the largest in Italy. The park lieson three communes which own most of its territory, as shown in Table 1.There are no villages with permanent inhabitants within the parkborders, except the hamlet of S. Anna di Valdieri, with less than 100people. Table 1. Ownership of territory in the Nature Park of Argentera. owner area of property percentage commune of Entracque 11,868 ha 45.9% commune of Valdieri 8,910 ha 34.4% commune of Aisone 1,580 ha 6.1% 1 private citizen (Valdieri commune) 2,437 ha 9.4% other private citizens 483 ha 1.9% State property 605 ha 2.3% The protected territory is between the altitudes of 800 m and3,297 m, corresponding to the southern peak (Cima Sud) of Argentera, themountain that gives its name to the Park. The Park headquarters is inValdieri, less than 20 km from Cuneo and not far from the TurinSavonamotorway and the international road to the Tenda tunnel. The park includes the upper basin of the Gesso river, with itscharacteristic fan shape formed by several deeply carved valleys on thenorthern side of the Maritime Alps. The main massifs (from west to east)are those of Monte Matto, Argentera and Gelas, all with several peaks ofmore than 3,000 m of altitude. On the Gelas Massif there are manyPyrenean type glaciers, the most southern ones in the Alps. The Maritime Alps have the appearance and the features of highmountains (3,300 m of altitude, wild and rugged rocky peaks, snow-fieldsand glaciers) only some tens of kilometres from the sea: in clear andwindy days, from the top of Argentera it is possible to see theMediterranean and Corsica. Microclimate variety, geological circumstances, glaciations andlithotype richness are responsible for the existence in the MaritimeAlps of a flora which is unique in Europe. Plants with very differentbiogeographic origins (Pyrnes, Provence, Corsica, Balkans,mediterranean and arctic regions) are found together here, and there isa high density of endemic species, with several remarkable'paleoendemisms' such as Saxifraga florulenta. According to Pawlowski(1970), the Maritime Alps are the prime area for endemism in the wholealpine chain. As far as fauna is concerned, its density is one of the highestin the Alps, with no apparent overpopulation. For instance there aremore than 24 chamois per 100 hectares and six eagle pairs in 26,000 ha.The Argentera ibex colony was one of the first in the Alps to berecreated from the last colonies of the Gran Paradiso. Moreover, aEuropean project has reintroduced the bearded vulture on thesemountains, since 1993. In this area, man has lived in harmony with nature since theprehistoric age. Here, thanks to the active and concrete collaborationwith Mercantour National Park in France, nature really has noboundaries. Argentera Park does not simply have a task of passiveconservation. It has actively participated and still participates in thefight against damaging developments and sponsors environmentalrestoration initiatives, sometimes with public and private partners. Since its establishment, Argentera Park has been a member of theFederation of Nature and National Parks of Europe, representing Italy inthe executive committee of this organisation. For this reason, the Parkhas frequent and interesting contacts with other European protectedareas. It has already had some temporary staff exchanges at variouslevels with English and Spanish parks, plus experience and informationexchange with Eastern European parks (Triglavski Narodni Park, Slovenia;Kiskunsag National Park, Hungary; Krkonosski Narodni Park, CzechRepublic). Close collaboration ties link Argentera Park to La Sierra deLas Nieves Regional Park (Andalusia, Spain). Together, they sponsor ascientific research programme on ibex, with the coordination andsupervision of the University of Turin, for a comparative study of thealpine species and the Spanish one. In October 1992, the twinning ofthese two parks was celebrated on the occasion of an internationalscientific congress of the Capra genus, in Ronda, where the Spanish parkhas its headquarters. A link is currently being formed with HuascarnNational Park and World Heritage Site in Per. Legal status Argentera Nature Park was established by the Regional Law n. 65 of 30May 1980, on the basis of a regional outline law and of the RegionalPlan for Parks. It is managed by a public Board controlled and financedby the Assessorato alla Pianificazione Territoriale, the department forterritory planning of Piedmont Region. The Park has a board ofdirectors, its own budget and its own staff. The rules for the use ofthe park were adopted with Regional Law n. 16 of 30 March 1987. Picking of botanical specimens, camping, dog access, motor-vehicle access and fishing are strictly regulated. Lighting fires,leaving litter, collecting minerals, fossils and insects, workingquarries and peat-bogs, and hunting are all forbidden. Lumbering withinthe park borders is allowed only on the basis of the Forest ManagementPlan, but it is forbidden in areas of particular protection (StrictNature Reserves and Special Reserves). It is also forbidden to build newroads and infrastructures that are not included in the area plan. Thisplan allows only the interventions which are necessary to carrying outthe Park's activities and to the fulfilment of its aims. Cultural and historical interest The most ancient vestiges of the human colonisation of these territoriesdate back to the Bronze age (between 4,000 and 3,000 before present). Inthe valleys of Valle des Merveilles and Fontanalbe (Commune of Tende,Mercantour National Park) there are more than 100,000 incisions carvedon the rocks polished by glaciers during the Quaternary. Recently, theSoprintendenza Archeologica (the archaeological board) of Piedmont andthe Civic Museum of Cuneo promoted an archaeological campaign whichrevealed interesting discoveries in Argentera Nature Park, in the glenof Vej del Bouc: graffiti, pottery and the remains of a Bronze agevillage. In those ancient times, shepherds and their flocks were alreadymoving along the sides of these mountains for which they had a sort ofreligious respect. Even today, peaks and ridges are not a frontier:pasture lands and shepherd huts ('gias') are spread all over theterritory. The village buildings are characteristic: on the French side,there are houses with 'colombages' roofs, while on the Italianterritory, there are still old villages, now mostly abandoned, withthatched roofs. The Park is preparing a project which includes therestoration of one of these villages to create an 'ecomuseum'. The period of the Royal Hunting Reserve (18571946) left severaltraces: various royal hunting residences in San Giacomo, Sant'Anna diValdieri, Terme di Valdieri and Valasco, hunting lodges and huts at highaltitudes and, most of all, many tracks that cover the whole territorylike a cobweb. During the period between the two world wars, manymilitary tracks were built using natural materials: an example worthy ofcopying. For this reason, the area plan fixed a series of rules for therespect of traditional building criteria, both for house restoration andconstruction of new infrastructures. Scientific research and nature management Scientific research is particularly important for the activity of thePark, both for the protection and enhancement of the environment and forenjoyment, information and educational activities. Scientific research is carried out directly by the Park staffwith the coordination and supervision of qualified experts (professionalresearchers and university professors). Collaboration with universities goes further, through therealisation of stages and 'in field' activities (University of Milan Faculty of Natural Sciences) and through the assignment of graduatetheses on specific subjects (University of Turin  Institute of Geologyand Veterinaria; University of Bologna  Institute of Entomology;University of Genoa; University of Pisa). The Park has a 'foresteria' in Sant'Anna di Valdieri, withguest-rooms especially prepared to give hospitality to researchers andstudents who are doing their studies in the park. Scientific research includes a series of essential operationsand routine activities, usually managed by Park personnel. The Park hasa computer data bank to catalogue all the observations recorded onspecial forms by the rangers out in the Park. The data bank includes thefollowing sections: amphibians and reptiles birds (with a special section on eagles) mammals (with a special section on ungulates) flora and vegetation. With regard to flora, the park hasprepared a herbarium including more than 600 species, with some 1,200samples. Other routine observations include checking of eagle nesting(all eyries are listed and the breeding pairs have been monitored since1984) and an annual census of ungulates. A big (Italo-French) research project is under way studyingatmospheric pollution across the border and the damage to high mountainconifers. The geographical extension of the project area covers thewestern Alps with particular reference to the protected areas:Argentera-Mercantour, Queyras-Val di Susa, Vanoise-Gran Paradiso. In theMaritime Alps in particular there has been a yellowing of the leaves ofthe species Pinus cembra and Larix decidua which, from the firstresults, would seem to be caused by ozone pollution combined withexposure to strong sunlight. Among the most significant scientific initiatives of the parkare the creation of a botanical garden in Terme di Valdieri and thereintroduction operations of ibex and bearded vulture in closecollaboration with the Mercantour National Park. The alpine botanical garden "Valderia" The extraordinary features of the park flora have already beenmentioned. These features explain why botanists have visited this areafor hundreds of years. In the 18th century, Allioni described for thefirst time the species Viola valderia, an endemic violet that he foundon the gravel bank of the torrent in Terme di Valdieri. It is exactlyhere, in the 'locus classicus', that the botanical garden with the nameof this endemic violet has been created. Works started in 1987. On 14July 1990, in the presence of illustrious botanists from Italy andFrance, the garden was inaugurated and opened to the public. Valderiawas designed on the basis of totally innovative criteria: it is neithera 'classic' alpine garden with a collection of mountain flora specimenscoming from all over the world, nor a botanical garden with rigorousgeometric structure formed by squared flowerbeds and parallel paths. It is rather the best possible reconstruction of all thedifferent habitats of the park, each one with its main indigenousbotanical species. Thus, it is divided into 'habitats', some of whichwere already present while others have been artificially recreated: themegaphorbiae association, the meadow, the crag and the detritus, thegrassland, the peat-bog, the stream, the shrubs, the herbaceousunderstorey. Each one is interpreted with a wooden panel describing itsmain features. In each habitat there are labelled specimens of the mostremarkable and typical species (more than 400). Reintroduction projects: animals do not respect frontiers Argentera and Mercantour parks inherited from the Royal Hunting Reservea long tradition of fauna management, even though the interventions werejustified by hunting interests rather than protectionist concerns. Theintroduction on the French territory, in the 1950s, of a non-indigenousspecies, the moufflon, must be considered in this context. Greatimportance is given to the reintroduction of ibex on the Italianterritory in the 1920s with animals captured on the Gran Paradiso, thuscreating the first new colony of ibex in the Alps. Starting in the 1970ssome studies on migration (Pfeffer and Settimo 1973) proved theexistence of important migrations across national borders, with ibex andmoufflon moving from opposite sides. In summer, ibex migrate towardsFrench territories and, at the beginning of autumn, they come back toItaly to their winter range. On the contrary, moufflon cross thefrontier to Italian territories in late summer but go back to France towinter at lower altitude. The importance of controlling these migrations and establishingcommon and coordinated fauna management urged Argentera and Mercantourparks' managers to strengthen their collaboration through the exchangeof data and common censuses and controls. The most significantcollaboration initiative is Operation Ibex, an important scientificproject that included the creation of two new ibex groups, one on theItalian territory, the other on the French territory, in areas that hadnot previously been colonised. This operation was conducted in Italy in 19861987 with 46 ibexreleases. In France the operation took place for the first time in 1987,with 13 ibex captured on the French territory; then in 1989 theoperation was repeated with 15 animals from Argentera Park, where thecapture was easier. Today the operation can be considered totallysuccessful. The second operation concerns the bearded vulture Gypaetusbarbatus, the largest European bird, which disappeared from the Alps atthe beginning of this century. In 1975 IUCN promoted an internationalprogramme of reintroduction in the Alps, which obtained the support ofWWF International. In 1987, on the basis of historical and ecologicaldata, the Argentera Regional Nature Park and the Mercantour NationalPark proposed their common candidature as a reintroduction site. Thespecial International Commission gave its full approval and theArgentera-Mercantour became one of four release sites in the Alps. Amongthe reasons for the support of the experts was the presence of two largeprotected areas, with 33 km of national boundary in common, the strongwill of the managers, and the good organisation of the Parks, based onthe work of 60 rangers and the extension of the protected territory(100,000 hectares). In particular, this size factor is extremelyimportant, if you consider that a bearded vulture can cover hundreds ofkilometres in a short period of time. After years of careful preparation (information campaign,exhibition, brochure, film, drawing competition for school children; alloperations were conducted together by the two parks, with an Italian anda French version) finally the first release took place in the Mercantourin 1993 with three birds, followed by Argentera in 1994 with the releaseof two bearded vultures. Placed in an artificial cave in the ValascoValley on June 14 1994 at the ages of 95 and 92 days, they were thenfollowed constantly by a team of experts until a month after their firstflight. Considering that this is one of the most popular areas of theparks it was necessary to take particular measures: road closure,limitations for hikers, constant presence of rangers. This activitygenerated enormous interest among the public and in the media (articlesin daily papers and on television). We have received reports ofsightings from many different sources: hunters, mountaineers, trippersand shepherds. The releases will continue alternately in France and inItaly for a period of ten years. It is also of great importance to mention the appearance ofwolves on the French side of the Alps: six wolves were sighted togetherin the winter 1993/94 in an area not far from the border. These probablycame from the Italian wolf population in the Appennines (the neareststable recorded group  150 km as the crow flies  is in the Liguro-Piedmontese Apenine in Val Borbera on the border between the province ofAlessandria and Genoa). In summer 1995, there was the first sighting forthe Italian side of the Maritime Alps. An important joint project hasbeen prepared with the Mercantour National Park covering scientificresearch and an information campaign. We have also been in contact withthe Abruzzo National Park in Italy because of their specific experiencein this field and with the Yellowstone National Park in North America,where a wolf reintroduction took place recently. The figures for the latest censuses of the larger animals(chamois 4,500, ibex 600, eagles 7 pairs) show a general increase. In accordance with the regional law n. 36/90 which legislatesfauna management, selective culls on boar and moufflon were carried out.The former are supernumerary and have caused considerable damage toagriculture. The latter are not an indigenous species and are incompetition with the chamois. The culling operation was carried out bythe rangers in collaboration with local hunters; this fact has helped tocreate a positive collaboration between the Park and hunters. Inaddition animals have been captured for repopulating other areas:chamois (for the Monte Baldo area and the Province of Brescia) and ibex(repopulation of the Forest of Tarvisio Nature Reserve, Eastern Alps,and Parco Naturale Adamello-Brenta, Central Alps). Effectiveness of protection During the second World War the ungulate population fell by 80% but,when hunting was forbidden again, it rapidly grew. Thus, the HuntingReserve did protect the animals in quite an effective way. However thenatural environment suffered many setbacks before the establishment ofthe Park. For example, in the 1960s an international road tunnel, theCiriegia-Mercantour, involved the construction, of a short demonstrationtunnel (1 km), now closed. The most significant intervention was theconstruction of two hydroelectric dams and one hydroelectric undergroundpower station in the 1970s. However, Argentera Park, after itsestablishment in 1980, succeeded in preventing an even more damagingdevelopment, the construction of new canals to collect water from nearbyglens. This project would have produced the same damage on all the parkterritory that is now evident only in the Vallone delle Rovine. However,since the early stages of its activities, the Park developed closerelations of collaboration with ENEL, the Italian hydroelectric board,which started an exemplary programme of environmental restoration. Thisprogramme includes removal of unnecessary material, consolidation andgrass covering of scarps. Moreover, at the power station, ENEL ispreparing an information centre on its plants which will include asection dedicated to the Park and the delicate relations betweendevelopment and nature conservation. In the same valley the Park hasplanned a picnic area by the semi-artificial Rovine Lake, with two aims;that of restoring a ruined area and also creating an outlet (alreadyused as it is) for the massive influx of Sunday trippers. Another positive aspect that should be stressed is thesuccessful degree of naturalisation of the artificial basins. This isproved by the fact that one lake (La Piastra, about 1,000 m above sealevel) has become an important halting-place for migratory birds. Duringrecent years, interesting observations have been recorded of rare birdsand species coming from Northern regions: mallard (Anas platyrrhyncos),teal (Anas crecca), tufted duck (Aythia fuligula), goldeneye (Bucephalaclangula), wigeon (Anas penelope), eider (Somateria mollissima), fulmarFulmarus glacialis (first Italian observation), grey heron (Ardeacinerea), cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo) and gulls (Laridae). Another threat to the environmental integrity of Valle Gesso isrepresented by limestone quarries that supply local cement-factorieswith raw materials. In this case too, the Park obtained a positiveresult with the creation of the Special Nature Reserve of Juniperusphoenicea, for the protection of a remarkable mediterranean biotope ofcalcareous crags. The Reserve succeeded in limiting the expansion of thequarry, thus allowing the nesting of peregrine falcon (Falcoperegrinus). Finally, the Park limited and controlled the expansion oftourism, which started in the late 1960s, thanks to the "area plan", ameans of territorial and urban management. Moreover, it succeeded inkeeping the few, small ski-lifts outside the park borders. A fundamental contribution comes from the Park rangers'activity, the purpose of which is essentially educational but, whenneeded, is also enforcement. Thanks to them, the behaviour of touristsand visitors has definitely improved; actually, they are now morerespectful and more conscious of how to behave in the naturalenvironment. Recreative, educational and sport interest Alpinists started to explore the Maritime Alps during the drawing up ofthe "Carta degli stati di S.M. di Sardegna", the map of the Savoiakingdom (around 1830). However, at the time these mountains wereinteresting for essentially geographical and military reasons. That iswhy the first people to climb their summits were officers of theSardinian Army. Mountaineering had its golden age during the romanticperiod, at the end of the 19th century. English and German climbers were the most active at this time,but the American Reverend Coolidge also deserves to be mentioned. He wasthe first to climb the Canalone di Lourousa, an impressive slide of ice,900 m from top to bottom and with a 45 degree gradient, and, after atraverse on a ridge, he conquered the southern peak of the Argentera,the highest summit in the Maritime Alps. Then came the French helped bylocal guides. In 1930, Victor de Cessole succeeded in conquering theCorno Stella, 'the noble cliff' and 'last peak of the old Europe thoughtto be inaccessible', thanks to his guides Plent of S. Martin Vesubie andGhigo of S. Anna di Valdieri. Nowadays, mountaineering is very much practised in this area;there are climbing faces and routes for all skills of alpinists and newroutes continue to be opened. Hiking too is very popular, thanks to theextraordinary network of mountain paths, with nine mountain huts and sixbivouacs of the Italian Alpine Club (CAI). The territory lends itself also to other sporting activities:canoeing, mountain-bike, pony-trekking and alpine skiing. The Park cancontrol sporting activities and avoid excessive disturbance by limitingaccess to its territory and the regulation of timing of activities. Asfar as general enjoyment is concerned, the Park has carried outsignificant educational activities for many years now, in collaborationwith all kind of schools, from primary to university level. Each year,detailed programmes are put forward for instructional activities, fromguided visits to various kinds of projects on specific subjects. For itsvisitors, the Park has an agreement with local hotels and its ownguesthouse, the Casa del Parco in Trinit di Entracque, with 35 beds,several rooms and teaching equipment to be used during 'green-week'stays and courses for students from primary to high school. Foruniversity students conducting specific studies or preparing theirgraduation theses, there is the already mentioned "Foresteria" inSant'Anna di Valdieri. Moreover, in Entracque, there is a visitor centre, with apermanent exhibition to introduce the Park to the public, and aninformation office, where brochures and other publications areavailable, some free and some for sale. The visitor centre also offersan instruction room for lessons, seminars and audiovisual activities.Another visitor centre, open in summer, has been set up at Terme diValdieri near the Botanical Garden. It has various facilities and anexhibition on the Park's flora. The Park is fully equipped to produce its own video cassettesand audiovisual material for didactic and educational purposes. Finally,in the Park building in Valdieri, there are all the administrationoffices, plus a small library, video and photo archives, the alreadymentioned herbarium, a laboratory for the preparation of naturalisticspecimens to be used in visitor centres and in teaching activities, anda carpentry-workshop for preparing signs, information boards and woodenequipment for picnic areas. For the moment, two such areas have alreadybeen equipped (Ciriegia and La Piastra), and two new ones are under way(Rovine and Terme). The aim of this latter kind of intervention isessentially the concentration of the presence of tourists in lessvulnerable areas, where enjoyment can be more easily controlled. Finally, Argentera and Mercantour Parks have confirmed theiraffinity through a common information policy. In particular, they haveproduced a bilingual brochure of presentation of the two parks on theoccasion of their twinning, bilingual brochures on ibex and beardedvulture, an exhibition on this rare bird, a common poster on Argenteraand Mercantour, a guide-book for hiking and, recently, a brochure ontransfrontier trails for pony-trekking. Their historical ties and their present active cooperationconvinced the Argentera and Mercantour managers to coordinate theirrespective efforts, with the ambition of obtaining the European Diplomafor each of them. The initiative was successful: for the first time twoneighbouring Parks were awarded with the Diploma at the same time (16October 1993). The Diploma has strengthened the cooperation: after theibex and the bearded vulture projects, the wolf project is under way.Besides this, there is the operation "Mountains without frontiers": 20border itineraries from La Maddalena pass to the Mediterranean in theFranco-Italian protected area of the Maritime Alps. It is a boxed setcontaining a book (in French and Italian) and 1:50,000 maps, with allthe practical and tourist information on the villages and the naturalenvironment along the routes: frontiers should not exist for animals orfor humans! Protected area increase Recently it was announed that Argentera Park would change its name andbecome bigger still: in April 1995 the protected area was enlarged toinclude the neighbouring "Bosco e Laghi di Palanfr" Nature Reservewhich was run independently (1050 hectares: see map). The management ofthe two protected areas has been concentrated into one body which willbe called the Maritime Alps Nature Park (= Parco Naturale AlpiMarittime). The staff have been amalgamated too, and go from being 27 to36 in number. Over 1,200 hectares of new territory has been included with theaddition of part of the Sabbione valley, an unspoilt and scenic valleybordering on the French Mercantour National Park. From a naturalist'spoint of view this territory is extremely important, because it isbetween the crystalline massif of the Argentera mountains and itssurrounding sedimentary base. The flora is, therefore, very varied andwe can add the species that are typically endemic to limestone soils tothe Park's list, amongst these the prestigious Primula allionii. As faras the fauna is concerned we should have better conservation of thechamois population, because a stretch of land where hunting waspermitted has been eliminated. Fortunately the local huntsmen did notprotest, because they realise the importance of the park in acting as agame breeding ground for the surrounding area. In this way we have givenan efficient and concrete response to one of the suggestions made alongwith the European diploma which looked towards an improvement in theboundaries for a better management of the biotopes. The new enlargedregional protected area is now one of the biggest in Italy, coming closeto 30,000 hectares, and could be considered the nucleus of the possibleMaritime Alps National Park, which the national framework law refers toand which many hope to see instituted. References: Pawlowski, B. 1970. Remarques sur l'endemisme dans la flore des Alpes et des Carpates. Vegetatio 21: 181243. Pfeffer, P., and Settimo, R. 1973. Deplacement saisonniers et competition vitale entre mouflons, chamois et bouquetin dans la Rserve du Mercantour (Alpes Maritimes). Mammalia 37 (2): 203219. Patrizia Rossi is the Director of Parco Naturale dell'Argentera, now"Parco Naturale Alpi Marittime", Corso Dante Livio Bianco 5, 12010Valdieri, Italy. **************************************************** The Australian Alps National Parks and protected area management GRAEME WORBYS The Australian Alps comprise the highest parts of the Great Dividing Range and associated mountains in the south-east of the Australian continent. Over the last 70 years historical exploitation and inappropriate land use within the Allps have mostly been replaced with conservation management practices. This has included the establishment of contiguous protected areas across three Australian states reinforced by a transboundary cooperative management agreement between three State Governments and the Australian Federal Government. This paper briefly describes the land use struggles and key developments leading to the establishment of the Australian Alps National Parks, one of the great systems of protected areas of the Australian continent. It provides an account of how park management principles and practices evolved strongly in the Alps, often in response to hard experience gained from the conservation versus historical and contemporary land use debates at hand. The paper also discusses how park management expertise gained during the evolution of the Alps parks has had significant benefits to protected area management practice throughout Australia and internationally. THE AREAS generally known as the Australian Alps (the Alps) comprise thehighest parts of the Great Dividing Range and associated mountains inthesouth-east of the Australian continent (Costin 1989). Of the 25,000 km2covered by the Alps (Costin 1989), about 15,300 km2 (62%) is permanentlyconserved in its essentially natural character within protected areas(Worboys et al. 1993). The Alps (see map) represent only about 0.3% of the Australianland mass and include all of the mainland snow country (approximately5,200 km2 above the average snowline of 1,370 m) as well as Australia'shighest mountain, Mt Kosciusko (2,228 m). They enclose slopes andvalleys running both inland and towards the coast down to approximately200 m above sea level (Costin 1989). Water originating in the Alps is ofnational and regional importance, being used to sustain agriculture inone of the most productive areas of Australia (Lawrence 1993), theMurray-Darling basin river system. The river system, the largest in theAustralian continent, receives about one-quarter of its average yieldfrom the Alps even though the Alps only occupy about 1% of its totalarea (Costin 1967). By Australian standards, the variability of therunoff from the Australian Alps is low. Water from the Alps is also usedfor domestic consumption and hydro-electric power generation. The Alps are rich in natural and cultural heritage. They containspecies and features not found anywhere else in the world, such as themountain pygmy possum Burramys parvus and the corroboree frogPseudophryne corroboree, both of which are endangered species; they arean area isolated from other mountain chains of the Southern Hemisphereand they are of considerable antiquity. An environment type thatcontrasts dramatically with the rest of the continent, the Alps are anoutstanding area recognised for their national and internationalsignificance. The Alps are listed on the Register of the National Estateand Kosciusko National Park is a World Biosphere Reserve. The development of protected area principles and practices The heritage and inspirational values of the Alps provided a unifyingelement for many individuals and visionaries associated with the areas(Mulvaney 1992). The ambience and quality of the landscapes, the moodsof the weather  these are some of the factors that inspired individualsto work with great energy and commitment towards a common goal ofconservation for the Alps. The role of key individuals whoseconservation work was often undertaken against tremendous odds andopposed by land use cultures practised for several generations isdiscussed below. The Alps before 1944 Richard Helms (Helms 1893) documented the negative impacts of grazing onthe New South Wales (NSW) section of the Alps but little occurred torectify the situation until the 1930s, when severe disquiet about theimpacts of traditional land use practices on mountain catchments in theAlps began to gain momentum. The severe degradation in the catchment areas of the NSW Alpswas investigated by Forester Baldur Byles in 19311932. Byles focused onthe protection of the Murray Catchment above the then proposed Hume Weirwhich was completed in 1936. His report called for the rehabilitation ofthe eroding areas and for rangers to control grazing (Byles 1932).Byles' conservation recommendations, however, were not based purely onutilitarian values. He also deeply appreciated the intrinsic naturalvalues of the NSW section of the Alps and became one of its staunchestconservation advocates (Gare pers. comm.). During this period, Victoria suffered devastating dust stormsand major wildfires in January 1939. In the patchily burnt VictorianAlps, the prolific regeneration of grasses and shrubs attracted cattlegrazing, exacerbating the post-fire soil erosion in Victoria's highcountry. Concern was raised, and in 1940 Victoria passed the SoilConservation Act, under which Victoria's Soil Conservation Board wasestablished to address the problem of soil erosion in the state(Gillbank 1992). This was an important step because it led to the formalintroduction of scientists into the management of the Victorian Alps.The Soil Conservation Board sought help from the Professor of Botany atMelbourne University, who arranged for Stella Grace Maisie Fawcett MScto undertake an extensive ecological survey of the Hume Catchment(Gillbank 1992). Maisie Fawcett also turned her attention to the BogongHigh Plains and initiated long-term exclusion plots and surveys of theeffects of grazing on the high mountain catchments of Victoria. Herearly reports clearly identified the soil erosion problems and theadverse affects of burning and grazing. Her role was the beginning ofthe powerful part scientists were to play in the future land use andmanagement of the Alps. During the 1930s and early 1940s the nucleus for a conservationarea in the Snowy-Indi area (the Alps in the NSW/Victorian border area)was proposed by Myles Dunphy (Mosley 1992). This was the firstsubstantive recognition of the need to conserve the intrinsic heritagevalues of the Alps. Although The Snowy Mountains National Chase,together with some small reserves over the limestone areas in the NSWsection of the Alps, had been established earlier, these were largelyineffectual in protecting the Alps in NSW (Stanley n.d.). In 1938, the NSW Soil Conservation Service was formed (Mosley1992) to conserve and protect the catchments of the Alps and other areasof NSW. This convergence of concern over the catchments was alsopromulgated by the potential of the catchments to sustain hydro-electricdevelopments. Sir William McKell (Premier of NSW) and Mr Sam Clayton(the new Commissioner of Soil Conservation) were the principal playersinvolved in the concept of the improved conservation of the NSW sectionof the Alps during the early 1940s (Worboys 1994). Clayton was a drivingforce behind the need to conserve the NSW Alps as a catchment area(Costin pers. comm.). The 1944 Kosciusko State Park Act, and the Alps during the 1950s and1960s The work of Maisie Fawcett continued in Victoria and resulted insignificant reductions in stocking rates in the high country of Victoriaduring the 1950s and 1960s. Alec Costin, then a young Sydney Universitygraduate, also became involved in the conservation of the Alps throughsummer work with Maisie Fawcett. Influenced by the botanist Dr JimWillis (Costin pers. comm.), Costin, through his work with the SoilConservation Authority of Victoria, played an important role inintroducing soil conservation principles throughout Victoria, especiallyin the Victorian Alps. Later, as a Commonwealth Scientific andIndustrial Research Organisation scientist, Costin played a criticalrole in achieving a science-based approach to the conservation of theAlps. On 19 April 1944 following Premier McKell's history-makingdirective, the Kosciusko State Park Act was passed setting aside the528,646 hectare Kosciusko State Park and establishing the KosciuskoState Park Trust (the Trust). Of this area, 10% was to be established asa primitive area and the State Park was to be managed to protect thecatchments, to provide for recreation and to provide for controlledgrazing (Worboys et al. 1991). It was the first very large protectedarea established in Australia (Mosley 1992). Myles Dunphy played a prominent role in attempting to establishconservation parameters, although many of his fundamental conservationmanagement principles were not able to be followed at that time (Mosley1992). Forester Byles was appointed as one of the original Parktrustees, and increasingly became a prime advocate for improvedmanagement and conservation, often working quietly behind the scenes toinfluence people (Gare pers. comm.). This most important pioneering legislation set the scene for thedevelopment of basic conservation management principles and practices.Its potential was not fully realised for a number of years, however, andnot until significant influence was brought to bear by outsiders. Thisinfluence came from the recently formed Snowy Mountains Hydro ElectricAuthority (1949) which was concerned about the protection of thecatchments for water yield purposes and as a consequence exertedpressure for the removal of grazing. Scientists working with the NSWSoil Conservation Service had similar catchment protection objectivesand also exerted pressure. Grazing in many parts of the NSW Alps stillcontinued, although stocking rates were reduced. Importantly, however,this pressure influenced the NSW Government not to renew any snow leasesabove 4,500 feet in altitude after 1958. The Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority (SMHEA) also hadmany development objectives for the mountains of NSW and proposed ascheme to dam and utilise the very highest headwaters of the Alps nearMount Kosciusko. This included the construction of dams and aqueducts. These threats from the SMHEA and threats from proposed skifacilities in the summit area of Kosciusko brought a concerted responsefrom conservationists. The conservation battle to protect the veryhighest peaks from modification became very intense before theconservation protection of the area was achieved. Significant influencewas achieved during this debate by soil conservation scientist Dr AlecCostin, prominent scientist Dr W.R. Browne, as well as by a concertedlobby from the Australian Academy of Science (Worboys et al. 1995). A change in the balance of power on the Kosciusko State Park(KSP) Trust at about this time helped to realise a more proactiveconservation-based approach for the State Park. This led to a moredetermined approach to implement the NSW State Government's new grazingban. It also appointed a professional manager in 1959 (Mr Neville Gare)and achieved a strict conservation approach for the Summit Area ofKosciusko through the proclamation of a Primitive Area in 1963 aspermitted by the Kosciusko State Park Act (Mosley 1992). Whilst it was still beset by many problems, Kosciusko State Parkunder the leadership of the Trust and Superintendent Gare began toemerge as a pioneer in Australian protected area management. During theperiod 19591965 Gare was influenced by his mentors, Byles (Mosley 1992)and Costin, as well as his contacts with the USA and New ZealandNational Park systems. Attendance by the newly appointed Trust DeputyChairman at the Second World Conference on National Parks in Seattle,USA, in 1962 brought support to Gare for concepts such as uniformedrangers, information centres, park signs and interpretative programmes. The first Master Plan for the State Park was completed in 1966and many basic conservation principles including a zoning scheme for thepark were manifest in that document. International Park managementprinciples and practices and conservation philosophies were activelysought by Gare and the Trust and, where appropriate, were introduced atKosciusko. A visiting Fulbright scholar, Mr Grenwill Lloyd, was anadvocate of a zoning scheme concept at Kosciusko, and may haveinfluenced its development (Costin pers. comm.). The resource managementcommittee of the Trust also set new standards for the management ofKosciusko State Park especially through the Master Plan (Gare pers.comm.). A change in Government in 1965 brought a new force to the Trust.As the Minister for Lands and Chairman of the Trust, the Hon. Mr TomLewis was an energetic and visionary politician who strove for thecontinued and improved conservation management of Kosciusko State Park(Gare pers. comm.). The Kosciusko State Park management model was significantlyinfluenced by Minister Lewis and in turn, its success influenced him.His 1967 NSW legislation (National Parks and Wildlife Act) achieved hislong-held vision to establish a state- wide professional National Parksorganisation for NSW to administer the state's multiple national parksand nature reserves (Gare pers. comm.). Soon after the introduction ofthe new legislation in October 1967, the newly formed National Parks andWildlife Service (NPWS) took over the management of Kosciusko NationalPark. The Trust was dissolved and the Kosciusko National Park AdvisoryCommittee was formed. The Alps and the Kosciusko State Park managementmodel had played a key role in the creation of the NSW NPWS. Conservationists in Victoria pursued the concept of a VictorianAlpine National Park in 1949, in 1969 and again in 1975 but wereunsuccessful (Johnson 1974). A continued and sustained lobby for theestablishment of a Victorian Alpine National Park however, became apowerful political force within Victoria. The Alps during the 1970s and 1980s The Alps protected areas increased in size in the early 1970s, with theaddition in 1974 of the Byadbo lands to the Kosciusko National Park, andthe creation of the Gudgenby Nature Reserve in the Australian CapitalTerritory (ACT) in 1979. In Victoria, there was considerable agitation for a VictorianAlpine National Park and the newly formed Land Conservation Councilrecommended major new protected areas in the Victorian Alps (BogongNational Park, 79,000 ha; Wonnangatta-Moroka National Park, 104,000 ha;Cobberas-Tingaringy National Park, 17,000 ha; the Avon Wilderness,29,500 ha) (Land Conservation Council 1979). After many years ofagitation, this was an important step forward but it fell short ofachieving the grand vision for a large Victorian Alps protected areaalong the length of the Great Dividing Range connecting with KosciuskoNational Park. The 1967 establishment of the NSW NPWS and subsequent expansionof the state's national park system meant that experienced national parkprofessionals were needed to manage these new areas. Many Kosciusko-trained personnel, being among the most experienced protected areamanagers in the state, were transferred to manage these reserves as wellas to other professional posts within the organisation. KosciuskoNational Park became an active training park for many of the new rangerstaff appointed to the NPWS. This period also witnessed the indirect influence of theAustralian Alps management both nationally and internationally.Superintendent Gare was seconded to assist the Papua New GuineaGovernment to establish its national parks and reserve system. Later, hereturned to Australia to help establish the Australian National Parksand Wildlife Service (ANPWS) now the Australian Nature ConservationAgency (ANCA). During the late 1970s and early 1980s, the NSW national park andreserve system was expanded further and Kosciusko National Park againtrained and supplied experienced management professionals to the newareas of responsibility. Other Kosciusko staff were promoted to heritageconservation positions in other organisations such as the Sydney WaterBoard, NSW State Premier's Department and ANCA. During the early 1980s an important development in the trainingand establishment of minimum standards for rangers occurred. Personnelfrom Kosciusko National Park and the Riverina College of AdvancedEducation together initiated the concept of a formal qualification(Associate Diploma) for rangers through correspondence course work andregular live-in training camps. This pioneering qualification forrangers has subsequently become adopted by many agencies throughoutAustralia as the training standard for Australia's rangers. In the ACT the establishment of Namadgi National Park in 1984together with an addition in 1991 extended the areas protected in theAlps. The unique leasehold land tenure system operating since theinception of the ACT greatly assisted the establishment of NamadgiNational Park, because it provided strong controls over the use of theland, especially subdivision and clearing. In the Cotter Valley, the need to protect a water supply for theNational Capital led to strict controls over public access early thiscentury. This same demand for potable water will continue to provide abasis for the security of the Namadgi (Hayes pers. comm.). Growth in the NSW ski industry created new demands for expansionof ski resorts at Kosciusko and a far more sophisticated approach to themanagement of the ski fields by the NPWS. Pressure from large numbers ofvehicle-based summer visitors on the Summit area of Kosciusko createdmajor impacts on the sensitive alpine vegetation and a managementstrategy to protect the Summit area was developed in 1979 (Worboys etal. 1995). In 1982 following an extensive public consultation period, thenew Kosciusko National Park Plan of Management was approved and achievedmany conservation gains including the exclusion of vehicles from theSummit area, the prohibition of grazing, and the transfer of firemanagement responsibilities from an external organisation to the NPWS. The Alps protected areas set a high standard within Australiafor the development of professional national park plans of management.The 1982 Plan of Management for Kosciusko National Park, the 1986 Planof Management for Namadgi, and plans for the Victorian Alpine NationalParks were all developed to a high professional standard. In the late 1980s, the most significant conservation achievementfor the Alps since 1944 occurred. On 2 December 1989, after a 49 yearconservation battle, the Victorian Alpine National Park was proclaimed.This achievement followed a period of intense political manoeuvring,compromising, and political campaigning. The mountain cattlemen inparticular held major demonstrations in Melbourne and captured thepolitical debate for a considerable period. Even on proclamation day atSnowy Plain in the heart of the Victorian Alpine National Park themountain cattlemen staged a horseback demonstration. The need for cooperative planning, fire management andconservation work in the border areas of the Alps National Parks formedthe catalyst for the development of the Australian Alps Memorandum ofUnderstanding (MOU) signed in July 1986 by the State and FederalMinisters responsible for the Alps and their management. The MOU, a nonlegally-binding cooperative agreement, established a number ofconservation objectives to be implemented through mutually agreed andplanned cooperative work programmes across state borders. An enhancedconservation outcome based on ecosystem management for the Alps was nowpossible. The Alps in the 1990s During the 1990s, the implementation of the Alps MOU was further refinedand strengthened. This included the development of a three-yearstrategic planning cycle, a formal budget with contributions from Stateand Federal Governments and the appointment of a permanent coordinatorto manage the annual work programmes and the three-year strategic plan.The success of the Alps MOU has provided a model for the establishmentof additional transboundary cooperative programmes within Australia.Recent programmes such as at Jervis Bay, between the NSW NPWS and ANCA,and a proposal for a transboundary coastal wilderness managementagreement between the NSW NPWS and Victorian Department of Conservationand Natural Resources, are based on this model. The Australian Alps MOU has also received considerable interestinternationally, and IUCN (Thorsell 1990) has recognised the AustralianAlps National Parks as a leader in the field of transboundarycooperative protected area management. As a result of this interest, theAustralian Alps were selected as the venue for the first transboundarymountain protected area travelling workshop. The workshop was convenedby IUCN, the Australian Alps Liaison Committee and ANCA and wasconducted during November 1995. It brought pairs of transboundarymountain protected area managers from all over the world to witnesscooperative management in action. Conclusion Land use within the Australian Alps over 70 years witnessed atransformation from exploitative to conservation-based land usepractices. This was achieved through the sustained actions ofindividuals and organisations with a strong commitment to theconservation and protection of the catchment and heritage values of theAlps. Government legislation established soil conservation authoritiesin two states, the Kosciusko State Park and the NSW National Parks andWildlife Service. Management of the protected areas established in theAlps evolved to deal with the conservation and protection issues at handand management professionals gained considerable experience and skillsin the process. The Australian Alps National Parks played a central rolein the establishment of the protected areas concept and their managementin Australia well beyond the Alps region. Conservation principles andpractices were established for the Alps parks; minimum acceptablestandards of management were determined and pioneering and innovativemanagement approaches were developed particularly in the area ofprotected area management planning. The establishment of the Australian Alps National Parks and theAustralian Alps MOU represents one of the outstanding success storiesfor conservation management in Australia. Focusing on ecological issues,species conservation and catchment protection in a manner that largelytranscends political imperatives and administrative boundaries, the MOUachieved a common vision and conservation philosophy for the Alps. Thisinitiative continues to be a model for transboundary management bothwithin Australia and internationally. References Byles, B.U. 1932. Report on the Murray River catchment in New South Wales. Bulletin No 13. Commonwealth Forestry Bureau Canberra. Costin, A.B. 1967. Alpine ecosystems of the Australasian Region. In: Wright, H.E., and Osburn, W.H. (eds), Arctic and Alpine research, 5587. Costin, A.B. 1989. The Alps in a global perspective. In: Good, R. (ed.), The Scientific Significance of the Australian Alps, 719. Australian Alps Liaison Committee. Gillbank, L. 1992. Scientific exploration of the botanical heritage of Victoria's Alps. In: Scougall, B. (ed.), Cultural Heritage of the Australian Alps. Proceedings of the symposium held at Jindabyne, New South Wales, 1618 October 1991. Australian Alps Liaison Committee. Good, R. 1992. Kosciusko Heritage, The Conservation Significance of Kosciusko National Park. NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service. Helms, R. 1893. Report on grazing leases of Mount Kosciusko Plateau. NSW Ag. Gazette 4: 349364. Johnson, R. 1974. The quest for an Alpine National Park. In: The Alps at the Crossroads. Victorian National Parks Association. Johnson, R. 1989. An Alpine retrospective. In: Hewett, D. (ed.), Common Ground. Department of Conservation Forests and Lands. Vol 2 No 3. Land Conservation Council, Victoria. 1979. Alpine Area Final Recommendations. Land Conservation Council of Victoria. Lawrence, R.E. 1992. Use and abuse of water in the Victorian Alps. In: Scougall, B. (ed.), Cultural Heritage of the Australian Alps. Proceedings of the symposium held at Jindabyne, New South Wales, 1618 October 1991. Australian Alps Liaison Committee. Mosley, J.G. 1992. Conservers of the Australian Alps. In: Scougall, B. (ed.), Cultural Heritage of the Australian Alps. Proceedings of the symposium held at Jindabyne, New South Wales, 1618 October 1991. Australian Alps Liaison Committee. Mulvaney, J. 1992. The Alpine Cultural Heritage In Perspective. In: Scougall, B. (ed.), Cultural Heritage of the Australian Alps. Proceedings of the symposium held at Jindabyne, New South Wales, 1618 October 1991. Australian Alps Liaison Committee. Stanley, H. (n.d.) A History of the Establishment of Kosciusko National Park. National Parks and Wildlife Service, Sydney. Thorsell, J. (ed) 1990. Parks on the Borderline: Experience in Transfrontier Conservation. Background papers presented at the Border Parks workshop held during the First Global Conference on "Tourism A vital force for peace". Vancouver, BC, Canada, October 1988. IUCN  The World Conservation Union. Worboys, G.L. 1994. Contributions of the Australian Alps National Parks to Australian Protected Area Management. In: Meek, I., Willis, A., Weir, I., and Frey, J. (eds.), Procedures of the ANZECC 6th Australasian Regional Seminar on National Parks and Wildlife Management. Australian Nature Conservation Agency. Worboys, G.L., Mackay, J., Spate, A.P., and Good, R. 1993. Protected Area Management in the Australian Alps A Case Study: Kosciusko National Park. In: Hamilton, L.S., Bauer, D.P., and Takeuchi, H.F. (eds.), Parks, Peaks, and People. A collection of papers arising from an International Consultation on Protected Areas in Mountain Environments held in Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, 26 October2 November 1991. EastWest Centre Program on Environment. Worboys, G.L., Pulsford, I., and Mackay, J. 1995. Conservation gains, setbacks and opportunities, Mount Kosciusko Alpine Area, Kosciusko National Park, NSW, Australia. Unpublished paper presented to the Transboundary Mountain Protected Areas workshop, Australian Alps November 1220 1995. Australian Alps Liaison Committee, IUCN. Graeme Worboys, Regional Manager (Southern), NSW National Parks andWildlife Service, PO Box 733, Queanbeyan, NSW, Australia 2620. ************************************************* Sacred mountains: implications for protected area management EDWIN BERNBAUM Sacred mountains highlight the key role that culture plays ininfluencing how people view and treat the environment. For long-termsuccess policies of conservation and sustainable use need to take suchcultural factors into account, enlisting the aid of traditional beliefsand practices. Otherwise they will fail to gain the support ofindigenous communities and other interested parties. In addition, sacredmountains reveal what in nature different societies revere and feelmotivated to protect. People experience the sacred nature of mountains through theviews they have of them, such as the mountain as centre of the universeor place of renewal. This paper examines some of the most important andwidely distributed of these views or themes and draws out theirimplications for formulating policies and measures for the conservationof mountain cultures and environments. The conclusion suggests that webroaden notions of sustainability to spiritual and cultural, as well aseconomic and ecological, aspects of the environment. SACRED MOUNTAINS highlight the key role that culture plays ininfluencing how people view and treat the environment. As the highestand most impressive features of the landscape, mountains tend to reflect thehighest and most central values and beliefs of different societies values and beliefs that underlie the ways people see the world and theirplace in it. These values and beliefs determine to a great extent whichnatural resources people seek to exploit and which features of the landthey strive to preserve. For any assurance of long-term success,policies directed toward environmental preservation and sustainable useneed to take such cultural factors into account; otherwise they will notwin the support of communities and individuals who most directly impactthe areas under consideration. In general, whatever people perceive as sacred possesses forthem ultimate reality and value. As a manifestation of ultimate reality,however that may be conceived, it acquires a special status that puts itbeyond the reach of mundane manipulation. This attitude is expressedwith particular force in Maori ideas of tapu or sacred mountains. Theyare places forbidden to ordinary people, off-limits to profane uses. Inaddition, the sacred is regarded as having a supreme value that makes itworth protecting at all costs  a value which, in fact, transcends allcost. If cultivated and taken seriously, such attitudes can function aspowerful forces helping to preserve the integrity of naturalenvironments. Of all the different kinds of natural sacred sites, mountainsare the ones that form the most diverse and complete environments andecosystems. They include shrub lands, forests, meadows, deserts,tundras, glaciers, rivers, lakes. Within these diverse environments,mountains hold a great diversity of flora and fauna, ranging fromtropical to arctic. They function, in fact, as microcosms of theenvironment as a whole. Sacred mountains can, therefore, give us some ofthe best pictures of what in nature people of different cultures revereand feel deeply motivated to protect. Although in many traditions the sacred itself is consideredultimately indefinable, it is not amorphous. People experience thesacred nature of mountains, in particular, through the views they haveof them, such as the mountain as centre of the universe or source oflife. The various expressions of these views or themes differentiate theexperience of the sacred and provide articulation for doing research andformulating policy for different cultures and mountain regions. To enlist local support for research and policy implementation,it is important to develop some empathetic understanding of how thisworks. Each view or theme brings together various ideas and images toevoke the experience of a deeper reality hidden in a mountain perceivedas sacred. The process works a little like the fusion of two photographsin a stereoscopic viewer to trigger a vivid perception of the thirddimension represented in each two-dimensional photograph. Somethingsimilar happens to many of us when, at particular moments, certainimpressions click together in our minds, and the mountain we areclimbing or seeing seems to come alive with a peculiar depth andintensity that we have difficulty defining. Major themes Using specific examples, we will examine some of the most important andwidely distributed themes associated with mountains. These themes havebeen selected for their potential to suggest general guidelines fordoing research and formulating policy for protected areas. Others could,and should, be chosen for further exploration. Many of the themesoverlap and imply each other, suggesting that we not treat them asdistinct, isolated views of mountains to be analysed apart from eachother. Many sacred mountains are first and foremost places of power.This power is often regarded as dangerous, a source of fear to betreated with the greatest care and respect. In the past Maori warriorscrossing the plateau beneath Mount Tongariro would avert their eyes fromits summit for fear of provoking a blinding snowstorm (Yoon 1986). Maoriconceptions of the mana of tapu mountains such as Tongariro emphasisethe sheer power of a sacred mountain that makes it forbidden to ordinaryhumans. The power of mountains can assume various forms. The five yehor principal sacred mountains of China, Tai Shan in particular,enshrined the political authority of the emperor to rule over the fourquarters of his empire, supported by the mandate of Heaven (Chavannes1910). The molten lava of Kilauea in Hawai'i embodies for many Hawaiiansthe fiery destructive and creative energy of the volcano goddess Pele.As this example shows, the power of a sacred mountain can be bothnatural and supernatural. Many people attribute this power to deitieswho reside on mountains or are identified with the peaks themselves, asPele is with Kilauea. Another widespread theme, especially in areas influenced byHinduism and Buddhism, is that of the mountain as centre. A number ofmountains that embody this theme, such as Mount Kailas in Tibet andGunung Agung in Bali, are patterned on the mythical Mount Meru orSumeru, which stands as a cosmic axis around which the universe isorganised in Hindu and Buddhist cosmology. As a piece of Merutransported there by the gods, Gunung Agung provides the Balinese withtheir sense of geographical and psychological orientation  everythingon the island exists and finds its place in relation to the volcano(Covarrubias 1946). A number of mountains in East Asia, Japan in particular, areviewed as centres of mandalas, circular spaces and arrangements ofdeities used in Buddhist meditation. Some, such as Mounts Koya andOmine, are treated as mandalas themselves, their peaks, trees, and othernatural features regarded as parts of a sacred circle representing thedivine space of a visualised deity with whom a meditator identifieshimself or herself (Bernbaum 1990). In a provocative article AllanGrapard (1982) argues that in the period leading up to World War II suchmandalas spread out from sacred mountains to engulf the surroundinglandscape and transformed the entire country of Japan into a divinenation in the eyes of its people. Cultures tend to look up to mountains as sources of blessings most notably, water, fertility, life and healing. Mountains such asAusangate in Per, Tlaloc in Mexico and the San Francisco Peaks inArizona are revered as abodes of weather deities, places of springs, andreservoirs of waters on which societies depend for their well-being andexistence (Reinhard 1985). In times of drought modernised Kikuyu ofKenya still fall back on pre-Christian traditions and face Mount Kenyato ask Ngai or God for rain. Today great numbers of elderly women climbTai Shan to make offerings to have grandchildren if their daughters ordaughter-in-laws have been infertile (Bernbaum 1990). Female shamans in Japan and Korea routinely climb sacredmountains to charge themselves with healing powers and conduct ritualsfor their patients (Blacker 1975; Kendall 1985). The leading spiritualdoctor of the Wintun tribe in northern California feels that she getsher power to heal from Mount Shasta, in particular from a sacred springin a pristine meadow threatened by the proposed development of a skiarea. Traditional singers or medicine men go to the four sacredmountains of the Navajo in the south-western United States to obtainmedicinal herbs and pebbles; they also invoke these mountains in ritualsand sand paintings intended to restore a sick person to health andharmony (Bernbaum 1990). Another major theme is that of mountains as divine ancestors andplaces of the dead, often involved in origin myths. Mount Koya has oneof the most impressive graveyards in Japan. East Africans traditionallyburied their dead facing sacred peaks such as Kilimanjaro and MountKenya. Most of the major peaks in New Zealand, including Aoraki or MountCook, are revered as ancestors of the Maori who came to the North andSouth Islands in migration canoes (Orbell 1985). According to the originmyth of the Korean people, they are descended from the union of a skygod and a bear woman on the sacred mountain of Paekdu (Henthorn 1971). As divine ancestors and places of origin, a number of mountainsprovide different societies with their sense of communal identity. Oneof the most dramatic examples of a sacred mountain holding a peopletogether is Mount Kaata in the Bolivian Andes. Joseph Bastien (1978) hasshown how the metaphor of Kaata as a human body unites the variouscommunities who live on its slopes into an organic unit that has beenable to resist all efforts to break it apart into smaller administrativesubdivisions. At intertribal gatherings Maori ritually identifythemselves by first stating their tribal mountain, followed by theirriver, or lake, and then their chief (Yoon 1986). The final theme to consider is that of the mountain as place ofspiritual revelation and transformation. Mount Sinai occupies a positionof particular prominence in the Bible as the awe-inspiring site whereGod reveals the Torah, the basic teaching of Judaism, and the TenCommandments, the basis of law and ethics in Western civilisation.Buddhist pilgrims to Wutai Shan in China expect to see manifestations ofManjushri, the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, who may appear to them in the formof a dragon, a prince seated on a lion, or as a ball of fire (Birnbaum1986). In China and Japan mountains are regarded as such ideal placesfor meditation and spiritual transformation that the Chinese expressionfor embarking on the practice of religion means literally 'to enter themountains' (Demiville 1965). Hua Shan, the most spectacular of the fiveprincipal sacred peaks of China, was a favourite haunt of Taoist hermitsintent on transforming themselves into immortals. North American PlainsIndians of different tribes seek out high places for vision quests thatgive them spiritual power and determine the course of their lives. Many people today, both traditional and modern, seek outmountains as places of spiritual renewal and transformation. Huang Shan,Mount Fuji and the Diamond Mountains continue to inspire artists andpoets in China, Japan, and Korea. Europeans became interested in theAlps for scientific and mountaineering reasons when philosophers andpoets such as Rousseau, Goethe and Shelley began to extol theirspiritually uplifting qualities (Bernbaum 1990). In the United StatesJohn Muir, a major figure in the genesis of the modern-day environmentalmovement, founded the Sierra Club primarily to preserve the SierraNevada as a wilderness area where people could go for spiritual renewal.Such motivations continue to inspire and energise the environmentalmovement today. They also draw many visitors to parks and protectedareas in mountain regions. Policy implications These themes have a variety of implications for policy regardingenvironmental and cultural preservation and sustainable use. In order todevelop general guidelines for policies in protected areas, we need toexamine their specific meanings in particular contexts. The same themecan have different implications for different mountains in differentcultures. It is also important to note that many cultures draw vitalityand cohesion from their relationship to mountains and other sacredfeatures of the landscape. Destroying what makes such a site sacred mayundermine a culture, resulting in adverse social, economic andenvironmental impacts as the society falls apart and traditionalcontrols are lost. This last point brings out an important role for managers ofprotected areas. Under the impacts of modernisation, the influx ofoutside forces, and population growth, many traditional beliefs andpractices that have been extremely effective in preserving theenvironment are now being overwhelmed. Managers need to work with localcommunities to support and revitalise these controls and adapt them tonew circumstances. An awareness of the themes we have looked at andtheir implications can help to guide this process. The perceived power of a mountain frequently sustains acommunity that holds it sacred. If development or conservation measuresappear to weaken that power, they may have negative consequences. In thecase of a mountain revered as a place of danger, a policy designed toavoid such consequences might intentionally make access to its higherslopes difficult in order to reinforce the mountain's mystique,especially if it is not traditionally climbed. Managers might also wantto avoid planting grass and trees and to leave untouched rocky areas andother features that are naturally devoid of wildlife and vegetation. The power of many mountains comes from the perceived presence ofdeities, often regarded as protectors of local communities. Theiconography and mythology of these mountain deities can provideimportant clues for formulating policy. For example, if a deity appearsin association with certain domestic animals, these will probably be thekind of livestock that should be allowed to graze on that deity's sacredmountain. Not taking such considerations into account can alienate thelocal community and cause unnecessary problems. Sherpas in the Sagarmatha National Park of Nepal believe thatgoats, yaks, and sheep are under the special protection of Khumbu YulLha, the protector deity of the Khumbu region. They were outraged whenthe park in 1983 banned the grazing of goats on the slopes of the god'ssacred mountain, Khumbila. Some of them feared that the action wouldoffend the deity and bring misfortune on their herds of yaks, on whichthey depend for much of their livelihood (Stevens 1993). Greatersensitivity on the part of park managers, perhaps allowing goats tograze on certain parts of the mountain where they would do the leastdamage, would have avoided creating suspicion and resentments that madeother park policies harder to implement. Many mountain deities appear with particular wild animals, oftenas their protectors: reinforcing this association in people's minds canhelp to protect those animals. Vicunas are considered the domesticlivestock of apus or mountain deities of the Peruvian Andes. Nationallaws protecting these animals have helped to reinforce traditionalprohibitions on hunting them and other wildlife, based on fears ofoffending their divine protectors (Bernbaum 1990). Similar relationships may hold for plants as well as animals.Holy Hills set aside by the Dai people of south-west China havepreserved valuable islands of biodiversity, largely through the beliefthat all the plants and animals found on them are companions of the godsthat dwell there or else belong to their gardens. Traditional practicesthat now need reinforcement in the face of modern pressures have untilrecently prevented gathering, hunting, wood-chopping and cultivation onthese sacred hills, which occupy 1.5% to 2.5% of the local prefecture(Pei 1993). The perception of sacred mountains as centres may play animportant role in holding communities together. To keep such communitiesfrom falling apart, policies may be needed to preserve, and evenreinforce, natural and man-made features that emphasise the symbolism ofa sacred mountain as a centre. These measures might include settingaside a circle of undeveloped land around the peak or making sure thatnothing obscures views of it from important places, such as temples andshrines. Policy measures should build on motivations and practices peoplealready have for preserving mountains as sacred sources of water,fertility, life and healing. For example, a community may be keeping amountain spring pure out of a belief that if they pollute it localdeities will inflict diseases on them. Sherpas avoid polluting springsfrom fear that the lu or serpent deities residing in the water willinflict leprosy on nearby residents. Rather than try to persuade themthat bacteria instead of gods or spirits cause illness, it would be morerespectful and effective to encourage them to hold both viewssimultaneously, applying each where it is appropriate to the end ofsafeguarding the water supply. This does not have to be contradictory:traditional beliefs may lend support to arguments that spiritualentities can act through bacteria as their material agents in thephysical world. If a community views a mountain as a place of the dead, policiesshould be formulated to encourage its members to treat it as they woulda cemetery containing the remains of their relatives. Just as cuttingdown trees or overgrazing would be for some cultures a desecration of agraveyard, so doing the same things on the mountain might offend thespirits of ancestors on whom people depend for their well-being andblessings. The presence of a kilometre and a half long cemetery on MountKoya in Japan has succeeded in preserving a magnificent forest of giantcedars (Bernbaum 1990). Protected area managers can work with local communities andindigenous groups to preserve sacred mountains  along with theirenvironments  as symbols of communal and tribal identity. In the latterpart of the 19th century, Europeans in New Zealand were starting to buyup parcels of land for sheep farms on Tongariro, the sacred mountain ofthe Ngati Tuwharetoa. In order to keep the mountain whole and preservethe power and integrity of the tribe, a European advisor counselled theParamount Chief, Horonuku Te Heuheu Tukino IV, to give Tongariro to theCrown as a park for the benefit of everyone. This he did in 1887, andTongariro National Park became the first national park in New Zealandand the fourth in the world (Lucas 1993). The last theme to consider, that of mountains as places ofrevelation and transformation, is the one most closely linked to issuesof tourism. Many people, ranging from pilgrims to tourists, go tomountains seeking spiritual renewal and inspiration. Will their presencein large numbers interfere with the practice of religious rituals andmeditation by indigenous practitioners, as well as the quality of theirown experience? On mountains where inspiration and renewal come fromquiet contemplation in a pristine environment the answer is yes. Eithervisitors must be encouraged to walk quietly and leave little trace oftheir passage, or they must be restricted as to where they can go. Onother mountains where inspiration and renewal come traditionally fromlarge numbers of people engaged in many different activities, such aspilgrimage festivals, this may not be such a problem. In some cases, rather than a pristine wilderness setting, a man-made temple or some other human structure may enhance the spiritualexperience of the mountain and help to preserve its environment. In themountainous Khumbu region of Nepal near Mount Everest, sacred grovesaround monasteries and temples have been better preserved than forestsprotected by the Nepali government and the Sagarmatha National Park(Stevens 1993). An effective policy for park administrators might be toidentify sacred sites in forest areas that need protecting and tosponsor the construction of new shrines and the renovation of old onesnear those places, encouraging local religious leaders to declare thesurrounding forests sacred. Many parks and wilderness areas in mountain regions have beenset aside for protection because of the cultural and spiritual valuesplaced on them by modern societies  values that often outweigh economicand political considerations. In order to retain and cultivate thisimportant source of support, park managers need to adopt policies thatreinforce, rather than undermine, such values. For example, although itmay may not be as cost-effective in the short term, it may be preferablefor parks themselves to handle wilderness permits and make reservationsfor campsites. Contracting such services out to ticket agencies mayalienate the public by appearing to commercialise the parks, reducingthem to theatres or amusement parks that no longer embody the naturalqualities of mountain environments that inspire a sense of renewal.Visitors who deal directly with rangers will feel that that their moneyis going for a good purpose and will have a greater sense of personalinvolvement that will make them more inclined to support park systemseconomically and politically. Conclusions For many people, both modern and traditional, the environment is notjust the natural environment. It includes cultural and spiritual aspectsthat make it meaningful  a source of life in its deepest and broadestsense. People who do rituals to draw water from a sacred mountain, forexample, do not view the water and mountain simply as physical parts ofthe ecosystem needed to grow their crops. They see them as essentialcomponents of a larger system of meaning, expressions of a deeperreality that sustains them spiritually and culturally, as well asphysically. A study of the role and significance of sacred mountainssuggests that we adopt a broader and deeper view of sustainable use.Protected area managers and development administrators need to formulatepolicies that take into account issues of cultural and spiritual, aswell as ecological and economic, sustainability. If trees are replanted,clear-cut logging can be sustained from an economic point of view, butthe biodiversity of the forest will be lost. In a similar vein, measurestaken only to preserve the natural ecology without regard for what itenshrines may kill the spirit of a place, destroying its value for thepeople for whom it is important. References Bastien, J. W. 1978. Mountain of the Condor: Metaphor and Ritual in an Andean Ayllu. St Paul: West Pub. Co. Bernbaum, E. 1990. Sacred Mountains of the World. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books. Birnbaum, R. 1986. The Manifestation of a Monastery: Shen-ying's Experiences on Mount Wu-T'ai in a T'ang Context. Journal of the American Oriental Society 106(1): 11937. Blacker, C. 1975. The Catalpa Bow: A Study of Shamanistic Practices in Japan. London: Allen & Unwin. Chavannes, E. 1910. Le T'ai Chan: Essai de monographie d'un culte Chinois. Paris: Ernest Leroux. Covarrubias, M. 1946. Island of Bali. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. Demieville, P. 1965. La montagne dans l'art litteraire chinois. France- Asie/Asia 20: 732. Grapard, A.G. 1982. Flying Mountains and Walkers of Emptiness: Toward a Definition of Sacred Space in Japanese Religions. History of Religions 21(3): 195221. Henthorn, W.E. 1971. A History of Korea. New York: Free Press. Kendall, L. 1985. Shamans, Housewives, and Other Restless Spirits: Women in Korean Ritual Life. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. Lucas, P.H.C. 1993. History and Rationale for Mountain Parks as Exemplified by Four Mountain Areas of Aotearoa (New Zealand). In: Parks, Peaks, and People, edited by L.S. Hamilton, D.P. Bauer and H.F. Takeuchi, pp. 2428. Honolulu: EastWest Center, Program on Environment. Orbell, M. 1985. The Natural World of the Maori. Auckland: Collins/Bateman. Pei Shengji 1993. Managing for Biological Diversity Conservation in Temple Yards and Holy Hills: The Traditional Practices of the Xishuangbanna Dai Community, Southwest China. In: Ethics, Religion and Biodiversity, edited by L.S. Hamilton, pp. 118132. Knapwell, Cambridge: The White Horse Press. Reinhard, J. 1985. Sacred Mountains: An Ethno-archaeological Study of High Andean Ruins. Mountain Research and Development 5(4): 299317. Stevens, Stanley F. 1993. Claiming the High Ground: Sherpas, Subsistence, and Environmental Change in the Highest Himalaya. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press. Yoon, H.-K. 1986. Maori Mind, Maori Land: Essays on the Cultural Geography of the Maori People from an Outsider's Perspective. Berne, Francfort-s. Main, New York, Paris: Peter Lang. Dr Edwin Bernbaum is a Research Associate at the University ofCalifornia at Berkeley and a Senior Fellow at The Mountain Institute.The author of Sacred Mountains of the World, he is a member of theMountain Protected Area Network, working on the implications of sacredmountains for environmental and cultural preservation. Legal brief The Alpine Convention  a promise for the future? WOLFGANG E. BURHENNE The Commission for the Protection of the Alpine Regions (CIPRA) wascreated in 1952 upon the initiative of both governmental and non-governmental representatives. In its first Programme of Action, the newCommission stressed the necessity of negotiating and concluding aconvention conserving the alpine environment and natural resources. It was not, however, until 1989 that a Conference of Alpine States wasconvened in Berchtesgaden, upon the initiative of the Minister ofEnvironment of the Federal Republic of Germany. After long discussions,this conference decided to commence negotiations for a conventioncovering the entire Alpine mountain range. On 7 November 1991 the Alpine Convention was signed in Salzburgby Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Lichtenstein, Switzerland, and theEuropean Community. Although Slovenia, as part of Yugoslavia, had takenpart in the negotiations, by the time the convention was ready forsignature that country was already in upheaval, and Slovenia signed theAlpine Convention on 29 March 1993 as an independent state. In 1994 aspecial protocol was concluded to allow for Monaco to become a Party. The Convention entered into force on 6 March 1995, afterratification by Austria, Liechtenstein and Germany. Since then Francehas also ratified. As is common in such instruments, the preamble sets out thegeneral purpose and goals of the Contracting Parties, recognising thespecific and multifaceted qualities of the natural environment as wellas the history and culture of the region as one of the largest naturalareas of its type in Europe. The text of the Convention describes theterritorial application of the treaty by reference to a map which iscontained in the annex. Each Contracting Party may, however, extend theapplication of the Convention to other areas under its sovereignty by adeclaration addressed to the Republic of Austria as depository.Likewise, such areas may be removed from the field of application of theConvention by means of the same procedure. The general obligations of the State Parties are determined byArticle 2 (1), which states the general principles governing theConvention to be the principle of prevention, the polluter-paysprinciple, the principle of cooperation, and the principle of thepreservation and protection of the Alps  taking into consideration theinterests of each Party, and the need to achieve the sustainable use ofresources. These principles are followed by a list of appropriatemeasures to be taken in specific sectors, in order to attain theaforementioned objectives (Article 2 (2)). Taken as a whole, theenumerated sectors demonstrate the broad scope of the Convention. Theyare: people and culture land use planning air quality soil protection water regimes protection of nature and landscape management mountain agriculture mountain forests tourism and leisure activities transport energy wastes Articles 3 and 4 are concerned with the harmonisation anddevelopment of research and monitoring activities as well as withcooperation in the legal, scientific, economic, and technical fields.Exchange of information and cooperation with international organisations governmental and non-governmental  as well as the provision ofinformation to the public on a regular basis on progress in those areasare singled out by the text as appropriate means of action. The next block of articles are those concerning institutions.The Conference of the Parties, i.e. the Alpine Conference, its meetingsand decision-making mechanisms, its functions and organs such as theStanding Committee, are dealt with. Provision is also made for thepossibility of creating a permanent Secretariat. The standard final clauses, including those on amendments to theConvention or Protocols, ratification and accession, conclude the text. The text of the Alpine Convention, therefore, clearlydemonstrates the classic elements of a so-called 'framework convention' that is, a treaty which is concerned with general principles as wellas obligations and which provides for the conclusion of specialProtocols which deal more thoroughly with specific subjects in greaterdetail. Because of its nature as a framework convention, the obligationsaccepted by the State Parties remain very general. In accordance withArticle 2(3) these obligations are defined at the level of theProtocols, which delineate measures to implement the terms of theConvention. It was therefore essential that negotiation of the Protocolsbegan immediately: without them, the Convention would remain an emptyshell, without substance. This is the reason that CIPRA and the WorldConservation Union (IUCN) were constantly emphasising the necessity ofconcluding the envisaged protocols to the Convention as rapidly aspossible. Thus, work on that task began even before the Alpine Conventionentered into force, with parallel negotiations, with the result thatthree Protocols were opened for signature at the same time on 20December 1994: the Protocol for the implementation of the AlpineConvention in the field of town and country planning and sustainabledevelopment; the Protocol for the implementation of the AlpineConvention in the field of mountain agriculture; and the Protocol forthe implementation of the Alpine Convention in the field of natureprotection and landscape conservation. They have all been signed byFrance, Germany, Italy, Monaco, Slovenia and the European Union. TheProtocol on town and country planning and sustainable development hasalso been signed by Liechtenstein. None, however, has yet been signed bySwitzerland or Austria. In the former case, the difficulty lies with thepositions taken by the Swiss Cantons which would be affected: they claimthat the imposition of some of the obligations would have socio-economicconsequences which require increased subsidies. The case of Austria ismore circumscribed: the federal Government is blocked from taking anyaction by the position of the Lnder which oppose the direction that thenegotiations of the Protocol on transport is taking. The Lnder, throughtheir Prime Ministers' Conference, want any further construction oftransalpine highways to be prohibited. The negotiators are at presentseeking a workable compromise on that point. In contrast, the negotiations on the Protocol on mountainforests are almost concluded. The negotiations on the soil preservationProtocol have run into some difficulties, in particular with regard toits field of application and definition of soil. Work on the Protocol onenergy is just beginning. That on tourism and leisure activities ismeeting with difficulties with regard to the provisions regarding theproduction of artificial snow in areas where there are ski facilities. Aspecial meeting will take place in order to help find the consensuswhich would be necessary in order that this Protocol be opened forsignature by the Ministers attending the next Alpine conference at theend of February 19961. In addition to the above efforts, an ambitious programme forAlpine monitoring is already well under way. Finally, during the last session of the Standing Committee tothe Convention, which was held in January of this year, therepresentatives have come to an agreement concerning the rules ofprocedure for the Alpine Conference and those of the Standing Committee.The rules of procedure will provide inter alia for the participation ofinternational NGOs at the Conference and at meetings of the StandingCommittee. Within the framework of this short overview of the status of theConvention and the ongoing negotiations of Protocols it has not beenpossible to analyse the obligations already imposed or thosecontemplated in any detail. It is however important to stress that theover-riding rule is that of consensus, and that as a consequence it mustbe understood that the provisions which have been adopted are not all asstringent as CIPRA or IUCN would have wished. However, the result as a whole shows progress  a progress whichmay become a really significant tool for continuing work on theconservation of the Alps. This can only become a reality, however, ifthe Contracting Parties take the necessary steps to bring the Protocolsto the Convention into force as soon as possible  and then firmlyimplement the measures they require. Law can but provide the means to the application of politicalwill! Wolfgang E. Burhenne served in a voluntary capacity as the firstSecretary of CIPRA, under the Presidency of Charles Bernard, who wasalso President of IUCN. Dr Burhenne represents IUCN at the negotiationsrelated to the Alpine Convention and its Protocols. 1 Publisher's note: This article was prepared by Dr Burhenne in January1996, but is only now being published due to unforeseen delays inproducing this issue of PARKS. Dr Burhenne informs us that there havebeen further developments within the Alpine Convention since January,the most important being that legally binding Protocols on tourism andon mountain forests have been signed. There is still no agreement on aProtocol for transport. ********************************************************* Identifying the world's most outstanding mountains JIM THORSELL I have in my mountain reference library a number of books that professto describe which are the world's most outstanding mountains. Most arewritten by the legions of mountain travellers and climbers. All areliberally dosed with the awe-inspiring photographs that mountains lendthemselves to. But there is another approach to defining which are the world's mostoutstanding mountains  the World Heritage Convention. In this case,government members of this international legal conservation instrumentmake formal applications to inscribe what they feel are their 'best'natural and cultural heritage sites. The world heritage point ofdeparture when it comes to mountains is not only their attraction toalpinists but their overall value to humanity for science andconservation. Through the mechanism of the World Heritage Convention, fiveindividual mountains and 31 mountain ranges have made it through therigorous IUCN selection procedure and been inscribed on the prestigiouslist of World Heritage sites (see list below). The process is not over,however, as there are many gaps left. In Asia, for example, there is nonatural World Heritage site in the Karakorum or the mountains of centralAsia outside the Himalayas. Work is progressing on a nomination of thenew Central Karakorum National Park and for one of the nature reservesin the Altai. Kailas as one of the world's acknowledged sacred peaks hasalso been suggested for potential cultural landscape nomination. TheChinese portion of Mount Everest is an obvious missing piece out ofNepal's Sagarmatha World Heritage site. The spectacular volcanoes inKamchatka are being assessed by IUCN in 1996 and several more in Russiaare soon to be nominated (surely something in the Caucasus wouldqualify). Elsewhere in south-east Asia Kinabalu in Malaysia and Lorentz inIndonesia stand out as obvious potential candidates. Both are well knownfor their scientific values and are protected as National Parks. In Africa, Mount Kenya has been proposed as a potential WorldHeritage site at a recent meeting of the African Mountain Association.South Africa is said to be considering one of the mountain parks in theDrakensburgs as well as several of the fynbos reserves in the Capemountains. In the European Alps, nature has been subject to millennia ofhuman intervention and there has been difficulty in defining what couldbe appropriate as a natural site. Northern Scandinavia is addressingthis issue by nominating their northern mountains as a culturallandscape to take into account the Sami peoples interaction in thatsetting. France and Spain have joined forces to nominate a transfrontierpark in the Pyrenees for review in 1996. In Norway, Iceland and Greenland other mountains are beingconsidered for nomination including the huge NE Greenland National Parkand the national park on Spitzbergen. In North America, the western Cordillera is already quite wellrepresented (some would say over-represented) in the current system ofWorld Heritage sites. Nevertheless the Brooks Range/British Mountains onthe border of Alaska and the Yukon would merit attention as would theTorngats in Labrador. The international significance of the mountains ofthe arctic islands in northern Canada have not yet been assessed. In Latin America, Chile is considering a nomination for thelarge temperate wilderness centred around the Bernardo O'Higgins/Torresde Paine complex. At the northern end of the Andes, the Santa Marta areaof Colombia may soon also be proposed for the List for mixed culturaland natural reasons. In conclusion, the above 'shopping list' summarises initiativesnow under way to nominate further Mountain World Heritage sites. As IUCNplays a quasi-judicial role in evaluating new nominations, we cannotmake any pre-judgments but it would be fair to say that most of theabove mentioned sites would have a reasonable chance of inscription onthe World Heritage list. It is also recognised that State Parties to theConvention (now numbering 145 countries) are the only ones that cansubmit nominations. But with eight World Heritage nominations inmountains having been submitted for 1996, the process of identifying theworld's most outstanding mountains has advanced further than that of anyother biome. World Heritage mountains name country name country Los Glaciares National Park Argentina Tongariro National Park New Zealand Tasmanian Wilderness Australia Ar Tnr Niger Pirin National Park Bulgaria Rio Abiseo National Park Per Rocky Mountain Parks (7) Canada Huascaran National Park Per St Elias Parks (5) Canada/USA Manu National Park Per Waterton/Glacier International Peace Park Canada/USA Virgin Komi Forests Russia Huangshan China Kilimanjaro National Park Tanzania Huanglong China Rwenzori National Park Uganda Jiuzhaigou China Yosemite National Park USA Talamanca/Amistad Costa Rica/Panama Hawaii Volcanoes National Park USA Galapagos National Park Ecuador Great Smoky Mountains USA Sangay National Park Ecuador Olympic National Park USA Simien National Park Ethiopia Yellowstone National Park USA Nanda Devi National Park India Grand Canyon National Park USA Shirakami Japan Canaima National Park Venezuela Sagarmatha National Park Nepal Virunga National Park Zaire Te Wahi Pounamu/ SW New Zealand New Zealand Kahuzi  Biega National Park Zaire Return to the Archives Page Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised August 1996WT01-B09-213IA008-000077-B040-31http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/biblio/biblio.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072158 text/html 10977HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:22:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10805Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:14 GMT Active Mountain Archive- Bibliography Information The Active Mountain Archive Bibliography Makalu-Barun National Park and Conservation Area Management Plan, submittedby the Task Force for the Makalu-Barun Conservation Project, November 1990. This is the compilation of results and recommendations of the four Components,based on a two-year study conducted by the Task Force (1988-90) wherein most of the Working Papers were prepared. The Management Plan calls for the establishment of the MBNPCA, with primary objectives being to protect this area of unusual natural beauty and biological diversity, to improve the socio-economic conditions of local people, and to develop models for sustainable conservation and development. Implementation of the Plan's policies incorporate traditional management systems as much as possible and the active participation of local people. Training and availability of production credit for income generation are key components, as is education of both children andadults, particularly women. The Plan gives an overview of the issues, recommends policies and programs, and presents the administration structure of the MBCP. 85 pgs. Community Resource Management Component, by Rohit Kumar Nepali, Task Force Community Development Specialist, Khagendra Sangam, Assistant Community Development Specialist, Charles Ramble, Anthropologist, and Chandi Chapagain,Anthropology Research Assistant, November 1990. A detailed plan outlining MBCP's policies and programs to conduct economically and environmentally sustainable development activities with maximum community participation in the Makalu-Barun Conservation Area. Five-year time-lines identify activities in forest management, livestock and grazing, educational training, infrastructure, credit facilities, horticulture, rural industries (e.g., lokta, allo, bamboo products, cash crops, medicinal plants, etc.), slash and burn, intensive agriculture, marketing development, culture conservation and human services with a summary budget. 176 pgs. Park Management Component, by Lhakpa Norbu Sherpa, Park Management Specialist, Ang Rita Sherpa, Assistant Park Specialist, Jayapal Shrestha, Research Assistant, November 1990. Defines the area, boundaries and land use zones for the National Parkand Conservation Area, with specific policies and strategies for natural resource management, livestock and agricultural activities, tourism, income generation, infrastructure development and education/research; outlines the roles and responsibilities of Project partners (HMG and Woodlands), sets forthadministrative and staffing arrangements, facilities and equipment needs, and summarizes program costs. 97 pgs. Scientific Research Component, by Tirtha B. Shrestha, Task ForceCoordinator/Natural Science Specialist, Keshab Raj Rajbhandari, Botanist, Rodney Jackson, Wildlife Ecologist, Narendra Raj Khanal, Geographer, November 1990. Underscoring the MBCP's strong commitment to ongoing research, providing data upon which sound conservation and community development decisions can be made, this plan prioritizes proposed research activities highlighting slash-and-burn, livestock and pasturage, non-timber forest products, wildlife depredation and cultural studies, and prescribes an institutional structure for guiding and reviewing such research. Research permitting procedures and assistance services are laid out, as is a general budget for each study activity. 56 pgs. Tourism Management Component, by Kamal Banskota, Task Force Tourism Specialist/Economist, and Murari Upadhyay, Socio-Economic ResearchAssociate, November 1990. Describing the level, types, areas and impacts of tourism in the MBCP area, the plan puts forth policies and strategies to develop environmentally and economically sustainable tourism, with recommendations on the siting and maintenance of trails, bridges, lodges and campsites, on the regulation of fuelwood use, waste disposal and construction inside the National Park, and on potential income generating and employment opportunities whereby local residents can benefit economically from tourism. 34 pgs. "Faces of a Reservation: A Portrait of the WarmSprings Indian Reservation" By Stowell, C.D, Oregon Historical Society Press, 1987. 200 pages. ISBN 0-87595-203-8 Text and photographs by Cynthia D. Stowell High in the Cascade Mountains of Oregon, USA lies the Warm Springs IndianReservation, a cultural and economic powerhouse that could be a model formany mountain peoples. Following the theme "Paying for Mountains", thiscase study illustrates, more than anything, the critical importance ofstrong local leadership. Through capable decision-making, coupled withpersistence, a long-term outlook, deliberate diversification, and an abilityto adapt to changing circumstances, the Warm Springs Indians have created ahomeland that offers decent jobs as well as cultural richness. Ancestors of the people of Warm Springs are believed to have occupied whatis now Oregon for at least 11,000 years. As a result of the westwardexpansion of white settlers, in 1855 a treaty was signed between the tribesof middle Oregon and the U.S. government. This treaty ceded 10 millionacres of land in return for the equivalent of 150,000 dollars in tools,clothing, provisions, salaries, and the right to continue fishing attraditional sites. Half a million acres of poor mountain land on the edgeof their traditional range was set aside as the Warm Springs IndianReservation, where several tribes, including the Sahaptin, Wasco, andPaiute, were forced to relocate. Many Indian reservations have lost huge portions of their acreage or havebeen terminated altogether since their establishment more than a centuryago. Warm Springs has been lucky to have had leaders who effectively foughtthe many attempts to reduce the size of their reservation, includingprivatization (and subsequent re-sale to non-Indians), inaccurate surveys,and frequent changes in the legal status of reservation land. In 1957, a major setback -- the loss of traditional salmon fishing sites onthe Columbia River, due to flooding caused by The Dalles dam, was turned toadvantage. The Tribes negotiated for a 4 million dollar settlement from theU.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and proceeded to invest this money wisely intheir own future. Rather than distributing the entire settlement amongtribal members (as is commonly done), the money was held in trust for thereservation as a whole. The first big expenditure was a university study of the reservation'snatural resources and their potential for sustainable economic development.Deliberate diversification led to investments in a number of economicactivities, about half of which were successful. Today, the fruits of thispolicy include a stable forest products industry, a luxury resort, ahydroelectric plant (plus rental monies from two utility-owned dams), andmore jobs than people to fill them. The reservation is filled with youngpeople, and a lively museum/cultural center celebrates the cultures of theTribes, both past and present. One idea comes through clearly -- whatever course the wise and resilientpeople of Warm Springs take in the future, it will be of their own choosing.(Annotation by Elizabeth Byers, The Mountain Institute) Region(s): North America Countries: USA Mountain ranges or peaks: Cascade Mountains, Mutton Mountains, Mt. Jefferson 200 pgs. Dans les Montagnes de Grece, by Constantinos Tsipiras Tsipiras, C., "Dans les Montagnes de Grece". This guide (in French) to mountain walking and trekking covers not only mainland Greece butCrete, the Isles and Peloponnese. It has suggested itineraries and mapsclassified by length and difficulty and some fine photos in its 269 pages.Published by Editions Olizane SA, Geneva. (excerpted from "MountainProtected Areas Update", Lawrence S. Hamilton, Vice-Chair for Mountains,Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas/IUCN). Language: French Region(s): Europe Countries: Greece Mountain range or peaks: Mountains of Greece, Crete, the Isles, Peloponnese 269 pgs. Mountains, by Jack D. Ives Ives, J.D.(ed.), 1994. "Mountains". Jack D. Ives, Consulting Editor, an Illustrated Library of theEarth series, 1994. Published by Rodale Press, 33 East Minor Street,Emmaus, Pannsylvania 18098 USA. US$35. Illustrated large format book withchapters on Mountains of the world, How mountains are formed, Mountains offire, Mountain weather and climate, Plants of the mountaintops, Animals ofthe mountains, Mountain people, Farming on the slopes, Scaling the peaks,Mining and damming, The future of the mountains. Region(s): global Countries: global Mountain range or peaks: global Mountain Protected Areas Update, by Lawrence S. Hamilton Ives, J.D.(ed.), 1994. "Mountains". *Hamilton, L.S., "Mountain Protected Areas Update" (periodical). "Mountain Protected Areas Update", edited by Lawrence S. Hamilton,Vice-Chair for Mountains, Commission on National Parks and ProtectedAreas/IUCN (periodical/newsletter). Published at intervals by the WorldConservation Union, Rue Mauverney 28, CH-1196 Gland, Switzerland, andLawrence S. Hamilton and Linda S. Hamilton, ISLANDS AND HIGHLANDS,Environmental Consultancy, RR#3, Box 3010, Charlotte, Vermont 05445 USA. Region(s): global Countries: global Mountain range or peaks: global Return to the Active Mountain Archive Index Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised August 1996WT01-B09-214IA008-000077-B040-111http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/archives/orglist/orglist.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072240 text/html 1823HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:22:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1652Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:23 GMT Active Mountain Archive- Organizational List  Organizations of the Mountain Forum ASIA/PACIFIC: ICIMOD Regional Coordinator: Shahid Akhtar, MF Membership PO Box 3226 Kathmandu, Nepal Tel: +977-1-525-313; Fax: +977-1-524-509; Telex: 2439 ICIMOD NP E-Mail: mforum@icimod.org.np Connect to the Asia/Pacific Regional Node at ICIMOD LATIN AMERICA: CIP/CONDESAN Regional Coordinator: Ana Ponce, MF Membership Apartado Postal 1558 Lima 100, Peru Tel:+51-14-366-920; Fax:+51-14-351-570 E-Mail: A.Ponce@cgnet.com Return to the Active Mountain Archive Index Back to the Mountain Forum home page The Mountain Forum / mfsupport@mtnforum.org / revised July 1996WT01-B09-215IA090-000968-B012-463http://ivf.com:80/ 206.185.60.251 19970123210143 text/html 2459HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:03:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2288Last-modified: Mon, 06 Jan 1997 02:02:00 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre: Infertility, IVF, Endometriosis Homepage Your browser doesn't support frames, but you can see the No Frames version<a href=oldindex.html>here</a>. infertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress, surgery, laparoscopy, oocyte, ICSI,micromanipulation,endoscopy,DES,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress, surgery, laparoscopy, oocyte, ICSI,micromanipulation,endoscopy,DES,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress, surgery, laparoscopy, oocyte, ICSI,micromanipulation,endoscopy,DES,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stress WT01-B09-216IA090-000968-B013-21http://ivf.com:80/oldindex.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210153 text/html 16773HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:03:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16601Last-modified: Fri, 08 Nov 1996 04:52:56 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre: Infertility, IVF, Endometriosis Homepage or Welcome to the Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre WWWhomepage. You are one of visitors to this Webpage. It is my belief that properly informed, you can become an active participant in your healthcare and make better choices. My goal is to provide you with accurate information in areas of womens health including: infertility, IVF, endometriosis, contraception,sexually transmitted disease, menopause, stress management and PMS. If you have installed RealAudio, you can listen to Dr. Perloe on Internet Radio. ARHC Goes Shareware The ARHC WWW has adopted the shareware concept. As this site has grown in popularity, it has become harder to respond to all questions. I spend a significant amount of time to review your background and your question and then attempt, respond appropriately. Please take a moment and consider what you have spent purchasing medical books and how much time, money and effort you might need to expend getting a simple question answered at your "offline" physician's office. By educating yourself and learning what questions to ask, you can enhance the value of your physician visit. Armed with the information contained in this WWW you can become a better healthcare consumer, achieve a more satisfactory result and save money. The Shareware means visit this site, take advantage of its many resources, if you find this site and the information you receive valuable, become an ARHC WWW Supporter by making a voluntary contribution. As this WWW Homepage is a work in progress, your feedback is necessary to enable us to better meet your needs. Let us know if any of links from this page no longer work. And, if you have found this web site helpful, please tell your friends. Learn more about: Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings an online book for couples with fertility problems by Dr. Perloe and Linda Gail Christie. This is the best place to start your search for information about fertility problems. You will find answers to many questions in these chapters. This book was first published in 1984 and is currently being updated as time allows. It is not available in print. Infertility Overview Ovulation & Hormone Problems Reproductive Surgery IVF, GIFT ICSI Male Factor Infertility Endometriosis Women's Health Newsletter Menopause Multimedia Contraception STD's Stress, Coping PMS Pregnancy Childbirth Search ARHC WWW Infertility Update Lecture ARHC WWW Guestbook Dr. Mark Perloe Learn About Our Practice Email Dr. Perloe How to Consult Dr. Perloe Miracle Babies / Infertility / Ovulation & Hormone Problems / Reproductive Surgery / IVF & ART / Male Factor / Endometriosis / Women's Health / Multimedia & Photo Gallery / Photo Gallery / Menopause / Pregnancy & Childbirth / Contraception & STD's / Stress, Coping & PMS / WWW Statistics / Learn more about Dr. Perloe / Consult Dr. Perloe / Sign Our Guestbook / Read the Guestbook / Fertility Update Lecture / Search this Site This information is not intended as a substitute for medical advice of physicians. The reader should regularly consult a physician in matters relating to his or her health and particularly with respect to any symptoms that may require diagnosis or medical attention. State laws prohibit the practice of telemedicine without licensure in each state. Tour the Women's Health WebRing! [ NextWebRing Site | Skip It | Random WebRing Site ] This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@ivf.com infertility,infertility,infertility,infertility,infertility,infertility,infertility,infertility,infertility,reproduction,reproduction,reproduction,reproduction,reproduction,reproduction,reproduction,reproduction,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tube,DES,endometriosis,women,women's health,endometriosis, clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology, healthcare,contraception,ovulation,ivf,in vitro fertilization, stress,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,gestational,cancer,uterus,fibroid,leiomyoma,ICSI,cyropreservation,micromanipulation,egg donor,microlaparoscopy,contraception,pms,pelvic pain,ovary,fallopian tubeWT01-B09-217IA090-000968-B013-147http://ivf.com:80/mishun.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210253 text/html 16063HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:04:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15891Last-modified: Sat, 09 Nov 1996 20:26:07 GMT About Dr. Perloe and Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre A Patients Guide To...... Innovative Solutions Patient Centered Care Confidentiality Office Hours Open Communication Internet Access Financial Matters Your Appointment Medical Record Review Dr. Perloe Our Location Mission Statement Innovative Solutions for Reproductive Problems Nationally recognized expertise in reproductive healthcare and treatment for endometriosis Excellent results from medical science's most advanced fertility technologies Personalized, in-depth patient care from compassionate, concerned medical staff Sate-of-the-Art diagnosis and aggressive treatment plans for optimal outcomes Comprehensive analysis to diagnose and prevent repeated pregnancy loss Successful history reversing tubal sterilization Patient Centered Care We understand that no two medical problems or patients are alike, and treatments must be individualized to every patient's needs. That's why the medical staff of the ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTRE is committed to finding medical solutions for each person who seeks care from us. We never attempt to fit an individual into a generic treatment mold. To provide the personalized quality care for which we've become nationally recognized, we spend hours with ourpatients and their partners to First, identify and diagnose the problem; Second, develop a partnership with each patient and her support team which may include her husband, another relative or friend and her referring physician; Third, outline medical or surgical options; Fourth, initiate a cost-effective treatment plan that combines the highest quality of care with the best possible outcome. Confidentiality We work hard to protect our patients' privacy. We do not release medical records or any portion of them without written authorization from the patient. Office Hours Our office is open Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. We try to be flexible for situations when it maybe necessary to see patients outside of regular office hours. Saturday and Sunday morning appointments are available for ultrasound monitoring, insemination, egg retrievals and pre-embryo transfers. Open Communication The best patient is a well-informed one. We value an open and ethical relationship with each patient who, we believe, is entitled to complete knowledge about her reproductive health. In an environment of trust and mutual respect, our patients and their partners feel free to ask questions at any time. We promise to answer all the questions asked -- and even those that aren't. It's the only way to build partnerships with every patient, her spouse and her referring physician. As a team, we allwork together to achieve the best possible outcome. Internet Access All visitors are welcome at our comprehensive Internet website, http://www.ivf.com where information is readily available on the medical practice and reproductive health issues. The website offers menus that include a revised copy of Dr. Perloe's book, Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems, and layers of detailed reports about reproductive medicine from many sources. Internet visitors can contact Dr. Perloe, sign or peruse the guestbook, ask a question, tour the ARHC multimedia gallery or join a discussion in the soon to be launched chatrooms. Financial Matters Most health insurers do not cover infertility. Conversely, many insurers will provide coverage for some gynecological diagnoses. However, we do not accept assignment for office visit charges unless we have a contract with your insurer or your health insurer's written authorization or referral for your appointment. Payment for medical, lab and diagnostic services provided in the office is due at the time of service. If we have a managed care contract with your insurer, you are expected to pay for the deductible and/or co-pay at the time of service. To keep patient accounts current, we accept Mastercard, Visa and Discover cards or we will verify your personal check. Depending on your diagnosis, you may be able to obtain some reimbursement for your care. Your receipt for payment will contain the standard diagnosis, medical and surgical treatment codes used by the majority of health insurers. Your Appointment Step 1: Call (404) 265-3662. Our staff conducts a preliminary telephone interview to assure that we are adequately prepared for the appointment. If necessary for insurance coverage, a referral authorization must be signed and in our office before an appointment can be scheduled. We attempt to see patients with urgent medical or surgical conditions as quickly as possible. Step 2: Once the appointment is scheduled, our staff sends the patient a Welcome Packet with detailed information about ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTRE. The packet also includes authorizations for release of medical information, and a new patient questionnaire for both partners to complete and bring the initial appointment. Step 3: Before the appointment, the Patient must take the authorization for release of medical information to her prior physician(s) and hospital(s) and obtain copies of relevant medical records. In addition, patients should obtain copies of surgical notes and videotapes, actual (not copies, not reports) x-ray films, copies of laboratory tests, her health insurance manual. Infertility evaluations require a spouse to sign a separate authorization for release of medical information to obtain copies of his records and semen analysis reports. All medical information should be delivered to ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTER for Dr. Perloe to review before your first appointment. For a fertility assessment, both partners should be present at the first appointment which usually takes two hours. This visit usually costs about $200 plus additional fees for lab or other diagnostic test which can run the total as high as $500. If you are not prepared for this expense at the time of your visit, you should let us know immediately so that additional testing can be postponed. Medical Record Review and Analysis Many patients oustide Atlanta choose to visit for a thorough evaluation and treatment of their reproductive problem. Others seek more limited information. Medical record reviews can provide Reassurance that you seem to be on the right track Questions to ask your own physician Access to the latest material about a particular medical concern. Please understand that without an examination, Dr. perloe can not make a diagnosis or order specific tests, recommend treatments or act as your physician. The information you will receive is not intended as a substitute for the medical advice of your own physician. You should should regularly consult a physician in matters relating to your health and particularly with respect to any symptoms that may require diagnosis or medical attention. To arrange a medical record review call our office (404) 265-3662 and ask them to fax or mail a new patient evaluation form and payment information form. This is then completed and mailed back to us together with ALL your medical records, films, videotapes etc. The value of this record review consult and interview will be limited if all available info is not provided. If you wish to arrange a telephone consult with Dr. Perloe, please provide several times and a phone number where you can receive a collect call. The fee for a medical record analysis and summary report is $89 and $129 for medical record analysis and telephone interview. If you need your films or videos returned, please make sure you enclose a completed fedex or UPS billing form. Dr. Mark Perloe Noted for the individualized and in-depth attention he gives each patient, Dr. Mark Perloe has helped hundreds of couples struggling with infertility realize their dream of having children. As director of reproductive endocrinology, infertility and in vitro fertilization at Georgia Baptist Medical Center, Dr.Perloe has above average success rates in achieving pregnancies through advanced reproductive technologies as well as expertise in treating recurrent pregnancy loss, endometriosis, menstrual disorders, fibroids, and endocrine and other reproductive health problems. He also has extensive experience using the latest microsurgical techniques for reversing tubal sterilization. A clinical assistant professor in obstetrics and gynecology at the Medical College of Georgia, Dr. Perloe completed his fellowship in reproductive endocrinology and infertility at the University of Minnesota. He holds an MD degree from the University of Pennsylvania, Hershey Medical Center and served his residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Wisconsin Dr. Perloe is board certified. He has conducted and published research in medical journals including OBGYN and at national conferences. In 1986, he co-authored Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems, a revised copy of which is on his website, http://www.ivf.com. He has served as consultant and a task force member to the Women's Initiative of the American International HealthAssociation and was active in establishing the first approved endoscopy training center in the former Soviet Union at the Russian National Institute of Women's Health. Dr. Perloe is a member of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists, International Society of Gynecologic Endoscopy, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and several state and local medical associations. He also serves on the advisory board for the Atlanta chapter of Resolve and the national advisory board of INCIID. He is married, has two children and enjoys playing with computers, sailing and traveling. Jennifer Clair, RNP Jennifer Clair, RNP, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a masters Degree in ambulatory womens health in 1988 from Boston College. She has worked as a reproductive endocrinology nurse practitioner and nurse coordinator since 1988. She has played a major role in the start-up of two IVF centers. Nationally certified in reproductive endocrinology as well as OB/GYN, she is a member of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, the Association of Womens health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses, and the National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Reproductive Health. She serves on the advisory board for the Atlanta chapter of Resolve. In addition to our physicians and nurse practitioner, our staff consists of patient representatives, nursing assistants, lab technicians, resident physicians and business office staff. Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Mission Statement ARHC is dedicated to dependably: Provide high quality women's healthcare that focuses on the patient as partner. Address the specialized reproductive healthcare needs of women at each stage of life. Provide advanced, innovative, high value, infertility care in a nurturing environment whichfocuses on family-building, not technology. Recognize the importance of the healthcare team functioning as a coordinatedunit that acknowledges the skills and values the contriubtions of each teammember and provides an emotionally supportive work environment. To accomplish this mission we will engage in activities designed to: Increase awareness in the medical community of the unique services and medicalexpertise that ARHC provides. Become an innovator in the marketplace by providing high value to patients and managed care organizations. Invest in continuing medical education to enhance the capabilities of all personnel. Affirm patients access to high quality infertility services by serving as an advocate to educate payors, policy-makers and the public of its importance. Participate and support graduate medical education, medical outreach, and clinical research to enhance physician's knowledge and skills for the betterment of women's healthcare. Return to ARHC HomepageWT01-B09-218IA090-000968-B013-172http://ivf.com:80/real.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210311 text/html 1387HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:04:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1216Last-modified: Sat, 02 Sep 1995 17:41:06 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Home Page What is RealAudio? RealAudio is an audio delivery system that allows you to hear sound in real time. That's right "audio on demand"! No more waiting exorbitant time to download files before being able to hear lectures, music, news broadcasts, or even.... messages and important announcements for people. A 5-minute newscast used to take 25, 30 or even 60 minutes or more to download. But with RealAudio it plays as it comes to your computer. This is an exciting breakthrough in audio delivery for the Internet. This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@mindspring.comWT01-B09-219IA090-000968-B013-219http://ivf.com:80/quest.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210328 text/html 5784HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:05:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5613Last-modified: Thu, 19 Dec 1996 03:49:13 GMT ARHC Contact Page Contacting ARHC & Dr. Perloe I would also like to take this opportunity to wish you the happiest of holiday seasons. I would also like to take the opportunity to spend it with MY family. So for the next two or three weeks, I may not be able to respond to all but the most urgent mail. The response to the ARHC WWW has been overwhelming. People from virtually every country have visited. The site averages over 3,000 visits per week! Many visitors seek additional information and send an email. Unfortunately as the volume of email continues to grow, my ability to provide updates and additional articles has been limited. In order to maintain the quality of this site, I must continue to invest the time to keep its content fresh. Unfortunately that limits my ability to respond to each and every email message. If you have not read Miracle Babies Online or used our ARHC WWW search form, please try that before sending an email. Search ARHC WWW (example of a Boolean search: 'good;bad' will find all lines containing both 'good' AND 'bad') What Should I do? If your case is rather complicated, you have questions about treatments that have been recommended or you just don't know what to do next, this is where to look. General Medical Questions This opportunity to submit a question is for general questions only and not requests for treatment recommendations. It is not intended to replace consultation with your physician. Questions are limited to less than 150 words. Questions from ARHC WWW supporters will receive the most rapid attention. Asking Questions about ARHC WWW If you would like to report technical problems with this website, contribute material, suggest a reciprocal link or discuss other non-clinical related issues, this is where to respond. Sign Our Guestbook Our guestbook provides an opportunity for you to leave comments and ask to hear from others with similar reproductive health issues. Please do not use the guestbook to request information from ARHC, ask Dr. Perloe medical questions, enter your comments twice or engage the caps lock key. ARHC Chatroom This chatroom is open to all who want to meet and share their questions and comments. Dr. Perloe will stop in from time to time. If you have a Java enabled browser such as Netscape 2.0 or Internet Explorer 3.0, just click here to get started. No additional software or registration is required to get online and share your thoughts with others. Effective Monday, January 6th, 1997, the ARHC Chat Room will be monitored from 9:00 - 10:00 P.M. EST every Monday night by Dr. Perloe. Return to the ARHC Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. WT01-B09-220IA090-000968-B013-251http://ivf.com:80/tocmb.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210346 text/html 6936HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:05:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6765Last-modified: Sat, 16 Nov 1996 22:14:50 GMT Miracle Babies: Table of Contents Miracle Babies Online & Other Happy Endings by Mark Perloe M.D. and Linda Gail Christie Table of Contents What This Book Will Reveal to You 1. How I Discovered the Secrets of Successful Fertility Treatment I. Making Your Fertility Treatment Plan 2. Taking Control of Your Fertility 3. Finding Your Happy Ending 4. How to Avoid Hit-or-Miss Fertility Treatment 5. Finding the Right Doctor II. Male Fertility 6. The Formula for Male Fertility 7. Evaluating Male Fertility 8. Maximizing Male Fertility Potential III. Female Fertility Problems 9. Clues from Your Past 10. Unraveling Your Fertility Mystery 11. Are you Ovulating? Clues From Your Menstrual History 12. Finding Out Why Your Periods are Abnormal 13. Finding Out Why You Have Never Had a Period 14. The Road to Successful Ovulation IV. When Sperm Meets Egg 15. Sperm-Mucus Interaction: Is the "Chemistry Right" 16. Sperm-Egg Transport: Solving Tubal Problems 17. Endometrioisis: Conquering the Silent Invader There's More to Come 18. The Drama of Life Before Birth: Fertilization & Implantation 19. Death of a Dream: When Pregnancy Doesn't Work V. Awaiting Your Miracle Baby 20. Planning the Rest of Your Life VI. High Tech Babies: Now and In the Future Appendix Letter to Friends and Family Glossary Click here to read the Introduction, What This Book Will Reveal to You Return to ARHC HomepageMiracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems Copyright (C) 1986 Mark Perloe M.D., and Linda Gail. This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@ivf.cominfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, insemination,polycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, insemination,polycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, insemination,polycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressWT01-B09-221IA090-000968-B013-288http://ivf.com:80/fert.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210403 text/html 29315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:05:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 29143Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 19:45:39 GMT A Patient's Guide to Overcoming Infertility A Couple's Guide To...... Overcoming Infertility Infertility Overview IVF, GIFT, ICSI, Donor Egg/Sperm Ovulatory Disorders Reproductive Surgery Endometriosis Male Factor Pregnancy Loss Adoption Miracle Babies Online Internet Resources Chat Rooms Organizations What Can I buy? Search ARHC WWW (example of a Boolean search: 'good;bad' will find all lines containing both 'good' AND 'bad') This is the absolutely the best place to start your search for information about fertility problems. Before reading the other articles on this site, please read Miracle Babies Online by Dr. Perloe as this book is the most comprehensive, in-depth exploration on finding solutions to your fertility problems. This book was first published in 1984 and is currently being updated. It is not available for sale. Infertility Overview & General Information Multimedia Image Gallery Videos, photos, and multimedia presentations help you to better understand infertility and its treatment. Steps to Pregnancy Learn the steps that must occur for you to conceive naturally. Basic Infertility Workup Finding a solution to your fertility problem is analgous to solving a crime. Yet it is often far more complex. Not only must I gather evidence and identify a suspect, I must also work closely with you to achieve a satisfactory resolution to your problem. This article provides an overview of those first steps in evaluating your fertility problem. Infertility Glossary If you don't understand a word, or just want to increase your vocabulary visit this comprehensive glossary. If you do not find the word you are looking for, please let me know so that I can add it. Uterine Receptivity Integrins are adhesion molecules that play a role in the attachment of the pre-embryo to the uterine lining. Read how abnormalities may interfere with your fertility. Infertility, Stress, Emotional Effects & PMS Part of the problem with this idea of "coping" with infertility is that we all have the notion that weshould be able to do it gracefully, with a minimum of tears and hysterics. Learn how you can more effectively deal with couple issues and family issues and gain new coping skills. Chemotherapy, Radiation Therapy and Infertility The ovaries contain a fixed number of eggs that's set at birth. The testicle is constantly replenishing its stock of sperm. Both gonads and there germ cells (sperm and eggs) are very susceptible to damage from chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Infertility and Family Building Each individual and each couple bring differents needs and expectations to the process of family building. This article explores how infertility can effect your relationship and will give you ideas on what you can do about it. Recommended Infertility Books You just can't seem to ever find enough to read about infertility. Inciid has compiled a list for you. Infertility FAQ Resolve answers Frequently Asked Questions Postcoital Testing This article explores the reliability and predictability of the postcoital test. Insemination vs Intercourse While making love may be more fun than making babies, this article addresses why intrauterine insemination might improve your chances for conception. Pregnancy Testing This article will help you interpret the significance of pregnancy test (hCG) values. Pollution, Escargot and Infertility Just read this one and grin. Ovulation and Hormonal Disorders Hormone Test Results This article lists the normal ranges for many laboratory tests used to evaluate your fertility potential. You must, however, understand that each laboratory may have different ranges for normals in their particular hormone assay. So, it is important to review your laboratory results with your own physician to better understand the significance of a given test result. Are Your Cycles Normal? What tests can be used to tell us if you are ovulating normally? What hormonal factors interfere with ovulation? How can you tell if your ovaries are just to old? Miracle Babies on Ovulation Be sure to read chapters 11-14 to learn about the normal menstrual cycle, what goes wrong, how we can diagnose your problem, and various treatment options. Amenorrhea and Athletes The Atlanta Olympics was an experience of a lifetime, but for many young, professional as well as amateur athletes, training leads to menstrual abnormalities. This article by Dr. Perloe explores theories as to why this happens and how these menstrual disturbances can lead to more serious problems. PCO FAQ This PCO Overview and FAQ includes a bibliography of the latest PCO medical information. Insulin and PCO This recent editorial from the New England Journal of Medicine provides hope for those with PCO that a solution may be near Urine LH Ovulation Predictor Kits Step by step instructions and a comparison of different urinary LH ovaulation predictor kits. Male Factor Infertility Reproductive Surgery and Tubal Infertility Hysterosalpingogram The hysterosalpingogram enables us to evaluate the uterine cavity and determine whether your tubes are blocked. But, its not really that simple. Sterilization Reversal Learn about your options to conceive if you have had a fallopian tube sterilization procedure and now wish to get pregnant. Laparoscopy Your MD has recommended a laparoscopy to evaluate your fallopian tubes and your fertility potential. Learn more about this procedure by reading here. Tubal Factor Infertility This chapter from Miracle Babies Online is an indepth discussion of those factors contributing to tubal infertility. Surgery and alternative therapies are explored. Microlaparoscopy This technique using the latest technological advances and miniature surgical instruments can allow us to evaluate the cause of pain and infertility with a simple procedure using local anesthesia and intravenous sedation. While this procedure is not for everyone, it may simplify your fertility evaluation. Tubal Microsurgery Dr. Don Galen discussed how advances in tubal microsurgery can help you conceive. Fibroids While most women with uterine leiomyoma (fibroids) have no symptoms, abnormal bleeding and fertility may result. Ectopic Pregnancy Learn about the risk factors that predispose to ectopic pregnancy. When the HSG is Normal This article will help you determine the appropriate course of action if the HSG is normal. Fallopian Tube Recanalization The fallopian tube may be blocked at its attachment to the uterus in up to 30% of those with abnormal tubal findings on HSG. If this is the case, tubal recanalization may relieve the obstruction and restore fertility. Advanced Reproductive Technologies Miscarriage and Recurrent Pregnancy Loss For Those Who've Miscarried A primary guide for parents who have recently experienced the death of a child through miscarriage, stillbirth or other perinatal loss; The Truth Is; A Mother's Prayer/ Affirmation After Miscarriage Immunotherapy for Recurrent Miscarriage An overview of various types of immunotherapy that may be indicated for treating recurrent pregnancy loss. Reproductive Immunology Overview A primary guide for patients by Dr. Alan Beer that describes the indications for immune testing and the type of tests he recommends. Natural Killer Cell's Dr. Beer explains how abnormalities in Natural Killer Cell activation results in pregnancy loss and how test results are interpreted. Reproductive Immunophenotype Dr. Beer offers information on interpreting the resuts of the reproductive immunophenotype. Adoption Adoption FAQ Find answers to your adoption questions here. This site includes FAQ with newsgroups, mailing lists, WWW sites, Gopher info and FTP sites Independent Adoption Center The Independent Adoption Cneter is the largest non-profit, nationwide, adoption agency in the USA The Open Door Adoption Agency You can visit this agency online. The American Surrogacy Center TASC provides a comprehensive source of information that includes traditional as well as gestational surrogacy. Indepth medical and legal information can be found. You can even advertise for a surrogate in their classified section. Center for Surrogate Parenting The Center for Surrogate Parenting is a large agency that matches birth mothers and recipient families. Internet Resources ARHC Chatroom Our ARHC Infertility Chatroom is now available. Join Dr. Perloeand others live, Monday, Jan 6 from 8-9 pm EST. misc.health.infertility alt.health.infertility alt.support.pco alt.adoption.agency soc.support.pregnancy.loss Newsgroups that provide information and support for those with infertility. Beware that those offering medical advice may not medically trained. PCO Mailing List Subscribe to the PCO Mailing list by clicking here and following these instructions: In the body of the message, type only the word subscribe in all lower-case letters. The I-List Learn how you can subscribe to the I-List Infertility Internet Mailing List Triplet Mailing List Having triplets is not easy. These folks can give you both advice and support. Fortility Mailing List A special mailing list for those over 40 who are facing fertlity problems.Subscribe to the Fortility Mailing list by clicking here and following these instructions: In the body of the message, type only the word subscribe in all lower-case letters. Pregnancy After Infertility Mailing List This mailing list deals with pregnancy after infertility. Subscribe to the PanFert list by clicking here and following these instructions: In the body of the message, type: subscribe panfert Subsequent Pregnancy After Loss Support Mailing List Issues related to pregnancy after a prior loss are discussed in the SPALS list. Subscribe to the SPALS Mailing list by clicking here and sending an e-mail request. Support Groups and Other Medical Organizations INCIID These organization focuses on making infertility information and support available online. Infertility Helper A Canadian Infertility support group. Fertilitext An infertility information service owned by a pharmaceutical distributor. They also have a commercial service physician referral service. Stuff to Buy Tapestry These people have a large catalogue of infertility related books. Infertility Newletters A list of infertility newsletters maintained by The Fertility Helper. This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. infertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, inseminationpolycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, inseminationpolycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, inseminationpolycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressWT01-B09-222IA090-000968-B013-319http://ivf.com:80/ovind.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210421 text/html 3809HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:06:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3638Last-modified: Sat, 12 Oct 1996 21:31:28 GMT Ovulation Induction Ovulation Induction Start by reading Miracle Babies: Chapter 11-14 Are your cycles normal? Amenorrhea and Athletes For those with prolactin producing tumors Pituitary Tumor Center or Pituitary Tumor Network Polycystic Ovaries Bibliography & FAQ PCO Information PCO Mailing List.To subscribe, send e-mail to: pco-request@lists.best.com In the body of the message, type only the word subscribe in all lower-case letters. Read the alt.support.pco newsgroup Improving your odds with clomiphene citrate (Serophene, Clomid). Hold on now! Not this much improvement. Click here A typical Pergonal / Humegon / Metrodin cycle Injectable Menotropins for Fertility Disorders Evaluating Ovarian Reserve with Day 3 FSH and the clomiphene challenge test An alternative to injections, GnRH Pump Lutrepulse. Almost FREE Pergonal Ovulation Induction and IUI improves pregnancy rates. CONTROLLED OVARIAN HYPERSTIMULATION ... Intrauterine Insemination Versus Timed Intercourse Does insemination improve pregnancy rates with Pergonal? Diagnosing luteal phase defect with endometrial biopsy Progesterone Vaginal Suppositories Learn more about the association between Ovulation Induction Medication and Ovarian Cancer This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@mindspring.comWT01-B09-223IA090-000968-B013-333http://ivf.com:80/surgery.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210430 text/html 4727HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:06:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4556Last-modified: Sat, 16 Nov 1996 23:53:56 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Infertility and Gynecologic Surgery A Woman's Guide To...... Infertility & Gynecologic Surgery Tubal Sterilization Reversal: A Patient Guide What's a Laparoscopy? Miracle Babies Chapter 16. Tubal Factor Infertility Microlaparoscopy A diagnostic surgical breakthrough. Endometrial Ablation offers a hysterectomy alternative Laparoscopic Hysterectomy speeds post-op recovery Controlling postoperative pain Hysterectomy Fibroids Nonsurgical Management of Leiomyomas, Abnormal Uterine Bleeding,and Chronic Pelvic Pain Advances in Microsurgery for Female Infertility Laparoscopic Burch Procedure Microsurgical Tubal Repair Ectopic Pregnancy Return to Dr. Perloe's Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe, Atlanta, Georgia, Atlanta, GeorgiaWT01-B09-224IA090-000968-B013-365http://ivf.com:80/art.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210523 text/html 3430HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:06:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3259Last-modified: Mon, 09 Sep 1996 14:42:01 GMT Advanced Reproductive Technology Advanced Reproductive Technology IVFPhoto Gallery You can find answers to frequentlyasked questions in the IVF FAQ This is what we tell our patientsabout IVF. IVF Instructions One woman shares her IVFexperience What you have to sign: IVFPermits Who asked whether cryopreservedembryos were called totcicles? GIFT So you want to be an eggdonor. Legalstuff for the donor Legalstuff for the recipient And although they don't getto meet and shake hands, the Agreementbetween Donor and Recipient Couple A very technical discussionof ICSI The American Surrogacy Center, Inc. TASC Classifieds: On-Line Advertising for Surrogacy HIV and ICSI FAQ Micromanipulationfor Male Infertility ARTStatistics from our program Thispage, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark Perloe M.D., P.C.Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@mindspring.com WT01-B09-225IA090-000968-B013-411http://ivf.com:80/male.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210552 text/html 3764HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:07:32 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3593Last-modified: Tue, 18 Jun 1996 17:04:19 GMT Male Factor Infertility Male Factor Infertility For Husbands Only! Miracle Babies Chapter 6. The Formula for Male Fertility Miracle Babies Chapter 7. Evaluating Male Fertility Miracle Babies Chapter 8. Maximizing Male Fertility Potential Is donor insemination right for you? Artificial insemination with husband's sperm British Andrology Society's Lab Manual for Semen Analysis Male Fertility Overview (~92+k) Impotence Male Infertility Role of Transrectal Ultrasound (TRUS) in Diagnosis and Management Treatment of Varicocele Nutrition and Male Infertility Xytex Sperm Bank Male Infertility Videotape "Historically, infertility has been assumed to be primarily a woman's concem... 50 percent of cases involve male-related problems... the video also stresses the need for self education and awareness by the healthcare consumer... all the material is easily understood." Library Journal, December 93. "There is a definite need for this well- orchestrated video tape... Couples with clear-cut male factor infertility should definitely consider viewing this videotape... The personal testimonies are quite effective and provide models with which patients can readily identify... The information is accurate and up-to-date." Fertility New, ASRM, December 93. This video tape by Paul M. Levine is an excellent introduction to basic male fertility problems. An indepth review of causes, diagnostic tests and treatment is covered. If your just getting started, this tape provides concise up to date information for couples presently unsuccessful in achieving a pregnancy or bringing that pregnancy to term. If you would like to order this tape please call 404-265-3662 for price and shipping information. This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@mindspring.comWT01-B09-226IA090-000968-B013-429http://ivf.com:80/endohtml.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210601 text/html 4981HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:07:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4810Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 12:58:23 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Endometriosis Homepage A Woman's Guide To...... Overcoming Endometriosis Miracle Babies Chapter 17 Endometriosis: The Silent Invader Endometriosis Update by Dr. Perloe Endometriosis Sourcebook You can order this helpful book by Mary Lou Ballweg, co-founder of the Endometriosis Association Endometriosis and the Immune System Endometriosis:The Missed Diseaseby Toni Mastro Endometriosis FAQ Endometriosis 2000 Report Endometriosis: symptoms, theories. diagnosis, treatment. Learn about the Endometriosis Association Endometriosis case study The Medical Reporter: Endometriosis Endometriosis Image Gallery Oxgene Study explores the genetic basis of endometriosis The Social Support Experiences of Women with Endometriosis Endometrioisis and Bowel Problems Learn about Irritable Bowel Syndrome Subscribe to the Endometriosis mailing list Other Personal Endometriosis WWW's Sarah's Endometrioisis Homepage Amanda's Endometroisis Homepage Xine's Endometrioisis Homepage Return to Dr. Perloe's Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. infertility, endometriosis, women, GNRH, women's health, healthcare, contraception, Lupron ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, ovary,uterus,uterine,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressWT01-B09-227IA090-000968-B014-25http://ivf.com:80/womhtml.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210633 text/html 11547HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:08:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 11375Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 20:05:50 GMT Women's Health Women's Health Mark Perloe M.D. Breast Disease Gynecologic Cancer Contraception Women's Health Endometriosis Pregnancy and Delivery Menopause Infertility Stress, PMS, Coping & Grieving Medical WWW's Health News Gynecologic Surgery Women's Resources on the Net Search ARHC WWW (example of a Boolean search: 'good;bad' will find all lines containing both 'good' AND 'bad') Breast Disease Breast cancer and Environmental Factors Breast Cancer Information Clearinghouse Breast Cancer Awareness Crusade Gynecologic Cancer Learn how Vulvar Self Exam can help save your life. Breast and Ovarian Cancer Awareness NIH Consensus Statement on Ovarian Cancer Women's Resources on the Net Women's Health Action and Mobilization Pleiades Directory of Women's Organizations and Resources General Women's Health Topics FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition Women's Health section Learn more about Vulvar Pain or Here Amenorrhea and Women's Athletics Gynecologic Self-care: description of menstrual cycle, examinations, and glossary Guttenberg Primo'sOB/GYN WWW The Medical Reporter Pap Smear Article Women's Health Newsletter Women's Health Weekly Online Women's Health Hotline Serotonin, Eating Disorders, and How to Lose Weight NARAL National Abortion Rights and Reproductive Rights Action League Focus on Obesity Women's Healthcare International Cancer Alliance Homepage Women's Healthcare in Russia Medical Sites and Health News The Medical Reporter Are you healthy? Take this short quiz. Online Drug Info Physicians Who Care UC Berkeley Wellness Letter General Health Info American Medical Association Medscape News Doctor's Guide to the Internet National Institutes of Health Centers for Disease Control andPrevention CDC National AIDSClearinghouse U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services Pregnancy and Delivery Menopause Infertility Stress, PMS, Coping & Grieving Endometriosis Gynecologic Surgery Contraception Return to ARHC Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. mperloe@ivf.cominfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, insemination,polycystic ovarian disease, menopause, osteoporosis, pap smear, breast, menopause, osteoporosis, pap smear, breast, menopause, osteoporosis, pap smear, breast, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, insemination,polycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressinfertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, endometriosis, ovulation, ivf, in vitro fertilization, stress,ICSI, ART, polycystic ovary, insemination,polycystic ovarian disease, micromanipulation,oocyte,egg,sperm,varicocele,testicle,ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,clomid,clomiphene,pergonal,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stressWT01-B09-228IA090-000968-B014-47http://ivf.com:80/gallery.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210641 text/html 1780HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:08:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1609Last-modified: Sun, 12 Feb 1995 17:27:42 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Photo Gallery Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Photo Gallery Click on the gallery of interest. When your in a specific gallery, clicking on any photo will download a larger JPEG file. Some Web browsers may immediately display the image while others may download it for later viewing. This area is continually growing so check back. Images will be linked to the appropriate information in Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings an online book for couples with fertility problems by Dr. Perloe and Linda Gail Christie or to other resource information. Normal Pelvic anatomy and function Pelvic pain and endometriosis Advanced Reproductive Technology Abnormalities of the uterus, tubes and ovaries ARHC Homepage. Email directly to mperloe@mindspring.com Please include your location.or, Phone us at +1 404-265-3662, or FAX your request to +1 404-265-4276. This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1995 by Mark Perloe,M.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. WT01-B09-229IA090-000968-B014-74http://ivf.com:80/meno.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210651 text/html 5976HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:08:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5805Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 13:02:31 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Menopause WWW Menopause Mark Perloe M.D. Postmenopausal Estrogen Replacement Therapy Menopause Matters Hormones Not Linked to Breast Cancer NIH Menopause Info Read the Menopause Newsgroup Subscribe to the Menopause Mailing List Monitoring Bone Loss Urinary Incontinence Osteoporosis Osteoporosis & Calcium Learn about hormone replacement options from Bajamar Women's HealthCarePharmacy Menopause Times A Friend Indeed Newletter Medscape Menopause News This information is not intended as a substitute for medical adviceof physicians. The reader should regularly consult a physician in mattersrelating to his or her health and particularly with respect to any symptomsthat may require diagnosis or medical attention. Return to Dr. Perloe's Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. menopause, osteoporosis, women, women's health, healthcare, ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stress, Atlanta, Georgia,menopause, osteoporosis, women, women's health, healthcare, ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stress, Atlanta, Georgia,menopause, osteoporosis, women, women's health, healthcare, ovary,uterus,uterine,LH,FSH,HCG,progesterone,surgery,laparoscopy,endoscopy,reproductive endocrinology,endocrinology,healthcare,stress, Atlanta, GeorgiaWT01-B09-230IA090-000968-B014-109http://ivf.com:80/multi.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210710 text/html 6593HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:08:44 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6422Last-modified: Sat, 09 Nov 1996 20:26:11 GMT ARHC Multimedia Multimedia Caution, video files are quite large. Your download times may be excessive if you do not have ISDN or T1 access. Microlaparoscopy Microlaparoscopy uses 2-3 mm instruments to perform surgery through needle punctures rather than incisions. In this video you will see adhesions cut and lysis of adhesions between the rectum and the uterus. 10.2 meg quicktime video Ovarian Drilling For women with PCOS, ovarian drilling can restore normal ovulation for periods up to six months. 30-40% will conceive following ovarian drilling although some women may form adhesions following surgery. 1.4 meg quicktime video Resection of Endometriosis As endometriosis can grow below the surface of the peritoneum, I believe that excision of endometriosis leads to better results than laser vaporization. 5.6 meg quicktime video Lysis of Adhesions The use of bipolar electrosurgery is a safe and cost effective alternative to laser surgery that offers similar results. Adhesions must be cut at both ends and removed and not just cut in the middle to achieve the best results 1.0 meg avi video Norplant Removal This video demonstrates Norplant Removal with the U-technique. 2.5 meg avi video Photo Gallery Click on the gallery of interest. When your in a specific gallery, clicking on any photo will download a larger JPEG file. Some Web browsers may immediately display the image while others may download it for later viewing. This area is continually growing so check back. Images will be linked to the appropriate information in Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings an online book for couples with fertility problems by Dr. Perloe and Linda Gail Christie or to other resource information. Normal Pelvic anatomy and function Pelvic pain and endometriosis Advanced Reproductive Technology Abnormalities of the uterus, tubes and ovaries Return to the ARHC Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, PerloeWT01-B09-231IA090-000968-B014-144http://ivf.com:80/contrac.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210721 text/html 5209HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:09:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5038Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 13:18:47 GMT Contraception / Sexually Transmitted Diseases A Woman's Guide To...... Contraception Sexually Transmitted Diseases Contraception The "U" Technique makes Norplant Removal a simple procedure. Planned Parenthood - national site Planned Parenthood of Houston and Southeast Texas Instructions for Pill Users Barnard College Student Guide STD's The Morning After Pill Emergency Contraception Contraceptive Choices Contraception Manual University of Montana Contraception Manual Barnard College Student Guide Contraception Visit the home of the Durex Condom Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD's) STD and the Blue Devil Is there really such a thing as Safe Sex? International Resources U.S. Agency forInternational Development World Health Organization World Bank United NationsDevelopment Programme UNICEF Asian Development Bank Informationon the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD '94)in Cairo Additional ICPD'94 Information from the International Institute for SustainableDevelopment Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, September 1995) Return to Dr. Perloe's Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. WT01-B09-232IA090-000968-B014-169http://ivf.com:80/strshtml.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210730 text/html 3845HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:09:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3674Last-modified: Sat, 16 Nov 1996 23:53:55 GMT Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Stress, Coping Strategies, Loss and PMS WWW A Guide To...... Stress, Coping Strategies, Grieving and PMS Are you STRESSED?! The Effects of Infertility on the couple relationship Coping Strategies On Listenting Miscarriage: What should I say? Hygeia A helpful site for those experiencing grief or loss Psyche Web Mental Health Page Depression Newgroup PMS Humor PMS Diary(1.1meg) This information is not intended as a substitute for medical adviceof physicians. The reader should regularly consult a physician in mattersrelating to his or her health and particularly with respect to any symptomsthat may require diagnosis or medical attention. Return to Dr. Perloe's Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. ,infertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, ivf, in vitro fertilization, loss, miscarriage, stillbirth, depression, anxiety, PMS, stressAtlanta, Georgia,infertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, ivf, in vitro fertilization, loss, miscarriage, stillbirth, depression, anxiety, PMS, stressAtlanta, Georgia,infertility, endometriosis, women, women's health, healthcare, ivf, in vitro fertilization, loss, miscarriage, stillbirth, depression, anxiety, PMS, stressAtlanta, GeorgiaWT01-B09-233IA090-000968-B014-200http://ivf.com:80/preg.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210753 text/html 8413HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:09:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8242Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 19:59:07 GMT Pregnancy and Childbirth A Couple's Guide To...... Pregnancy and Childbirth Read the Pregnancy Newsgroup Water Birth can reduce the pain and stress of birth for bothmotherand baby. VisitNOAH Learn about prenatal care, nutrition and exercise during pregnancyas well a tests such as AFP, ultrasound and amniocentesis. Robin Elise Weiss provides birth stories,FAQ's, breastfeeding information and links to other pregnancy related pages. Birth-Plan Family Web Page Triplets Mailing List Sabrina's PregnancyPage Twins Twin families information, advice and moral support to help raisehealthy, happy children. Birth Index NursingAdvocacy Page Learn about the health benefits of nursing. Read the Breastfeeding Newsgroup BabyWeb The Internet Parenting Resource is "theplace to get everything you need to know for your baby." Pregnancy Primer Pregnancyand Reproductive Health Education Information Pregnancy Calendar An interactive resource to follow the courseof pregnancy Cesarean Section This information is not intended as a substitute for medical adviceof physicians. The reader should regularly consult a physician in mattersrelating to his or her health and particularly with respect to any symptomsthat may require diagnosis or medical attention. Return to Dr. Perloe's Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. pregnancy, childbirth, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, breast feeding, lactation, episiotomy, cesarean, post partum, doula, midwife, birth, parturition, endometriosis,healthcare,stress,pregnancy, childbirth, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, breast feeding, lactation, episiotomy, cesarean, post partum, doula, midwife, birth, parturition, endometriosis,healthcare,stress,pregnancy, childbirth, women, women's health, healthcare, contraception, breast feeding, lactation, episiotomy, cesarean, post partum, doula, midwife, birth, parturition, endometriosis,healthcare,stressWT01-B09-234IA090-000968-B014-257http://ivf.com:80/search.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210816 text/html 1281HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:09:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1110Last-modified: Sun, 12 Jan 1997 12:50:41 GMTYou can make a formless search if your browser doesn't supports forms. What would you like to search for? (example of a Boolean search: 'good;bad' will find all lines containing both 'good' AND 'bad') Case insensitiveAllow partial match to a word Number of misspellings allowed:Best match012345678 Maximum number of files returned: Maximum number of matches per file returned: Web Help webhelp@mindspring.com WT01-B09-235IA090-000968-B014-279http://ivf.com:80/mpmd.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210825 text/html 16838HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:10:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16666Last-modified: Thu, 19 Dec 1996 01:50:03 GMT About Dr. Perloe and Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre A Couple's Guide To...... Innovative Solutions Patient Centered Care Confidentiality Office Hours Open Communication Internet Access Financial Matters Your Appointment Medical Record Review Dr. Perloe Our Location Mission Statement Innovative Solutions for Reproductive Problems Nationally recognized expertise in reproductive healthcare and treatment for endometriosis Excellent results from medical science's most advanced fertility technologies Personalized, in-depth patient care from compassionate, concerned medical staff Sate-of-the-Art diagnosis and aggressive treatment plans for optimal outcomes Comprehensive analysis to diagnose and prevent repeated pregnancy loss Successful history reversing tubal sterilization Patient Centered Care We understand that no two medical problems or patients are alike, and treatments must be individualized to every patient's needs. That's why the medical staff of the ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTRE is committed to finding medical solutions for each person who seeks care from us. We never attempt to fit an individual into a generic treatment mold. To provide the personalized quality care for which we've become nationally recognized, we spend hours with ourpatients and their partners to First, identify and diagnose the problem; Second, develop a partnership with each patient and her support team which may include her husband, another relative or friend and her referring physician; Third, outline medical or surgical options; Fourth, initiate a cost-effective treatment plan that combines the highest quality of care with the best possible outcome. Confidentiality We work hard to protect our patients' privacy. We do not release medical records or any portion of them without written authorization from the patient. Office Hours Our office is open Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. We try to be flexible for situations when it maybe necessary to see patients outside of regular office hours. Saturday and Sunday morning appointments are available for ultrasound monitoring, insemination, egg retrievals and pre-embryo transfers. Open Communication The best patient is a well-informed one. We value an open and ethical relationship with each patient who, we believe, is entitled to complete knowledge about her reproductive health. In an environment of trust and mutual respect, our patients and their partners feel free to ask questions at any time. We promise to answer all the questions asked -- and even those that aren't. It's the only way to build partnerships with every patient, her spouse and her referring physician. As a team, we allwork together to achieve the best possible outcome. Internet Access All visitors are welcome at our comprehensive Internet website, http://www.ivf.com where information is readily available on the medical practice and reproductive health issues. The website offers menus that include a revised copy of Dr. Perloe's book, Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems, and layers of detailed reports about reproductive medicine from many sources. Internet visitors can contact Dr. Perloe, sign or peruse the guestbook, ask a question, tour the ARHC multimedia gallery or join a discussion in the soon to be launched chatrooms. Financial Matters Most health insurers do not cover infertility. Conversely, many insurers will provide coverage for some gynecological diagnoses. However, we do not accept assignment for office visit charges unless we have a contract with your insurer or your health insurer's written authorization or referral for your appointment. Payment for medical, lab and diagnostic services provided in the office is due at the time of service. If we have a managed care contract with your insurer, you are expected to pay for the deductible and/or co-pay at the time of service. To keep patient accounts current, we accept Mastercard, Visa and Discover cards or we will verify your personal check. Depending on your diagnosis, you may be able to obtain some reimbursement for your care. Your receipt for payment will contain the standard diagnosis, medical and surgical treatment codes used by the majority of health insurers. Your Appointment Step 1: Call (404) 265-3662. Our staff conducts a preliminary telephone interview to assure that we are adequately prepared for the appointment. If necessary for insurance coverage, a referral authorization must be signed and in our office before an appointment can be scheduled. We attempt to see patients with urgent medical or surgical conditions as quickly as possible. Step 2: Once the appointment is scheduled, our staff sends the patient a Welcome Packet with detailed information about ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTRE. The packet also includes authorizations for release of medical information, and a new patient questionnaire for both partners to complete and bring the initial appointment. Step 3: Before the appointment, the Patient must take the authorization for release of medical information to her prior physician(s) and hospital(s) and obtain copies of relevant medical records. In addition, patients should obtain copies of surgical notes and videotapes, actual (not copies, not reports) x-ray films, copies of laboratory tests, her health insurance manual. Infertility evaluations require a spouse to sign a separate authorization for release of medical information to obtain copies of his records and semen analysis reports. All medical information should be delivered to ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTER for Dr. Perloe to review before your first appointment. For a fertility assessment, both partners should be present at the first appointment which usually takes two hours. This visit usually costs about $200 plus additional fees for lab or other diagnostic test which can run the total as high as $500. If you are not prepared for this expense at the time of your visit, you should let us know immediately so that additional testing can be postponed. Medical Record Review and Analysis Many patients oustide Atlanta choose to visit for a thorough evaluation and treatment of their reproductive problem. Others seek more limited information. Medical record reviews can provide Reassurance that you seem to be on the right track Questions to ask your own physician Access to the latest material about a particular medical concern. Please understand that without an examination, Dr. perloe can not make a diagnosis or order specific tests, recommend treatments or act as your physician. The information you will receive is not intended as a substitute for the medical advice of your own physician. You should should regularly consult a physician in matters relating to your health and particularly with respect to any symptoms that may require diagnosis or medical attention. To arrange a medical record review call our office (404) 265-3662 and ask them to fax or mail a new patient evaluation form and payment information form. This is then completed and mailed back to us together with ALL your medical records, films, videotapes etc. The value of this record review consult and interview will be limited if all available info is not provided. If you wish to arrange a telephone consult with Dr. Perloe, please provide several times and a phone number where you can receive a collect call. The fee for a medical record analysis and summary report is $89 and $129 for medical record analysis and telephone interview. If you need your films or videos returned, please make sure you enclose a completed fedex or UPS billing form. Dr. Mark Perloe Noted for the individualized and in-depth attention he gives each patient, Dr. Mark Perloe has helped hundreds of couples struggling with infertility realize their dream of having children. As director of reproductive endocrinology, infertility and in vitro fertilization at Georgia Baptist Medical Center, Dr.Perloe has above average success rates in achieving pregnancies through advanced reproductive technologies as well as expertise in treating recurrent pregnancy loss, endometriosis, menstrual disorders, fibroids, and endocrine and other reproductive health problems. He also has extensive experience using the latest microsurgical techniques for reversing tubal sterilization. A clinical assistant professor in obstetrics and gynecology at the Medical College of Georgia, Dr. Perloe completed his fellowship in reproductive endocrinology and infertility at the University of Minnesota. He holds an MD degree from the Pennsylvania State University, Hershey Medical Center and served his residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Wisconsin Dr. Perloe is board certified. He has conducted and published research in medical journals including OBGYN and at national conferences. In 1986, he co-authored Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems, a revised copy of which is on his website, http://www.ivf.com. He has served as consultant and a task force member to the Women's Initiative of the American International HealthAssociation and was active in establishing the first approved endoscopy training center in the former Soviet Union at the Russian National Institute of Women's Health. Dr. Perloe is a member of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists, International Society of Gynecologic Endoscopy, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and several state and local medical associations. He also serves on the advisory board for the Atlanta chapter of Resolve and the national advisory board of INCIID. He is married, has two children and enjoys playing with computers, sailing and traveling. Jennifer Clair, RNP Jennifer Clair, RNP, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a masters Degree in ambulatory womens health in 1988 from Boston College. She has worked as a reproductive endocrinology nurse practitioner and nurse coordinator since 1988. She has played a major role in the start-up of two IVF centers. Nationally certified in reproductive endocrinology as well as OB/GYN, she is a member of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, the Association of Womens health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses, and the National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Reproductive Health. She serves on the advisory board for the Atlanta chapter of Resolve. In addition to our physicians and nurse practitioner, our staff consists of patient representatives, nursing assistants, lab technicians, resident physicians and business office staff. Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Mission Statement ARHC is dedicated to dependably: Provide high quality women's healthcare that focuses on the patient as partner. Address the specialized reproductive healthcare needs of women at each stage of life. Provide advanced, innovative, high value, infertility care in a nurturing environment whichfocuses on family-building, not technology. Recognize the importance of the healthcare team functioning as a coordinatedunit that acknowledges the skills and values the contriubtions of each teammember and provides an emotionally supportive work environment. To accomplish this mission we will engage in activities designed to: Increase awareness in the medical community of the unique services and medicalexpertise that ARHC provides. Become an innovator in the marketplace by providing high value to patients and managed care organizations. Invest in continuing medical education to enhance the capabilities of all personnel. Affirm patients access to high quality infertility services by serving as an advocate to educate payors, policy-makers and the public of its importance. Participate and support graduate medical education, medical outreach, and clinical research to enhance physician's knowledge and skills for the betterment of women's healthcare. Return to ARHC HomepageWT01-B09-236IA090-000968-B015-21http://ivf.com:80/phone.html 206.185.60.251 19970123210937 text/html 16838HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:11:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16666Last-modified: Thu, 19 Dec 1996 01:50:28 GMT About Dr. Perloe and Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre A Couple's Guide To...... Innovative Solutions Patient Centered Care Confidentiality Office Hours Open Communication Internet Access Financial Matters Your Appointment Medical Record Review Dr. Perloe Our Location Mission Statement Innovative Solutions for Reproductive Problems Nationally recognized expertise in reproductive healthcare and treatment for endometriosis Excellent results from medical science's most advanced fertility technologies Personalized, in-depth patient care from compassionate, concerned medical staff Sate-of-the-Art diagnosis and aggressive treatment plans for optimal outcomes Comprehensive analysis to diagnose and prevent repeated pregnancy loss Successful history reversing tubal sterilization Patient Centered Care We understand that no two medical problems or patients are alike, and treatments must be individualized to every patient's needs. That's why the medical staff of the ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTRE is committed to finding medical solutions for each person who seeks care from us. We never attempt to fit an individual into a generic treatment mold. To provide the personalized quality care for which we've become nationally recognized, we spend hours with ourpatients and their partners to First, identify and diagnose the problem; Second, develop a partnership with each patient and her support team which may include her husband, another relative or friend and her referring physician; Third, outline medical or surgical options; Fourth, initiate a cost-effective treatment plan that combines the highest quality of care with the best possible outcome. Confidentiality We work hard to protect our patients' privacy. We do not release medical records or any portion of them without written authorization from the patient. Office Hours Our office is open Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. We try to be flexible for situations when it maybe necessary to see patients outside of regular office hours. Saturday and Sunday morning appointments are available for ultrasound monitoring, insemination, egg retrievals and pre-embryo transfers. Open Communication The best patient is a well-informed one. We value an open and ethical relationship with each patient who, we believe, is entitled to complete knowledge about her reproductive health. In an environment of trust and mutual respect, our patients and their partners feel free to ask questions at any time. We promise to answer all the questions asked -- and even those that aren't. It's the only way to build partnerships with every patient, her spouse and her referring physician. As a team, we allwork together to achieve the best possible outcome. Internet Access All visitors are welcome at our comprehensive Internet website, http://www.ivf.com where information is readily available on the medical practice and reproductive health issues. The website offers menus that include a revised copy of Dr. Perloe's book, Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems, and layers of detailed reports about reproductive medicine from many sources. Internet visitors can contact Dr. Perloe, sign or peruse the guestbook, ask a question, tour the ARHC multimedia gallery or join a discussion in the soon to be launched chatrooms. Financial Matters Most health insurers do not cover infertility. Conversely, many insurers will provide coverage for some gynecological diagnoses. However, we do not accept assignment for office visit charges unless we have a contract with your insurer or your health insurer's written authorization or referral for your appointment. Payment for medical, lab and diagnostic services provided in the office is due at the time of service. If we have a managed care contract with your insurer, you are expected to pay for the deductible and/or co-pay at the time of service. To keep patient accounts current, we accept Mastercard, Visa and Discover cards or we will verify your personal check. Depending on your diagnosis, you may be able to obtain some reimbursement for your care. Your receipt for payment will contain the standard diagnosis, medical and surgical treatment codes used by the majority of health insurers. Your Appointment Step 1: Call (404) 265-3662. Our staff conducts a preliminary telephone interview to assure that we are adequately prepared for the appointment. If necessary for insurance coverage, a referral authorization must be signed and in our office before an appointment can be scheduled. We attempt to see patients with urgent medical or surgical conditions as quickly as possible. Step 2: Once the appointment is scheduled, our staff sends the patient a Welcome Packet with detailed information about ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTRE. The packet also includes authorizations for release of medical information, and a new patient questionnaire for both partners to complete and bring the initial appointment. Step 3: Before the appointment, the Patient must take the authorization for release of medical information to her prior physician(s) and hospital(s) and obtain copies of relevant medical records. In addition, patients should obtain copies of surgical notes and videotapes, actual (not copies, not reports) x-ray films, copies of laboratory tests, her health insurance manual. Infertility evaluations require a spouse to sign a separate authorization for release of medical information to obtain copies of his records and semen analysis reports. All medical information should be delivered to ATLANTA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CENTER for Dr. Perloe to review before your first appointment. For a fertility assessment, both partners should be present at the first appointment which usually takes two hours. This visit usually costs about $200 plus additional fees for lab or other diagnostic test which can run the total as high as $500. If you are not prepared for this expense at the time of your visit, you should let us know immediately so that additional testing can be postponed. Medical Record Review and Analysis Many patients oustide Atlanta choose to visit for a thorough evaluation and treatment of their reproductive problem. Others seek more limited information. Medical record reviews can provide Reassurance that you seem to be on the right track Questions to ask your own physician Access to the latest material about a particular medical concern. Please understand that without an examination, Dr. perloe can not make a diagnosis or order specific tests, recommend treatments or act as your physician. The information you will receive is not intended as a substitute for the medical advice of your own physician. You should should regularly consult a physician in matters relating to your health and particularly with respect to any symptoms that may require diagnosis or medical attention. To arrange a medical record review call our office (404) 265-3662 and ask them to fax or mail a new patient evaluation form and payment information form. This is then completed and mailed back to us together with ALL your medical records, films, videotapes etc. The value of this record review consult and interview will be limited if all available info is not provided. If you wish to arrange a telephone consult with Dr. Perloe, please provide several times and a phone number where you can receive a collect call. The fee for a medical record analysis and summary report is $89 and $129 for medical record analysis and telephone interview. If you need your films or videos returned, please make sure you enclose a completed fedex or UPS billing form. Dr. Mark Perloe Noted for the individualized and in-depth attention he gives each patient, Dr. Mark Perloe has helped hundreds of couples struggling with infertility realize their dream of having children. As director of reproductive endocrinology, infertility and in vitro fertilization at Georgia Baptist Medical Center, Dr.Perloe has above average success rates in achieving pregnancies through advanced reproductive technologies as well as expertise in treating recurrent pregnancy loss, endometriosis, menstrual disorders, fibroids, and endocrine and other reproductive health problems. He also has extensive experience using the latest microsurgical techniques for reversing tubal sterilization. A clinical assistant professor in obstetrics and gynecology at the Medical College of Georgia, Dr. Perloe completed his fellowship in reproductive endocrinology and infertility at the University of Minnesota. He holds an MD degree from the Pennsylvania State University, Hershey Medical Center and served his residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Wisconsin Dr. Perloe is board certified. He has conducted and published research in medical journals including OBGYN and at national conferences. In 1986, he co-authored Miracle Babies and Other Happy Endings for Couples with Fertility Problems, a revised copy of which is on his website, http://www.ivf.com. He has served as consultant and a task force member to the Women's Initiative of the American International HealthAssociation and was active in establishing the first approved endoscopy training center in the former Soviet Union at the Russian National Institute of Women's Health. Dr. Perloe is a member of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists, International Society of Gynecologic Endoscopy, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and several state and local medical associations. He also serves on the advisory board for the Atlanta chapter of Resolve and the national advisory board of INCIID. He is married, has two children and enjoys playing with computers, sailing and traveling. Jennifer Clair, RNP Jennifer Clair, RNP, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a masters Degree in ambulatory womens health in 1988 from Boston College. She has worked as a reproductive endocrinology nurse practitioner and nurse coordinator since 1988. She has played a major role in the start-up of two IVF centers. Nationally certified in reproductive endocrinology as well as OB/GYN, she is a member of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, the Association of Womens health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses, and the National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Reproductive Health. She serves on the advisory board for the Atlanta chapter of Resolve. In addition to our physicians and nurse practitioner, our staff consists of patient representatives, nursing assistants, lab technicians, resident physicians and business office staff. Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre Mission Statement ARHC is dedicated to dependably: Provide high quality women's healthcare that focuses on the patient as partner. Address the specialized reproductive healthcare needs of women at each stage of life. Provide advanced, innovative, high value, infertility care in a nurturing environment whichfocuses on family-building, not technology. Recognize the importance of the healthcare team functioning as a coordinatedunit that acknowledges the skills and values the contriubtions of each teammember and provides an emotionally supportive work environment. To accomplish this mission we will engage in activities designed to: Increase awareness in the medical community of the unique services and medicalexpertise that ARHC provides. Become an innovator in the marketplace by providing high value to patients and managed care organizations. Invest in continuing medical education to enhance the capabilities of all personnel. Affirm patients access to high quality infertility services by serving as an advocate to educate payors, policy-makers and the public of its importance. Participate and support graduate medical education, medical outreach, and clinical research to enhance physician's knowledge and skills for the betterment of women's healthcare. Return to ARHC HomepageWT01-B09-237IA090-000968-B015-62http://ivf.com:80/ask.html 206.185.60.251 19970123211012 text/html 10591HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:11:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10419Last-modified: Thu, 19 Dec 1996 03:32:00 GMT Ask a question? If only I could get more info... You can. You can get more info....from Dr. Mark Perloe and the Atlanta Reproductive Health Centre. Before submitting a question, you may wish to review the information provided on this WebSite. Frequently you can find the answer to your question in the material provided. This form will generate an automatic response when you click the submit button. This opportunity to submit a question should be for general questions only and requests for treatment recommendations. It is not intended to replace consultation with a physician. If you would like to arrange a visit to our clinic in Atlanta or a formal record review so that I can make treatment recommendations, please request more information below or call our office at 404-265-3662. The ARHC WWW has gone shareware. As this site has grown in popularity, it has become harder to respond to all questions. I spend a significant amount of time to review your background and your question and then attempt, respond appropriately. Please take a moment and consider what you have spent purchasing medical books and how much time, money and effort you might spend trying to get a simple question answered at your "offline" physician's office. By educating yourself and learning what questions to ask, you can enhance the value of your physician visit. Armed with the information contained in this WWW you can become a better healthcare consumer and save money. Shareware means visit this site, take advantage of its many resources, and if you find this site and the information you receive valuable, become an ARHC WWW Supporter by making a voluntary contribution. Please complete the information at the bottom of this page, enter your correct e-mail address and submit your question. To better respond to your request for information, I would like to know a little about you.(None of this goes anywhere, it's just my natural curiosity.) If you are not asking a question related to infertility, please skip those questions that do not apply. Are you Male or Female? Your approximate age: How long have you been trying to conceive? (Enter "0" if you are not trying.) How many times have you been pregnant? (include miscarriages, ectopics & terminations) How many times have you delivered a liveborn baby? How many pregnancies has your partner fathered? Please describe your previous pregnancies. Enter the year they occurred.(Year) How many weeks did you carry the pregnancy(Duration)? Did you deliver (DEL), have a cesarean (CS), miscarriage (SPAB) ectopic pregnancy (ECT) or terminate the pregnancy(TAB)? Enter the appropriate outcome. Did you have fertility problems(Infertility)? Enter Y/N. And, did your present partner father that pregnancy(Present) Enter Y/N. Year  Duration(wks)  (DEL CS SPAB ECT TAB)  Infertility  Present male  Where do you live? (City State Country) Where did you hear about this WWW Site? I would like to see your WWW Site include more information on: Reproductive Medicine Problems (To choose more than one item, hold down Control while selecting or deselecting individual items.) EndometriosisPelvic adhesionsPrevious ectopic pregnancyAbsent/blocked fallopian tube(s)Absent/irregular periodsAbnormal semen analysisRecurrent pregnancy lossPremature menopauseAbnormal postcoital testFibroid tumorsPMSBreast dischargeAbnormal FSH, TSH, Prolactin or progesterone levelsImmune abnormalities Fertility Treatments you have tried include (please check all that apply): Clomid, Serophene, clomiphene How many cycles? 0 1 to 3 4 to 6 7 to 12 More than 12 Pergonal, Metrodin or Humegon How many cycles? 0 1 to 2 3 to 4 5 to 6 More than 6 Intrauterine insemination. How many cycles? (Total all cycles, without ovulation induction, clomiphene and pergonal/metrodin cycles). 0 1 to 3 4 to 6 7 to 12 More than 12 IVF, GIFT, ZIFT. How many cycles? 0 1 to 2 3 to 4 5 to 6 More than 6 Donor sperm Donor Egg Laparoscopic surgery Type your question in the Email response box (150 words or less).  Confidentiality Many times the questions that are asked may provide valuable information for teaching others. Please let me know if I can share this information and whether you wish to remain anonymous. Distribute question and response. You may share this info anonymously. Respond E-Mail only. The information provided in return is not intended as a substitute for medical advice of physicians. The reader should regularly consult a physician in matters relating to your health and particularly with respect to any symptoms that may require diagnosis or medical attention. What is YOUR First & Last Name (This field is required.) Street Address Daytime phone number with area code (U.S. only) Email address (This field is required for a response. Please check for accuracy) Making a Voluntary Contribution to the ARHC WWW Please provide the following information: Please enter the amount of your contribution in US$: If you prefer, you can FAX your credit card information to (404) 265-4276, or call us at (404)-265-3662. Send a check to: ARHC WWW, 285 Boulevard, NE, Suite 320, Atlanta, GA, USA 30312 Bill me for using the credit card information below. Visa MasterCard Discover Account Number Expiration Date Name (exactly as it appears on credit card) You are now ready to submit your question. (Only once per question please or your computer might explode!.) Submit this form. Return to Dr. Perloe's ARHC HomepageThis page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark Perloe,M.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. WT01-B09-238IA090-000968-B015-116http://ivf.com:80/chat.html 206.185.60.251 19970123211036 text/html 6749HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:12:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6578Last-modified: Tue, 07 Jan 1997 01:26:40 GMT Endometriosis and Infertility Chatroom ARHC WWW Chat Room Welcome to ARHC Infertility Chatroom Thanks for visiting our chatroom. The java chat applet may take a few minutes to load on your computer. When the loading is completed, the gray square at the bottom of this page will contain the chat winndow. You may float the chat window and continue to browse on the web if you like. A second endometriosis chat room will be available soon. Chat Room Technical Requirements Due to the volume of traffic on the chat server, you may experience a delay of up to two or three minutes for the chat program to initialize. Please be patient. (A little MD humor) The grey box will be replaced with a chat window when the java script has completely transferred. Unfortunately the chat server provider, Earthweb, chose today to switch to a new server. If you are unable to connect tonight, please send an email and let me know. SUBJECT: NOCHAT. EMAIL The ARHC Chat Room is a java application that runs in your browser window. You must have a java-capable browser such as Microsoft Internet Explorer 3.0, Netscape Navigator 2.X + , or Sun's HotJava to participate in this forum. This Chat Room is provided as a meeting place for you and your colleagues. To arrange a meeting, share the URL for the ARHC Chatroom and arrange a suitable time for participating members. Weekly Chat Room Conference Effective Monday, January 6th, 1997, the ARHC Chat Room will be monitored from 9:00 - 10:00 P.M. EST every Monday night by Dr. Perloe. Instructions: In the windows that appear below, enter a name or pseudoname and your email address and press the "Connect" button. Please note that the name you enter will be used to identify you to other participants in the chat room and does not have to be your real name. Caution: At present, this function is not secure and your conversation may be monitored by others.Please refrain from discussing any sensitive personal information. Return to the ARHC Homepage This page, and all contents, are Copyright (C) 1996 by Mark PerloeM.D., P.C. Atlanta, GA, USA. laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe,laparoscopy, minimally invasive surgery, ectopic,infertility, endometriosis, adhesions, pelvic pain, diagnosis, women's health, gynecology, Perloe