WT01-B12-1IA049-000856-B012-329http://www.rx-compound.com:80/history.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114850 text/html 23979HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:21:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 23807Last-modified: Fri, 22 Nov 1996 16:06:57 GMT History of Professional Compounding Pharmacy ofMinneapolis, MN HISTORY OF PROFESSIONAL COMPOUNDING PHARMACY WE SPECIALIZE IN "CUSTOM-MADE" MEDICATIONS. PROFESSIONAL COMPOUNDINGPHARMACY Professional Compounding Pharmacy has beenproducing "custom made" medications for over 45 years.This pharmacy was originally founded by Donald K. Thompson in1951 as the Nile Pharmacy in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Today thePharmacy is still a family owned business and is operated byDonald’s son Neil Thompson. In 1951 when Professional Compounding Pharmacy started, customcompounding was an every-day practice. Pharmacists were trainedto tailor the Physician's prescribed medications to the needs ofindividual's rendering these services. Now more then ever, peopleare starting to appreciate and understand the importance ofhaving this type of service available to them. THE HISTORY OF PHARMACUTICAL COMPOUNDING The History of the Pharmacy andPharmacology dates back to the medieval times with priests, bothmen and women, who ministered to the sick with religious rites aswell. Many peoples of the world continue the close association ofdrugs, medicine, and religion or faith. Specialization firstoccurred early in the 9th century in the civilized world aroundBaghdad. It gradually spread to Europe as alchemy, eventuallyevolving into chemistry as physicians began to abandon beliefsthat were not demonstrable in the physical world. Physiciansoften both prepared and prescribed medicines; individualpharmacists not only compounded prescriptions but manufacturedmedicaments in bulk lots for general sale. Not until well intothe 19th century was the distinction between the pharmacist as acompounder of medicines and the physician as a therapistgenerally accepted. PHARMACY phar�ma�cy (f�r�me-s�) noun plural phar�ma�cies Abbr. phar., Phar., pharm., Pharm. 1. The art of preparing and dispensing drugs. 2. A place where drugs are sold; a drugstore. In this sense, alsocalled apothecary. [Middle English farmacie, a purgative, from Old French, fromMedieval Latin pharmac�a, a medicine, from Greek pharmakeia, useof drugs, from pharmakon, drug. (The American Heritage� Dictionary ofthe English Language, Third Edition copyright � 1992 by HoughtonMifflin Company. Electronic version licensed from InfoSoftInternational, Inc. All rights reserved.) The origin of the word "pharmacy" is generally ascribedto the Greek pharmakon ("remedy"). It has beensuggested that there is a connection with the egyptian termph-ar-maki ("bestower of security"), which the god Thoth, patron ofphysicians, conferred as approbation on a ferryman who hadmanaged a safe crossing. The notion of an Egyptian origin has acertain romantic appeal, but in all likelihood the word"pharmacy" and its many cognates derive, like so manyother scientific terms, from the Greek. As much as 80,000 years ago, people of the Paleolithic periodwere interested in the flora around them to engrave a variety ofplants, bones and deer antlers. It is fruitless to try todetermine when Pharmaceutical practice started because Pharmacyin a rudimentry form existed before the word. Combining different agents, or compounding, was considered an artform practiced by Priests, and Doctors. The first known chemicalprocesses were carried out by the artisans of Mesopotamia, Egypt,and China. Most of these craftspeople were employed in templesand palaces, making luxury goods for priests and nobles. In thetemples, the priests especially had time to speculate on theorigin of the changes they saw in the world about them. Theirtheories often involved magic, but they also developedastronomical, mathematical, and cosmological ideas, which theyused in attempts to explain some of the changes that are nowconsidered chemical. GREEK NATURAL PHILOSOPHY The first culture to consider these ideas scientificallywas that of the Greeks. From the time of Thales, about 600 BC,Greek philosophers were making logical speculations about thephysical world rather than relying on myth to explain phenomena.Thales himself assumed that all matter was derived from water,which could solidify to earth or evaporate to air. His successorsexpanded this theory into the idea that four elements composedthe world: earth, water, air, and fire. Democritus thought thatthese elements were composed of atoms, minute particles moving ina vacuum. Others, especially Aristotle, believed that theelements formed a continuum of mass and therefore a vacuum couldnot exist. The atomic idea quickly lost ground among the Greeks,but it was never entirely forgotten. When it was revived duringthe Renaissance, it formed the basis of modern atomic theory (seeAtom and Atomic Theory). Todaymodern pharmacist deals with complex pharmaceutical remedies fardifferent from the elixirs, spirits, and powders described in thePharmacopeia of London (1618) and the Pharmacopeia of Paris(1639). In the U.S. today, major medicines, those regarded ashaving the greatest therapeutic value, are selected for inclusionin the Pharmacopeia of the United States, first published in1820, by a Committee on Revision on which all colleges ofmedicine and pharmacy, all state medical and pharmaceuticalassociations, and the U.S. surgeon general are represented. Afterthe drugs have been chosen, the standards for quality and potencyare formulated by pharmacists and pharmaceutical chemists.Similar criteria for drugs regarded by the committee as havingless therapeutic value are set forth in the National Formulary,published by the American Pharmaceutical Association (founded1852) since 1888. Any significant variation from pharmacopeia andformulary standards may be prosecuted by the Food and DrugAdministration under the Pure Food and Drug Acts. Pharmacy, science of compounding and dispensing medication; also,an establishment used for such purposes. Modern pharmaceuticalpractice includes the dispensing, identification, selection, andanalysis of DRUGS. Pharmacy began to develop as a professionseparate from medicine in the 18th cent., and in 1821 the firstU.S. school of pharmacy was established in Philadelphia. Pharmacology (f�r�me-k�l�e-j�), study of the changesproduced in living animals by DRUGS, chemical substances used totreat and diagnose disease. It is closely related to otherscientific disciplines, particularly BIOCHEMISTRY and PHYSIOLOGY.Areas of pharmacologic research include mechanisms of drugaction, the use of drugs in treating disease, and drug-inducedside effects. Pharmacy, practice of compounding and dispensing drugs; also theplace where such medicinal products are prepared. Pharmacy is anarea of materia medica, that branch of medical science concerningthe sources, nature, properties, and preparation of drugs.Pharmacists share with the chemical and medical professionresponsibility for discovering new drugs and synthesizing organiccompounds of therapeutic value. In addition, the communitypharmacist, or druggist, is increasingly called upon to giveadvice in matters of health and hygiene. Educationand Practice In the U.S., colleges of pharmacy offer 5-year undergraduateprograms leading to the degree of bachelor of science in thepharmaceutical sciences. All accept students directly from highschool and may grant advanced standing to college students orgraduates. Licenses are granted by states after the followingrequirements have been met: graduation from one of the 72colleges with programs accredited by the American Council onPharmaceutical Education; about 1500 hours of internship under aregistered pharmacist; satisfactory completion of a stateexamination. Pharmacists may practice their profession in apharmacy located in a hospital, nursing home, or special area ofa drugstore. They may also be employed by a pharmaceuticalcompany in scientific research or the development and productionof new pharmaceutical products. WHAT HAPPENED TO THE NEIBORHOOD COMPOUNDING PHARMACY? THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION The rapid change from hand methods to machine methods ofproduction that characterized the Industrial Revolution found aready application in pharmacy, especially under the impact of thescientific developments of the nineteenth century. Phytochemistryand synthetic chemistry created new derivatives of old drugs andnew chemical entities of medicinal value that strained the capacity ofthe individual pharmacy. Large scale drug manufacturing had itsstrong hold on society with the advent of machines and patents. The progress made by this new industry is demonstrated by thecatalogue of the American firm G.D. Searle, which by the late1880’s listed 400 fluid extracts, 150 elixirs, 100 syrups,75 powdered extracts, and 25 tinctures and other drug forms. THE DECLINING ART OF THE APOTHECARY Industrialization had an impact on every aspect of theactivity of the pharmacist. First, it led to the creation of newdrugs, drugs that the individual pharmacist’s own resourcescould not produce. Second, many drugs that the individualpharmacist was able to produce could be manufactured moreeconomically, and in superior quality, by industry. Third,industry assumed responsibility traditionally vested in thepharmacist for the quality of the medication. The plethora ofproprietary medicines, widely and often blatantly advertised,deprived the pharmacist of a market for private specialties; itforced the pharmacist to become a vendor of questionablemerchandise; it opened the way to much broader competition frommerchants, grocers and pitchmen than the pharmacist hadpreviously encountered. THE COMMUNITY PHARMACY The nineteenth century did not see the end of the art ofcompounding, but the art did give way, however grudgingly, to newtechnology. It has been estimated that a "broad knowledge ofcompounding" was still essential for 80 percent f theprescriptions dispensed in the 1920s. Althoughpharmacists increasingly relied on chemicals purchased from themanufacturer to make up prescriptions, there still remained muchto be done secundum Artem. They spread their own plasters,prepared pills (of aloes and myrrh or quinine and opium, forexample), prepared powders of all kinds, and made up confections,conserves, medicated waters, and perfumes. They put up tinctures(of laudanum, paregoric, and colchicum) in five gallon demijohns.And they frequently combined into a single dosage from severalmedicines, which normally today would be written and dispensed asseparate prescriptions. Further more, they were often called uponto provide first aid and medicines for such common ailments asburns, frostbite, colic, flesh wounds, poisoning, constipation,and diarrhea. In addition to maintaining a prescription laboratory, pharmacistsusually carried the disliked but necessary patent and proprietaryremedies along with herbs and locally popular nostrums of theirown compounding. THE TWENTIETH CENTURY PHARMACIST The most notable change in pharmacy in modern times hasbeen the virtual disappearance of the preparation and compoundingof medicines. Whereas in the 1920s, 80 percent of theprescriptions filled in American pharmacies required a knowledgeof compounding, by the 1940s the number of prescriptionsrequiring compounding had declined to 26 percent. As far back as1971, only 1 percent, or less, of all prescriptions combined twoor more active ingredients. Moreover, the pharmacist’scommitment to maintaining the quality of the drugs dispensed hasbeen reduced to knowing such facts as the length of shelf lifeand the effect of exposure to light and judging the reliabilityand reputations of the manufacture. Allthis meant that the pharmacist’s education and activitieshad to undergo change. At the same time that the scientificeducation of pharmacists was steadily becoming more demanding,their role in the provision of health care was becoming more andmore circumscribed. Moreover, they were increasingly subject togovernment and institutional requirements that diminished theimportance of the patient-pharmacist relation. And, especially inthe United States and Great Britain, competition fromprescription departments in chain and department stores tended todemean both the role and the dignity of the pharmacist as ahealth-care professional. The urban blight that attacked theneighborhoods was inevitably a threat to the friendlyneighborhood pharmacist. The reaction to these conditions was apparent in the drop in theproduction of graduates of American schools of pharmacy who wereplanning to go into the field of community pharmacy. In 1947,about 90 percent of graduates planned to go into some aspect ofcommunity pharmacy; in 1973, that figure had dropped to 76.6percent; in 1988 it stood at 57.1 percent. COMPOUNDING TODAY Custom Compounding pharmacies are on the rise.Physicians, medical institutions and patients are realizing morethen ever the importance of tailoring an individuals medicationsto specifically meet there needs. A majority of the Pharmaciststhat are going back to compounding are doing so for the love ofthe science and interest in the patients well being. Being ableto be in the role of a problem solver opens the doors tocreativity and genius that the medical industry has been eagerlyadopting for the last decade. Note: Most of the information detailed in this report was found in the definitive book on the history of pharmacy; Pharmacy an illustrated history, by David L. Cowen and William H. Helfand, published byHarry N Abrams, Inc., New York. - ISBN 0-8109-1498-0 This is a beautifully illustrated, 250 page book that was published in 1990. Information | History | Guest Registry Ask The Pharmacist The Mortar and Pestle� Industry Newsletter Professional Compounding Pharmacy 2249 East 38th Street Minneapolis, MN 55407 612-721-1496 800-721-1623 Fax: 612-728-3758 Daily Shipping via UPS or Priority Mail *Next Day Delivery Available* "Most Major Credit Cards Accepted" Information | History | Guest Registry Ask The Pharmacist The Mortar and Pestle� Industry Newsletter WT01-B12-2IA049-000856-B012-348http://www.rx-compound.com:80/guestreg.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114857 text/html 6588HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:21:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6417Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:09:34 GMT Guest Registry / Mailing List for Professional CompoundingPharmacy of Minneapolis, MN GUEST REGISTRY WE SPECIALIZE IN "CUSTOM-MADE" MEDICATIONS. Complete this form and we will send you moreinformation about Professional Compounding Pharmacy, Inc. Whenprompted to receive The Mortar and Pestle News Letter, select"Yes" and you shall be added to our monthly mailinglist. Name: Title: Organization name: Address: Phone Number: Fax Number: E-Mail Address: Would you like to receive the Motar and Pestle News Letter? Yes No Leave a comment for Professional Compounding Pharmacy: Thank you for your interest in Professional CompoundingPharmacy. Professional Compounding Pharmacy 2249 East 38th Street Minneapolis, MN 55407 612-721-1496 800-721-1623 Fax: 612-728-3758 Daily Shipping via UPS or Priority Mail *Next Day Delivery Available* "Most Major Credit Cards Accepted" Information | History | Guest Registry Ask The Pharmacist The Mortar and Pestle© Industry Newsletter WT01-B12-3IA049-000856-B012-365http://www.rx-compound.com:80/askrph.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114903 text/html 3870HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:21:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3699Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:09:29 GMT Ask The Pharmacist ASK THE PHARMACIST WE SPECIALIZE IN "CUSTOM-MADE" MEDICATIONS. Please Drop us an E-Mail at info@rx-compound.com And we will bend over backwards to help you! Professional Compounding Pharmacy 2249 East 38th Street Minneapolis, MN 55407 612-721-1496 800-721-1623 Fax: 612-728-3758 Daily Shipping via UPS or Priority Mail *Next Day Delivery Available* "Most Major Credit Cards Accepted" Information | History | Guest Registry Ask The Pharmacist The Mortar and Pestle© Industry NewsletterWT01-B12-4IA049-000856-B012-391http://www.rx-compound.com:80/mortar.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114914 text/html 9535HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:22:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9364Last-modified: Fri, 22 Nov 1996 16:07:06 GMT The Mortar and Pestle(c) Industry News Letter - Internet Addition THE MORTAR AND PESTLE - OCTOBER 1996, ISSUE 6 - TBA THE MORTAR AND PESTLE - September 1996, ISSUE 5 - Professional Pharmacists Respond To The Challenge to improve the effectiveness of medication therapy by providing Pharmaceutical Care. - Ginger for Motion Sickness? - Dextrometorphan attenuates and reverses morphine tolerance. - Intranasal lidocaine for migraine - 4-Aminopyridine for Fatigue of MS by Michele Mass, M.D., Neuroimmunology, Oregon Health Sciences University, MS Center of Oregon. THE MORTAR AND PESTLE - August 1996, ISSUE 4 - Individualized Therapy For Weight Control: Affecting Outcomes In Major Disease States - Ina landmark study, Weintraub et al. at the University of Rochester studied the effects of phentermine 15mg/day plus fenfluramine 60mg/day (versus placebo) in 121 patients who weighed 120% to 180% of their "ideal weight." - Topical Ketoprofen for Chronic Pain by Susannah Sterling, R,N., C. C. M, Rehabilitation Specialist, Kingston, PA THE MORTAR AND PESTLE - JULY 1996, ISSUE 3 - We’re Talking About SERVICE - Customized medications to meet each patient’s specific need - Pluronic Lecithin Organogel & Transdermal Drug Transport - Natural Progesterone: The Multiple Roles of a Remarkable Hormone - Recurrent Wheezing in Children by John Rogers, M.D. Pediatric Pulmonology Childrens Hospital, Knoxville, TX THE MORTAR AND PESTLE - JUNE 1996, ISSUE 2 - Impotence "Triple Therapy" - Lip Balms - DHE Nasal Spray & Migraine - The Right Medication in the Right Doses by Gene Lawrence, M.D., Obstetrics and Gynecology, Newport Beach, CA THE MORTAR AND PESTLE - MAY 1996, ISSUE 1 - Welcome to the first edition of "THE MORTAR AND PESTLE" - Topical NSAID Therapy - DHEA-Dehydroepiandrosterone - Transderm Scop-Where Are You? - Topical Therapy for Onychomycosis by Bruce Berger, M.D., Dermatologist, Princeton, NJ Information | Freee-mail Mailing List The Mortarand Pestle� Industry Newsletter ProfessionalCompounding Pharmacy Web and Graphic Design by WilliamNeuenschwander Consulting Group @ XPLOSIVCOMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-5IA049-000856-B013-1http://www.rx-compound.com:80/mpissue5.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114922 text/html 12487HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:22:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12315Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:10:05 GMT The Mortar and Pestle - September 1996 - Issue 5 September, 1996 Issue 5 PROFESSIONAL PHARMACISTS RESPOND TO THE CHALLENGE to improve the effectiveness of medication therapy by providing Pharmaceutical Care. While this term permeates the pharmacy literature, few others understand its implications. Pharmaceutical care involves far more than patient counseling. Specialized services may include such areas as asthma and allergy care, diabetes care, home health management, and human & veterinary compounding. Pharmaceutical compounding is the preparation of a customized medication dosage or dosage form to meet a specific patient need. Asthma programs involve elimination of asthma triggers and teaching the proper use of metered dose inhalers, peak flow meters, etc., as well as a complete medication history review. Diabetes care may involve self monitoring as well as education in areas of exercise and nutrition, often utilizing the expertise of individuals such as a Certified Diabetes Educator (CDE). While the trend toward managed care tends to diminish the reality of specific patient needs, pharmaceutical care involves working on an individual basis with patient and physician to meet these unique needs, thereby improving the outcome of medical therapy. Interestingly, these interventions have also been shown to reduce overall healthcare costs. We welcome the opportunity to work with you and answer any questions. GINGER FOR MOTION SICKNESS? While may other treatment options are available, ginger may be nature’s cure for motion sickness. "Ginger soothes the stomach and reduces the likelihood of nausea," says Varro Tyler, PH.D., a professor of pharmacognosy at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana… One gram of fresh ginger (about ½ teaspoon) taken 30 minutes before travel should prevent the problem." For those who find the taste of the herb unacceptable or wish to ease administration problems while traveling, the powder can be placed in a gelatin capsule. DEXTROMETORPHAN ATTENUATES AND REVERSES MORPHINE TOLERANCE - Elliot et al. Of Cornell University Medical College showed that dextromethorphan, an NMDA receptor antagonist, can modulate morphine-mediated analgesic tolerance. Administration of subcutaneous dextromethorphan (but not saline) prior to an escalating morphine dosage schedule prevented a 5-fold increase in the morphine ED50 value observed on treatment day 4. In a trial involving morphine tolerant mice, administration of dextromethorphan resulted in an almost complete return of the morphine ED50 value to the opiod naïve value. [Pain 1994 Dec;59(3): 361-8] A study of postoperative pain relief using PCA in women undergoing hysterectomy indicates that patients who are poor metabolizers of dextromethophan (or in whom the O-demethylation is competitively inhibited by other medication) may not experience any effect from the narcotic. {Br J Clin Pharmacol 1995 Feb;39 (2): 182-6] INTRANASAL LIDOCAINE FOR MIGRAINE - In a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial, Maizels et al. Showed that a 4% solution of intranasal lidocaine gave rapid and complete relief of headache pain in 55% of a community urgent care sample of patients with acute migraine. Effect usually occurred within 5 minutes and nausea and photophobia were similarly relieved. The relapse rate (42%) was similar to that reported from sumatriptin, but onset of relapse of lidocaine was usually within one hour. However, 58% of lidocaine responders had persistent symptom relief for 24 hours or more. The theoretical site of action for intranasal lidocaine is the sphenopalatine ganglion SPG). (JAMA July 24/31; 1996; 276:319-321) Additional references and information on preparation of customized dosage forms are available by calling our pharmacy. "Success isn’t measured by the position you reach in life; it’s measured by the obstacles you overcome." Booker T. Washington 4-AMINOPYRIDINE FOR FATIGUE OF MS by Michele Mass, M.D., Neuroimmunology, Oregon Health Sciences University, MS Center of Oregon Several clinical trials have shown that 4-aminopyridine may be helpful in treating one form of fatigue that occurs in multiple sclerosis. Fatigue is the single most common symptom experienced by people with MS, There are several types of fatigue that occur in multiple sclerosis. Four-AP appears to be particularly helpful in nerve fiber fatigue. In multiple sclerosis, the insulating myelin coverings of nerve fibers are destroyed leaving naked or demyelinated nerve fibers that are very sensitive to body temperature changes and fatigue easily. Because of nerve fiber fatigue, multiple sclerosis patients often notice that there is a limit to the distance they can walk or the time they can work with their hands. They also commonly notice worsening of their symptoms if they experience a fever, hot weather or as the day goes on. Demyelinated nerve fibers may work more efficiently and be less susceptible to fatigue when MS patients take 4-AP. Research on 4-AP demonstated that is improved function prone to nerve fiber fatigue in some MS patients. However, 4-AP does have side-effects such as dizziness, tingling sensations and in rare cases, seizures. It has been difficult to find the right dose since patients must take enough to have positive effects but not too much as it can cause seizures. Elan Pharmaceutical Company, which holds the marketing rights for this medication, is continuing to attempt to find the optimal dose. Though the Food and Drug Administration has not approved 4-AP for use in humans, 4-AP is available through several pharmacies in the United States. Information | Freee-mail Subscriptions The Mortarand Pestle© Industry News Letter ProfessionalCompounding Pharmacy Web and Graphic Design by XPLOSIVCOMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-6IA049-000856-B013-28http://www.rx-compound.com:80/mpissue4.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114930 text/html 13646HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:22:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13474Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:10:02 GMT The Mortar and Pestle - August 1996 - Issue 4 August, 1996 Issue 4 INDIVIDUALIZED THERAPY FOR WEIGHT CONTROL: AFFECTING OUTCOMES IN MAJOR DISEASE STATES Obesity is probably the most common chronic disease in our country. "Obesity used to be viewed as a lack of willpower in a patient… It was not viewed as a medical problem. Today I think it is," says Douglas Greene, a University of Michigan endocrinologist who heads an FDA committee of outside experts that studies new obesity drugs. Excess body fat increases the risk of hypertension, coronary artery disease, non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, lower back pain, esophageal reflux, gallbladder disease, sleep apnea, gout, and certain types of cancer (e.g. prostate cancer). Patients with these medical conditions would benefit from a successful weight loss program. Proper food choices (limiting fat) and regular aerobic exercises are preferable to calorie restriction as a method of weight loss, yet this approach is futile for the majority of people, two-thirds of whom regain all their lost weight after five years. In a letter to JAMA (1993; 270: 1423), Robert Yaes wrote, "Certainly, at a time when it is fashionable to claim that alcoholism an d drug abuse are illnesses, whose treatment should be covered by health insurance, it is inconsistent to blame fat people for their own condition… The majority of patients who enter weight-control programs do so because of concerns about their physical attractiveness, not their health. This perception could partially explain why so few physicians and so many charlatans are involved in the treatment of obesity." We would like to see this trend reversed. Outcome based weight management programs could eliminate the cause of many diseases, as opposed to treating the symptoms. It is increasingly recognized that obesity is not a failure of will or behavior, nor is it a disorder of body weight regulation. It is a chronic medical condition. Research suggests that drug therapy may play an important role in long-term management. Robert Weintraub (see the "Rx Capsules" at the end of this editorial) has pointed out that if obesity is a chronic medical conditions in the same way that hypertension is, then weight gain following drug discontinuation is no different from blood pressure elevation after stopping antihypertensive medications. In the 1970’s, clinical investigators Richard and Judith Wurtman (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) had already implicated serotonin in eating disturbances. They theorized that dietary starch is converted to sugar; sugar stimulates the pancreas to release insulin; insulin raise tryptophan ( a precursor of serotonin) levels in the brain; serotonin regulates mood. In studies with obese women, Wurtman et al. Found that a high-carbohydrate snack improved mood. In support of this theory, weight loss is one of the side effects noted with the serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluoxetinbe (Prozac). Boosting serotonin seems to reduce carbohydrate craving and helps patients feel "full." If mood swings are eliminated, perhaps behavior modification can be more effective. Dean Ornish, a California doctor leading a crusade to treat heart disease through diet and lifestyle change, disputes the premise that a serotonin imbalance is at the root of obesity. His clinical work suggests that a diet with only 10% of calories form fat is extremely effective in losing weight and keeping it off. In patients for whom nutritional therapy has not worked, the physician may want to consider customized drug therapy. As pharmacists, we feel that it is important for physicians to have control over their patients’ therapy. Through the use of professional compounding, we can work with you to individualize each patients’ therapy and maximize the therapeutic benefit. Please call for more information. "We help doctors to solve medicaiton problems." - Patty Story - Editor - R. PH. Ina landmark study - Weintraub et al. at the University of Rochester studied the effects of phentermine 15mg/day plus fenfluramine 60mg/day (versus placebo) in 121 patients who weighed 120% to 180% of their "ideal weight." After 34 weeks of drug or placebo therapy, along with calorie restriction, behavior modification, and exercise, patients in the treated group had lost an average of 15.9% of initial weight, compared with an average loss of 5.9% in the placebo group. Of significance is that those who continued in the study were able to maintain weight loss for three years. (Clin Pharmacol Ther. May 1992; 51:581-586.) The Medical Sciences Bulletin states - "Obesity is a chronic disease that requires lifelong management. Drug treatment can play an important role in any management strategy, and combination therapy with two anoretic drugs may be the best approach. Combining two anorectics permits reducing the dose of both agents, which reduces adverse effects." Side effects of stimulation from phentermine and sedation from fenfluramine can be offset with combination therapy. TOPICAL KETOPROFEN FOR CHRONIC PAIN BY SUSANNAH STERLING, R,N., C. C. M, REHABILITATION SPECIALIST, KINGSTON, PA I first became aware of the use of transdermal NSAIDs when working with physicians who were treating pain of various origins. The physicians had found that patients with long-term chronic pain, including myofacial pain, had extraordinary response to topical non-steroidals prepared by a compounding pharmacist. Pain at multiple trigger points responded extremely well to a combination of ketoprofen and capsalcin. When using this therapy for industrial injury patients and in those chronic back pain, I have experienced no failures. The typical starting dose of topical ketoprofen 10% PLO (pluronic organic lecithin) gel is 1 cc applied to the affected area every six hours. The dosage is titrated to patient response. Ketoprofen PLO gel has been very helpful and I am extremely enthusiastic about it’s potential with other patients. A definite advantage of topical therapy is area-specific targeting of the active ingredient to obtain high tissue levels. Topical absorption means a lack of GI side effects. Also, low or undetectable blood levels avoid the need for dosage adjustment and the potential for problems with hepatic and renal impairment. Editor’s note: Please see the abstract in our previous edition regarding transdermal drug transport. Proper preparation of this gel involves significant physical agitation in order to increase micelle formation and ensure efficacy. (Micelles are spaghetti-like structures that produce a macroscopic viscosity, increasing the transdermal penetration of the gel.) Appropriate agitation requires the use of an ointment mill or other homogenization process which we use in our compounding laboratory. Information | Freee-mail Subscriptions The Mortarand Pestle© Industry News Letter ProfessionalCompounding Pharmacy Web and Graphic Design by XPLOSIVCOMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-7IA049-000856-B013-64http://www.rx-compound.com:80/mpissue3.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114941 text/html 12879HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:22:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12707Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:09:58 GMT The Mortar and Pestle - July 1996 - Issue 3 July, 1996 Issue 3 WE’RE TALKING ABOUT SERVICE… The basic ingredient in our ability to provide customized care and medications is our commitment to quality service. The type of service that is most appropriate for each individual is best determined by working within the "triad"- that "all important" patient-physician-pharmacist relationship. Service can mean the difference between therapeutic success and failure, or the ability to provide the medication that will be most efficacious instead of having to use a sub-optimum preparation for lack of a better alternative. "Customized medications to meet each patient’s specific need." We can compound a formulation that contains the precise dose of active ingredients which will be most effective, in a dosage form that can be conveniently administered, well-tolerated, and properly flavored. We can avoid the use of offensive excipients such as alcohol, dyes, lactose, or preservatives. Our state of the art equipment and specialized training allows us to compound medications that are tailored to the needs of each patient. Examples are slow-release dosage forms titrated to individual response and concentrated medications in a base that will enhance bioavailability. Our technique and knowledge, combined with our desire to provide the best possible care by working with each patient and physician is what makes the difference. We welcome the opportunity to answer your questions and to work with you and your patients. WE HELP DOCTORS SOLVE MEDICINE PROBLEMS When an individual is unable to take or use a commercial medicine, costly problems may occur- such as avoidable physician and emergency room visits, hospital admissions, and lost time from school or work. We reduce this waste and improve our patient’s quality of life by compounding medicines into forms that can be used. We help with these- and more: Best dose commercially unavailable Suitable dosage form unavailable Medication discontinued Medicine tastes bad Known allergy to preservative, dye, other excipient Inconvenient to use PLURONIC LECITHIN ORGANOGEL & TRANSDERMAL DRUG TRANSPORT - Absorption through the skin is currently regarded as an important alternative to traditional methods of drug delivery. Lecithin gels have many properties which make them a desirable vehicle: they can be obtained with biocompatible components, are stable for a long time, and can solubilize sizeable amounts of quite different chemicals. The proposed mechanism of transport is an interaction between the layers of lipids in the stratum corneum and the phospholipids of the gel. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Vol. 81, No. 9, Sept 1992, pp. 871-4 reports effective transport of scopolamine and broxaterol (a bronchodilator), and the authors concluded with "…studies in our laboratory show that various other substances, such as estradiol, amino acids, and peptides, can be transported transdermally via lecithin gels. These results suggest that there are no great restrictions on the chemical structure of the drug." "NATURAL PROGED. Discusses the use of natural progesterone in treating osteoporosis and PMS, as well as fibroid tumors, mild to moderate endometriosis, fibrocystic breast disease, and cervical erosions or dysplasia. To reverse osteoporosis, Dr. Lee prescribes natural progesterone cream, a diet rich n vegetable and grains to serve as a source of calcium and magnesium for bone mineralization, mineral and vitamin supplements, and modest exercise. "MAN IS BORN TO LIVE AND NOT TO PREPARE TO LIVE. " - BORIS PASTERNAK The Right Medication in the Right Doses by Gene Lawrence, M.D., Obstetrics and Gynecology, Newport Beach, CA All physicians, gynecologists in particular, encounter patients frustrated by recurrent bacterial vaginosis. A recent case had an Enterococcus which was resistant to clindamycin, sulfonamides, and metronidazole. The simple solution was seven days of ampicillin vaginal suppositories compounded by my local "problem solving specialist". Although the underlying pathophysiology varies from patient to patient, an alkaline vagina is commonly the problem. An acidic vagina can usually be achieved by daily utilization of 600 mg boric acid suppositories for thirty days. If lactobacilli are not found on a follow-up culture, the boric acid suppositories should be continued. Editor’s Footnote The suppository is a practical alternative for infants or severely debilitated patients who cannot take oral medication and for whom the parental route is unsuitable. Suppositories have been used for several thousand years and are referred to in the ancient writings of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans. Early suppositories consisted of cloth, plants, wood or other material used plain or soaked in a solution of "medication" prior to administration. Today, a suppository is generally made from a fatty acid base consisting of palm and coconut oils or a water soluble base consisting of polyethylene glycol. Desirable characteristics of a good suppository include: it is stable, non-irritating, compatible with a variety of drugs, aesthetically acceptable, and melts or dissolves in various body fluids. Generally, a correctly compounded vaginal or rectal suppository can quickly and easily deliver up to 600 mg of active drug. Suppositories can be used to treat local conditions such as hemorrhoids or infection, or systemic problems such as nausea, pain or inflammation. In conclusion, the suppository is very useful in treating a variety of medical conditions and the physician will benefit from adding this alternative dosage form to his armamentarium. Information | Freee-mail Subscriptions The Mortarand Pestle© Industry News Letter ProfessionalCompounding Pharmacy Web and Graphic Design by XPLOSIVCOMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-8IA049-000856-B013-93http://www.rx-compound.com:80/mpissue2.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210114951 text/html 10979HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:22:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10807Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:09:55 GMT The Mortar and Pestle - June 1996 - Issue 2 June, 1996 Issue 2 One of the keynote speakers at a recent anti-aging conference in Las Vegas addressed the significance of the physician-pharmacist-patient relationship, and the importance of not violating this "triad." The FDA and National Association of State Boards of Pharmacy agree, and allow more latitude to all parties when this triad is intact. This triad has always been the basis of the profession of pharmacy. Each year- as the rate of development of new medications and therapeutic and diagnostic technologies accelerates, the physician-pharmacist-patient relationship becomes more significant to each of its members. Health care providers are seeing more patients each day. Patients are being forced to become more involved in their own healthcare. Physicians and pharmacists working together with the patient can provide the necessary supervision. When everyone places the care and well-being of the patient foremost, this triad is extremely effective. Utilizing available resources and the professional expertise of other members of the health care team strengthens the ability of the triad to provide optimal patient care. Our pharmacists have been specially trained to deal with patient care issues. We welcome the opportunity to work with you. Patty Story - Editor - R. PH. Compounding Pharmacies Specialize in Meeting Patient's Needs Hospice Care Pain Consultation Nebulizer and Respiratory Therapy Physical Therapy Hormonal Replacement Therapy Dental Care and Oral Hygiene Veterinary Medicine Preparation of these specialized products requires chemicals and equipment which are not available in most pharmacies. Our pharmacist has received extensive additional training in compounding techniques and has a support network that generates a constant exchange of ideas and innovations. IMPOTENCE "TRIPLE THERAPY"- Several recent studies have compared intracavernous injection of alprostadil (prostaglandin E-1; Caverject) alone and with papaverine and phentolamine for treatment of erectile dysfunction. The Medical Letter (9/29/95) states "Alprostadil (5mcg) combined with papaverine, with or without phentolamine, has been reported to be more effective than papaverine plus phentolamine or 10 mcg of alprostadil alone." From The Journal of Urology Vol. 150, 1822-4: "A superior dose response coupled with a low incidence of priapism, pain and scarring have led us to use triple-drug therapy as our agent of choice." Additional information is available. LIP BALMS - are practical, portable, and long-lasting dosage forms which can be used to apply medication directly to the lips. A smaller amount of active ingredients may be required when medication is applied topically at the affected site, and product costs may be reduced. DHE NASAL SPRAY & MIGRAINE - In an open multicentre study in Switzerland, dihydroergotamine nasal spray was studied for its efficacy and tolerability in the treatment of acute migraine attacks (common and classical migraine-one attack per patient) in a total of 904 patients. In the global assessment, 76.8% of all the patients reported good efficacy (freedom from pain, less pain or shorter duration of pain). When the nasal spray was used in the prodomal phase, good efficacy could be obtained by 90 (63%) of 143 patients. 18.1% of all the patients treated- more frequently those who obtained no beneficial effect and /or who took additional medication during the migraine attack- reported one or more minor side effects such as local nasal irritation, nausea, dizziness and vomiting. Contact your "problem-solving pharmacist" for more information. "I am not discouraged, because every wrong attempt discarded is another step forward." Thomas Edison The Right Medication in the Right Doses by Gene Lawrence, M.D., Obstetrics and Gynecology, Newport Beach, CA All physicians, gynecologists in particular, encounter patients frustrated by recurrent bacterial vaginosis. A recent case had an Enterococcus which was resistant to clindamycin, sulfonamides, and metronidazole. The simple solution was seven days of ampicillin vaginal suppositories compounded by my local "problem solving specialist". Although the underlying pathophysiology varies from patient to patient, an alkaline vagina is commonly the problem. An acidic vagina can usually be achieved by daily utilization of 600 mg boric acid suppositories for thirty days. If lactobacilli are not found on a follow-up culture, the boric acid suppositories should be continued. Editor’s Footnote The suppository is a practical alternative for infants or severely debilitated patients who cannot take oral medication and for whom the parental route is unsuitable. Suppositories have been used for several thousand years and are referred to in the ancient writings of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans. Early suppositories consisted of cloth, plants, wood or other material used plain or soaked in a solution of "medication" prior to administration. Today, a suppository is generally made from a fatty acid base consisting of palm and coconut oils or a water soluble base consisting of polyethylene glycol. Desirable characteristics of a good suppository include: it is stable, non-irritating, compatible with a variety of drugs, aesthetically acceptable, and melts or dissolves in various body fluids. Generally, a correctly compounded vaginal or rectal suppository can quickly and easily deliver up to 600 mg of active drug. Suppositories can be used to treat local conditions such as hemorrhoids or infection, or systemic problems such as nausea, pain or inflammation. In conclusion, the suppository is very useful in treating a variety of medical conditions and the physician will benefit from adding this alternative dosage form to his armamentarium. Information | Freee-mail Subscriptions The Mortarand Pestle© Industry News Letter ProfessionalCompounding Pharmacy Web and Graphic Design by XPLOSIVCOMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-9IA049-000856-B013-130http://www.rx-compound.com:80/mpissue1.htm 206.8.11.82 19970210115002 text/html 8046HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:22:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7875Last-modified: Mon, 18 Nov 1996 03:09:52 GMT The Mortar and Pestle - May 1996 - Issue 1 May, 1996 Issue 1 Welcome to the first edition of "THE MORTAR AND PESTLE", a publication written and edited by pharmacists for healthcare professionals. With the advent of managed care, your time is becoming even more valuable. Our goal will be to provide you with information pertinent to your practice in a brief, easy to digest format. Since this newsletter is written by pharmacists, it will present health care information as it relates to both pharmacy and medicine. We will feature several departments on a regular basis. RX EDITORIAL will be an article by one of our pharmacist editors on a healthcare issue. This department will also respond to any medical or ethical questions pertaining to the practice of pharmacy. RX CAPSULES will be capsules of information that will include changes in the law, legislative activities and clinical insights that will directly affect your practice. RX SOLUTIONS will feature a patient case history and how this medical problem was solved by the healthcare practitioner. The format of this newletter is flexible and will be changed to adapt to the needs of its readers. I hope that you will find it interesting and valuable. Patty Story - Editor - R. PH. Hummus-a favorite vegetarian snack 1 15 oz. can garbanzo beans (chick peas); reserve liquid 3 tablespoons tahini (sesame butter) 2 tablespoons lemon juice 1 to 2 garlic cloves, minced ¼ teaspoon cumin salt to taste Mix all ingredients into a smooth paste using a blender or food processor. If mixture is too dry to be spreadable, add some of the reserved bean liquid. Sprinkle with paprika. Leave to stand for and hour for flavors to develop. Serve with wedges of pita bread, crackers, or slices of fresh vegetables. TOPICAL NSAID THERAPY- Four separate multi-center, double-blind clinical trials in the UK have shown that the efficacy of a topical non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug is equal to that of oral medication in treatment of soft tissue injuries and mild to moderate osteoarthritis. The advantage? Plasma concentrations remain low after topical application, significantly reducing the incidence of GI side effects. The British Medical Journal (1995;311:22-6) reports that a post marketing study of 23,590 patients using a topical NSAID showed only 6 cases of adverse GI events that were "definitely" or "probably" related to topical NSAID use. Another study of 1103 patients demonstrated no significant association between topical NSAID therapy and upper GI bleeding and perforation. Contact your "problem-solving" pharmacist for more information. DHEA-Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a steroid produced by the adrenal cortex. DHEA levels decline with progressive age. A 1994 study demonstrated a higher concentration of insulin growth factor (IGF) in the subjects receiving DHEA, an indication of increased growth hormone release. Patients receiving small daily doses of DHEA have shown improved ability to cope, increased mobility, less joint discomfort and sounder sleep. Although its biologic role is still undefined, itmay prove to be a key in slowing the aging process. Additional information is available upon request. TRANSDERM SCOP-WHERE ARE YOU?- The latest word from CIBA Pharmaceuticals is that the patch will not be available until mid 1996, due to a production problem discovered by their quality managemnet team during a test run. A representative from CIBA stated that the difficulty was a "variance", but would not elaborate as to whether the variance referred to delivery rate, blood levels or some other factor. Contact our compounding pharmacy for alternatives. Take care of your body today or someone else will take care of it tomorrow! Topical Therapy for Onychomycosis by Bruce Berger, M.D., Dermatologist, Princeton, NJ Traditional therapy for fungal infection of the nail has required prolonged therapy with oral griseofulvin, and often surgical excision of the nail. Commercially available topical creams are ineffective. Oral itraconazole has just been approved by the FDA. Although more effective than griseofulvin, it still must be taken for three months, and the recommended dose of two capsules daily is estimated to cost over $350 per month. Both oral agents have the potential for several serious drug interactions with Seldane, Hismanal, Propulsid, Versed, Halcion, and other medications. I have found an effective alternative. This therapy is a good selection for patients who can not tolerate the oral agents, or those who wish to avoid the potential for drug interactions. Itraconazole or fluconazole can be placed in a dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) base, and applied topically to the affected nail. DMSO has been well-documented as a penetrant-enhancer with various other medications, and is key to the success of this therapy. I have used these specially compounded products in many patients with cnychomycosis and have achieved excellent results. Information | Free e-mail Subscriptions The Mortar and Pestle© Industry News Letter Professional Compounding Pharmacy Web and Graphic Design by XPLOSIV COMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-10IA049-000856-B012-273http://www.rx-compound.com:80/ 206.8.11.82 19970210114823 text/html 2653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Mon, 10 Feb 1997 11:21:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.0.0Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2482Last-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 17:33:06 GMT RX-COMPOUND.COM - Professional Compounding Pharmacy of Minneapolis, MN WELCOME TO WE SPECIALIZE IN "CUSTOM-MADE" MEDICATIONS Information | History | Guest Registry Ask The Pharmacist The Mortar and Pestle© Industry Newsletter Copyright © 1996 Professional Compounding Pharmacy, Inc. Minneapolis, MN Web and Graphic Design by XPLOSIV COMMUNICATIONSWT01-B12-11IA012-000125-B012-66http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/ 207.137.75.68 19970216221001 text/html 14461HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:10:16 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:16:51 GMTContent-length: 14276Content-type: text/html Advantage Vitamin and Health Source - vitamins , minerals, melatonin, dheaDHEA, skin care Advantage Vitamin and Health Source Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... In the fast paced world in which we live, it is vital that we take everyADVANTAGE when it concerns our health! VITAMINS, MINERALS, ANTIOXIDANTS, MELATONIN, SKIN CARE, STRESS & WEIGHT MANAGEMENT, DHEA Here at Advantage, we make it easy for you to shop for nutritional supplements! JustCLICK on the high-lighted name of the product, and you will see a completedescription and information on ordering. What can be more simple? New page lists products by disease or problem! TOP SELLING PRODUCTS Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA - The Greatest Nutritional Breakthrough of our Times! Proanthenols Bio-Complex Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger. Stops Degenerative Diseases in Their Tracks! Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution - Acts Like an Antibiotic - WITHOUT Side Effects! Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients. Get RESTFUL Sleep! Micro-Mins Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals in Convenient Capsule Form Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Natural Relief for Sufferers of Arthritisand Joint Pain! Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 VITAMINS TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Vita Saurus Children's Chewable Vitamins & Minerals Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne MINERALS Micro-Mins Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals in Convenient Capsule Form CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium ANTIOXIDANTS Proanthenols Bio-Complex Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne WEIGHT MANAGEMENT Shape Plus Herbal Appetite Suppresant Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Pro-Max 100 100% Pure Vegetable Protein Powder Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus RAINFOREST BASED PRODUCTS We have found the secret ADVANTAGE of a healthier world living in the rainforest!Try our new RAINFORCE line of products, and reap thebenefits of the rainforest while preserving it for future generations! NATURAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's. Natural Relief for Sufferers of Arthritisand Joint Pain! ANTI-AGING Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA - The Greatest Nutritional Breakthrough of our Times! Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Forever Young Emollient Cleanser Removes Surface Material Forever Young Facial Perfecting Gel Recontours Your Facial Skin Forever Young Day/Night Renewal Complex Continuous Protection & Restoration for Your Face Forever Young Body Perfecting Lotion Moisturizes, Protects & Restructures Your Body Forever Young Body Sponge Massages Your Body As You Bathe Forever Young Skin Care System FY Emollient Cleanser, FY Facial Perfecting Gel, FY Day/Night Renewal Complex, FY Body Perfecting Lotion & Body Sponge NATURAL ANTIBIOTIC Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution MELATONIN Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients COLON ECOLOGY, FIBER & HERBAL LAXATIVE Ecology No. 1 Colon Ecology Ecology No. 2 Colon Ecology Ecology No. 3 Colon Ecology Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Inner ActHerbal Laxative Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne STRESS MANAGEMENT Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne MENTAL ALERTNESS & ENERGY BOOSTERS Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors Oxy-Gen Caps Stabilized Anaerocidal Atomic Oxygen HEALTHY SALT Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment IMMUNE SUPPORTING NUTRIENTS Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne HEALTHY BODY ORGANS Prostate Formula Herbs & Other Nutrients for Prostate Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate FOR WOMEN ONLY Progesterone Plus- Natural progesterone plus pregnenolone which increases female libido, improves skin, prevents hair thinning and encourages fat burning. Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Forever Young Emollient Cleanser Removes Surface Material Forever Young Facial Perfecting Gel Recontours Your Facial Skin Forever Young Day/Night Renewal Complex Continuous Protection & Restoration for Your Face Forever Young Body Perfecting Lotion Moisturizes, Protects & Restructures Your Body Forever Young Body Sponge Massages Your Body As You Bathe Forever Young Skin Care System FY Emollient Cleanser, FY Facial Perfecting Gel, FY Day/Night Renewal Complex, FY Body Perfecting Lotion & Body Sponge FOR MEN ONLY Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Prostate Formula Herbs & Other Nutrients for Prostate MEGA PAKS Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Forever Young Skin Care System FY Emollient Cleanser, FY Facial Perfecting Gel, FY Day/Night Renewal Complex, FY Body Perfecting Lotion & Body Sponge Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus Read These Exciting Testimonials From our Valued Customers! Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-12IA012-000125-B012-93http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/milnes.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221030 text/html 139938HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:10:25 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:40:04 GMTContent-length: 139752Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with Herbal Answers to Diseases! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... Natural Answers to Life's Illnesses and Diseases! Suggested Nutritional Guide On this page, we have provided a comprehensive list of common ailments and a carefully selected grouping of products which resarchers at Life Plus find beneficial for relief and improved health. Products are listed in decreasing order with the most important onelisted first. Experiment to see which products are best for you. This information is NOT intended for use in treating diseases nor is it intended to replace your doctor's recommendation. No guarantees are made for the effectiveness of any products mentioned in thisguide. All pains, illnesses and diseases are listed in alphabetical order. Please click on the first letter of the ailment. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U V W X Y If you don't see your problem listed, please e-mail us at ADVANTAGE!. To find out more information on the products listed, simply CLICK yourmouse on the highlighted names! A ABSCESSES Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients ACNE Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Ecology No. 3 Colon Ecology Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients ADDICTION Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne AGING Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate AIDS Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement ALCOHOLISM Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora ALERTNESS Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Pro-Max 100 100% Pure Vegetable Protein Powder Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men ALLERGIES Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA ANEMIA Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E ANGINA Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate ANXIETY Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Pro-Max 100 100% Pure Vegetable Protein Powder Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA APPETITE (to decrease) Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Shape Plus Herbal Appetite Suppresant Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge APPETITE (to increase) Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA ARRHYTHMIA Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora ARTHRITIS Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement ASTHMA Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme ATHEROSCIEROSIS Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E ATHLETE'S FOOT Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols B BED WETTING DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Vita Saurus Children's Chewable Vitamins & Minerals BLADDER DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men BLOOD PURIFER Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne BODY BUILDING Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Catagesic, Synergistic energy and anti-inflammatory rainforest herbs for athletic performance and recovery formula. Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 BOILS Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger BREAST LUMPS CATIMUNE, Cat's Claw plus other synergistic immune supporting rainforest herbs. CAT'S CLAW FORTE, Concentrated Cat's Claw Drops! Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger BRONCHITIS Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body BRUISING Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients BURNS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids BURSITIS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement C CANCER Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement CANDIDA ALBICANS (yeast) Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA CANKER SORES Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) CARPAL TUNNEL Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" CATARACTS Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 CHEMOTHERAPY (NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT) Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals CHOLESTEROL (TO REDUCE) Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA CIRCULATION Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E COLDS AND FLU Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution COLITIS Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within CONJUNCTIVITIS Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within CONSTIPATION Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Inner ActHerbal Laxative Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets COUGH Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger CRAMPS (intestinal) Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets CRAMPS (muscle) CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E CROHN'S DISEASE Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients CYSTIC FIBROSIS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals CYSTITIS DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients D DEPRESSION Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge DERMITITIS Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora DETOXIFICATION Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Inner ActHerbal Laxative Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients DIABETES Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Pro-Max 100 100% Pure Vegetable Protein Powder Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA DIARRHEA Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder DIGESTIVE PROBLEMS Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex DIURETIC DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment DIVERTICULITIS Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger DRUG TOXICITY Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement E EAR INFECTIONS Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body ECZEMA Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution EDEMA DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment EMPHYSEMA Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA ENERGY Oxy-Gen Caps Stabilized Anaerocidal Atomic Oxygen Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge EPILEPSY Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid EPSTEIN BAR VIRUS Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients EYES Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution F FATIGUE Oxy-Gen Caps Stabilized Anaerocidal Atomic Oxygen Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger FEMALE PROBLEMS Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid FEVER Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids FEVER BLISTERS Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution FRIGIDITY TOUCHFIRE HERS for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HERS contains chuchuasi, catuaba, and five other rainforest herbs. Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder FUNGUS Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols G GALL BLADDER Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids GINGIVITIS Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution GLAUCOMA Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients GOITER Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger GOUT Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" H HALITOSIS Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers HANGOVER Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora HAIR and NAIL PROBLEMS Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder HAY FEVER Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution HEADACHE Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain HEART Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment HEARTBURN Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement HEMORRHOIDS Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution HERPES Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E HORMONE IMBALANCE Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme HOT FLASHES Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme HYPERACTIVITY Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Vita Saurus Children's Chewable Vitamins & Minerals Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA HYPOGLYCEMIA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA I IMPOTENCY TOUCHFIRE HIS, for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HIS contains extracts of muira puama, nettle root and others. Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 INDIGESTION Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex INFECTION Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 INSECT BITES Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within INSOMNIA Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" INTESTINAL CLEANSING Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Inner ActHerbal Laxative Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora J JAUNDICE Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution JOINT PAIN Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E K KIDNEYS DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men L LARYNGITIS Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids LIVER Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors LOU GEHRIG DISEASE (ALS) Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA LOW BLOOD PRESSURE Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger LUNGS Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids LUPUS Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients M MALNUTRITION Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Vita Saurus Children's Chewable Vitamins & Minerals Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 MEMORY LOSS Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge MENOPAUSE Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate MENSTRUAL PROBLEMS Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets MENTAL PROBLEMS Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA MITRAL VALVE PROLAPSE Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate MONOMUCLEOSIS Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder MYASTHENIA GRAVIS Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men N NAUSEA Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" NEPHRITIS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 NERVES Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge NIGHT BLINDNESS Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne NIGHTMARES Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder O OBESITY Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Shape Plus Herbal Appetite Suppresant Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge OSTEOPOROSIS CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder P PAIN Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients PANCREAS Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger PARALYSIS Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain PARKINSON'S DISEASE Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge PERIODONTAL DISEASE Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids PHLEBITIS Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment PNEUMONIA Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 POISON IVY Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients POLLUTION Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids POST ANTIBIOTICS Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement PREGNANCY TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids PROSTATE Prostate Formula Herbs & Other Nutrients for Prostate Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men PSORIASIS Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution PUBERTY TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora PYORRHEA Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids R RADIATION Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement RASHES Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols RESTLESSNESS Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge RHEUMATISM Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients RINGING IN EARS Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora S SEBORRHEA Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora SEIZURES/NERVE INSTABILITY CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement SENILITY Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora SEX DRIVE TOUCHFIRE HERS for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HERS contains chuchuasi, catuaba, and five other rainforest herbs. TOUCHFIRE HIS, for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HIS contains extracts of muira puama, nettle root and others. Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder SHINGLES Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols SINUSITIS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols SLEEP DISORDERS Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men SLENDERIZING Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Shape Plus Herbal Appetite Suppresant SLIPPED DISK Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate SMOKING Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger SORE THROAT Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger STOMACH GAS, BLOATING, INDIGESTION Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora SPORTS/STAMINA Catagesic, Synergistic energy and anti-inflammatory rainforest herbs for athletic performance and recovery formula. Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body SPRAINS/STRAINS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets STRESS Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid STROKE Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment SUNBURN Wonder Gel provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body T TENDONITIS Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA THROMBOPNIEBITIS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TOXEMIA Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers TRIGLYCERIDES Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger U ULCERS (DIGESTIVE) Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Ecology No. 3 Colon Ecology ULCERS (LEG) Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution URINARY PROBLEMS DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution V VAGINITIS Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution VARICOSE VEINS Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate VENERIAL DISEASE Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger VIRAL INFECTIONS Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger VISION Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution VITALITY TOUCHFIRE HIS, for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HIS contains extracts of muira puama, nettle root and others. TOUCHFIRE HERS for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HERS contains chuchuasi, catuaba, and five other rainforest herbs. Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge VOMITING Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Ecology No. 3 Colon Ecology Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement W WARTS Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution WATER RETENTION DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate WEIGHT LOSS Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus Shape Plus Herbal Appetite Suppresant Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge WORMS Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme WOUNDS Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals X X-RAYS Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Y YEAST INFECTION Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA YELLOW JAUNDICE Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Proanthenols Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution This page is under construction! If you do not see your disease or problem listed, drop me a line! CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-13IA012-000125-B012-110http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mendo.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221050 text/html 8975HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:11:00 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:22:01 GMTContent-length: 8791Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with DHEA; anti-aging and weight loss! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... ENDOCRYN DHEA: Real DHEA Prohormone Complex Each Tablet Contains: DHEA 30mg Phytosterol Complex 10mg Herbs and Herbal Extracts Amino Acids Wild Yam (Mexican & Asian Dioscorea) 100mg Tyrosine 20mg Gota Kola 40mg L-Glutamine 20mg Gingko Biloba (50:1) Arginine 10mg Siberian Ginseng 20mg Ornithine 10mg Norwegian Kelp 30mg Lysine 10mg Saw Palmetto Extract 10mg Pantothenic Acid 10mg MOTHER OF HORMONES DHEA is called the mother of hormones by researchers because it is used by the body to manufacture many other hormones, including our sex hormones that are necessary for many bodily functions. Some of these are well known, such as estrogen, testosterone, progesterone, cortisone and others. They are responsible for the maintenance of many bodily functions such as fat and mineral metabolism, controlling stress, maintaining male and female characteristics and others. The body produces DHEA and then converts it on demand to these other hormones. In addition, we now know that each of our cells also have DHEA receptors, meaning that DHEA has its own effects as well. AGING This wonderful substance is abundant in our bodies when we are about 20 years old but continues to decrease with time. At 80 years of age, we usually only produce about 10 to 20% of the amounts when we were in our 20's. Interestingly, the steady declining levels of DHEA in our blood stream as we age perfectly matches the increasing incidence of the killer diseases cancer, heart disease (including atherosclerosis) and Alzheimer's disease. Much research has shown the major importance of DHEA levels in the prevention of these kinds of disease. For example, a 1988 study at Johns Hopkins showed 50% reduction in arterial plaque in rabbits. A Temple University study showed supplemental DHEA was able to prevent breast cancer in mice that were prone to develop it. The studies also showed the prevention of lung and bowel tumors plus the extension of life span. A study in Guernsey, U.K. showed women destined to develop breast cancer had low DHEA levels up to nine years previous. Doctors at the Medical College of Virginia showed lower DHEA levels were associated with build-up of atherosclerotic plaque and that higher insulin levels from the ingestion of simple carbohydrates caused a reduction of DHEA levels in the body. Maintaining DHEA levels in the body has been shown to be important in improving memory, preventing Alzheimer's disease and osteoporosis in post-menopausal women. A twelve year study published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 1986 (315.1519-24) reported that of the 242 men aged 50-79 studied: "A I00 microgram per deciliter increase in DHEA sulfate concentration corresponded with a 48% reduction in mortality due to cardiovascular disease and a 36% reduction in mortality for any reason. The natural level of DHEA sulfate was measured and those individuals with higher DHEA sulfate levels lived longer and had much lower risk of heart disease." WEIGHT CONTROL One of the most exciting benefits of DHEA is its ability to burn fat and help keep it off by converting fat to muscle. It is a "thermogenic" substance because it helps burn calories for energy rather than store them as fat. Dr. A. Schwartz, a researcher at Temple University, has now proven beyond question DHEA's effectiveness in weight control. DHEA's ability to block an enzyme named G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase) may be one of the most significant finds of the century. This enzyme is not only essential for fat tissue production but also promotes cancer cell growth. By blocking it, DHEA's action of reducing body fat and helping to prevent against cancer may be explained. DHEA's weight control effect does not seem to be so diet dependent. No matter what you eat, DHEA still has benefits of weight loss. Of course, dietary modification, exercise and lifestyle are important in weight control but it is exciting to obtain benefits of such a fantastic natural substance at whatever level of commitment you want to make. UNIQUE FORMULATION DHEA has probably become the most extensively studied substance in recent history. This is because it plays such an important role in metabolism and can have such an amazing positive effect when used as a specialized supplement. DHEA is a much needed substance to maintain youthful vigor, a lean body and many other desirable traits. Our endocrine (hormonal) system is virtually dependent on adequate levels of DHEA, but unfortunately levels decrease as we age. Many researchers believe that decreasing levels of DHEA contribute to symptoms normally associated with aging as well as many degenerative conditions such as cancer and atherosclerosis or hardening of the arteries. ENDOCRYN DHEA not only contains a full 30 mg of the prohormone DHEA, but also 10 mg of a high quality Phytosterol Complex that also serves as fuel for the endocrine system. The herbal concentrates, amino acids, pantothenic acid and magnesium nutritionally support adrenal function for optimum health. PHYTOZYME BASE ENDOCRYN DHEA is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE IT As a natural DHEA supplement for general use, it is usually recommended to take one tablet from one to three times a day. Larger individuals, or those desiring a more aggressive approach, may take more for a month or two. The goal is to provide your body with the DHEA and nutritional materials to support your adrenal glands so they can produce and maintain healthy DHEA levels. Suggested Use: One or more tablets per day Product No: 0210 Package Size: 90 tablets $25.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-14IA012-000125-B012-124http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mopc.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221058 text/html 9385HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:11:13 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:43:55 GMTContent-length: 9201Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with proanthocyanidins; powerful antioxidants Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PROANTHENOLS: Dr. Masquelier's 100% Bioavailable Proanthocyanidins Each Tablet Supplies: Regular High Potency Mini-Tabs Proanthenols 50mg Proanthenols 100mg Proanthenols 20mg CytoFlav-C ® CytoFlav-C ® CytoFlav-C ® HISTORY In 1928, Albert Szent-Gyorgyi isolated vitamin C from citrus and other sources. It helped prevent scurvy, but results were not consistent. He later isolated bioflavonoids, which he called vitamin P. He blended the two together and called the mixture "citrin." This mixture was more reliable but still inconsistent. Then in 1947, Professor Dr. Jack Masquelier, working at the University of Bordeaux began solving the puzzle. The French government asked him to research the possible toxicity of the red pigment in peanut skins. The agricultural authorities wanted to know if the residue from peanuts being fed to livestock was toxic because some of the animals did not like to eat it. He showed the red substance was not toxic and while studying it, isolated the first proanthocyanidins or OPC's ever identified. As a matter of fact, his Ph.D. thesis was about this research. It shed light on the colorless OPC's that had a vascular protective effect greater than Szent-Gorgyi's citrin. The OPC's were different from the yellow colored bioflavonoids isolated earlier. In 1948 and in 1951, Masquelier registered his first patents. They described his method of extracting OPC's from peanut skins and pine bark. In later patents, Masquelier described methods to obtain OPC's from grape seeds. Most importantly, his 1987 U.S. Patent No, 4,698,360 granted the exclusive right to use OPC's as antioxidants to protect the body "against the harmful biological effects of free radicals." TERMINOLOGY Dr. Masquelier's extract contains individual units called catechins. The catechins, which occur individually, are called monomers. When they are linked together in pairs, they are called "dimers" and when in three's, "trimers." In 1979, he named the mixture "pycnogenols" from the Greek "pycno" meaning to "thicken or condense," "gen" meaning "to generate " and "ol" from their chemical name. The dimers and trimers are referred to as oligomeric proanthocyanidins. "Oligo" is from the Greek meaning "a few" or "more than one but not many. " "Pro " means "before," "precursor" or "produces," and "anthoCyanins" are the red compounds that the proanthocyanidins change into when fruit ripens, flowers mature or leaves turn. "Oligomeric ProanthoCyanidins'' is abbreviated "OPC," They are found in most plants, are highly bioavailable and are active in the body as tremendous antioxidants and free radical scavengers. OPC's are chemically classified as flavanols and are present in red wines, flowers, leaves, fruits, berries, nuts, sorghum, beans and hops with high concentrations in skins, barks and seeds. The most feasible commercial source is the seeds of grapes and the bark of the French Maritime Pine. Technically speaking according to Masquelier, OPC's are really not bioflavonoids. OPC's are "flavonols" while bioflavonoids are "favonoids." While the chemical structure of their core molecules is the same, flavonols and flavonoids actually have more differences than similarities. OPC's are colorless, bioflavonoids are yellow. OPC's are water soluble, bioflavonoids are relatively insoluble. Flavanols, including OPC's, are always made up of polymers of one compound called "flavan-3-ol", while bioflavonoids are made up of many different compounds with a "flavane" nucleus. FORMULATION All Life Plus PROANTHENOLS products are formulated exclusively with Dr, Masquelier's OPC-85, a scientific blend of extracts including grape seeds and French Maritime Pine Bark, under protection of U.S. Patent No. 4,698,360, assuring today's standard of excellence in proanthocyanidins. Up to 25% of OPC extract consists of monomeric precursors, the building blocks of OPC. In grape seed extract, these precursors are known as catechins and epicatechins. Pine bark extract contains catechins and taxifolin. Every plant species has its own unique precursor mix. Blending both grape seed and pine bark extracts combines all their monomeric precursors. The two together provide a broad spectrum, creating a more complete storehouse of OPC building blocks. On their own, these precursors are inactive and short lived. However, catalyzed by the presence of OPC, they become active and "unfurl" their own unique biological benefits rendering the blend richer in total activity. POWERFUL ANTIOXIDANTS Free radicals are incredibly destructive. They damage our cells, which can mean premature aging, reduced immune function, inflammation and ultimately degenerative disease. Our primary defense is antioxidant nutrients, of which the most well known are vitamins C and E. The biological activity of antioxidants is enormously important to our health. OPC's, or proanthocyanidins are the most powerful antioxidant free radical scavengers known to man. They are as much as 50 times more potent than vitamin F and 20 times more than vitamin C. OPC's are major protectors of collagen, the basic foundation our blood vessels and all connective tissues such as skin, ligaments around joints and tendons. PHYTOZYME BASE All PROANTHENOLS products are formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme tablet base. PhytoZyme base is a unique combination of concentrates containing numerous phytonutrients from over thirty different plants. When you take Life Plus products, you receive the added benefit of many natural phytochemicals. Each formula contains these synergistic nutrients for the natural health supporting phytonutrients and other micronutrients they contain. SUGGESTED USE Most individuals take 1 mg of OPC's per pound of body weight per day. For example, a 100 lb person would take 100 mg per day. This equals one HP 100 mg tablet or two Regular 50 mg tablets. Most take more the first week. Children and adults under 100 lbs take 100 mg per day. The HP formula is the most cost effective and convenient. It is common to take more for specific needs. Suggested Use: Usually one mg. of pycnogenol per pound of body weight per day for seven days, thereafter 50 mg per day. Product No: 0197 Package Size: 50 mg 60 tablets $24.50 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 1946 Package Size: 50 mg 240 tablets $91.50 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 1950 Package Size: 100 mg 60 tablets $45.50 U.S. +Shipping Product No: 1949Package Size: 20 mg 60 tablets $15.50 U.S. +Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-15IA012-000125-B012-140http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msilva.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221105 text/html 8641HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:11:21 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:48:27 GMTContent-length: 8457Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with colloidal silver- the natural antibiotic! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... COLLOIDAL SILVER: All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution Contains: 20 parts per million (ppm) 0f 99.999% Pure Colloidal Silver Particles0.0001 microns in diameter in electro-magnetically charges and suspendedin deionized water. No artificial ingredients, protein stabilizers, preservatives or additives COLLOIDAL SILVER COLLOIDAL SILVER is an amazing natural alternative to antibiotics. There is no disease causing bacteria that can live in the presence of even minute traces of metallic silver.Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER contains only aural ingredients that help the body fight infections just like synthetic antibiotics, but without their damaging side effects. Its natural light golden color is characteristic of its high quality. The concentration of five parts of silver per million contained Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER is the most effective, safe formulation available. Higher concentrations can actually be less effective as they may interfere with beneficial bacteria and cause skin discoloration, even when used internally. Every family desiring optimum natural health should have a bottle of Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER in the medicine cabinet. QUALITY The Life Plus top grade COLLOIDAL SILVER is produced by a highly technical electrocolloidal method employing an electrical current. It has a pH of approximately 6.5 and is a natural golden color. Usually, an antibiotic kills a half dozen or so bacteria, but silver kills some 650. Resistant strains do not develop to silver like they do with antibiotics. HISTORY Silver was used as a proven germ fighter in the early 1900's. It was the mainstay of antibiotic treatment, and today's technology is even more superior. The medical journal Lancet reported phenomenal results from colloidal silver in 1914. Dr. Henry Crooks showed colloidal silver to be highly germicidal yet absolutely harmless and non-toxic to humans. Colloidal Silver has been proven useful against all species of fungi, bacteria, protozoa, parasites and certain viruses, which are often killed within minutes. L>C> For, M>D> at the UCLA School of Medicine reported in 1988 that silver solutions were effective against Streptococcus, Pyogenes, Staphylococcus Aures, Neisseria Gonorrhea, Garnerella, Vaginalis, Salmonella Typhu and other enteric pathogens. He also found that it was fungicidal for Candida Albicans, Candida Globata and M. Furfur. Science Digest reported in an article in 1978, entitled "Our Mightiest Germ Fighter" that "silver is emerging as a wonder of modern medicine." Dr. Robert O. Becker, M.D. stated, "we have rediscovered the fact that silver kills bacteria, which had been known for centuries...when antibiotics were discovered, uses for silver as an antibiotic were discarded." COLLOID The term "colloid" refers to a substance that consists of ultra-fine particles within the range of 0.005 to 0.015 microns in diameter. In a true colloid, like Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER, these particles cannot be seen by the naked eye and stay suspended as they are electrically charged. This activates the germicidal quality of the silver. PRODUCTION The "grind" method can b used, but the particles are too large and a protein, or other, stabilizer has to be included. However, stabilizers can interfere with effectiveness. Also, a chemical process can be used but the end product is usually too acid and not as effective. Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER is produced by the electrocolloidal process, which allows extremely fine silver particles to be suspended in solution by the tiny charge placed n them. This process replaces the need for any chemicals or stabilizers and the product can be called a true colloid. Then, the particles can remain in suspension almost indefinitely. COLOR Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER is the ideal golden yellow color. Other products that are not true colloids will be another color, unless coloring is added. Color is a critical indicator of colloidal silver quality. AS NATURE INTENDED Silver may be linked to the proper functioning of our immune system and that people with inadequate intakes may be more prone to infection. Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER contains 99.999% pure colloidal silver particles 0.0001 microns in diameter with a concentration of 20 parts per million that have little effect on the friendly bacteria in our digestive tract. However, be aware of products with higher concentrations as they can attack friendly bacteria just like some antibiotics. This could upset your natural balance and lead to other complications. With colloidal silver, higher concentrations are not necessarily better. As a matter of fact, the opposite is usually true. HOW TO USE COLLOIDAL SILVER When used as an antibiotic, adults and children twelve and older, take one, two or three teaspoonfuls of Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER by mouth three times a day. Younger children can take half this amount. It is tasteless, odorless and non-irritating to sensitive tissues such as the eyes, so it can also be used like a first aid spray on cuts, sores, burns, insect bites, etc. Life Plus COLLOIDAL SILVER is furnished with a sprayer top on the bottle. The sprayer makes it convenient to use as a topical spray. However, it is recommended that you also spray it into the mouth when taking it orally. Forty pumps from the sprayer equals one teaspoonful of solution. For maximum utilization, pump several sprays into the mouth, hold for a few seconds and swallow. Repeat this process until forty full pumps are swallowed for each teaspoonful desired. This allows the silver to be absorbed sublingually (under the tongue), getting it into the system sooner, plus bypassing the intestinal flora. Suggested Use: Adult and children 12 years and older, take one to threeteaspoonfuls three times per day as needed. Children under 12, take one-halfthe adult dosage. Can be sprayed on sores, cuts and burns as well. Product No: 1945 Package Size: 4 oz. $26.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-16IA012-000125-B012-157http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mmel.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221115 text/html 9161HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:11:28 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:43:18 GMTContent-length: 8977Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with melatonin for a restful sleep Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SOMNISET: Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients Each Tablet Supplies: Melatonin 1.5mg Minerals Herbs Amino Acids Calcium Lactate 25 mg Valerian Root 40 mg L-Glutamine 20 mg Magnesium Gluconate 50 mg Hops 20 mg L-Glutamic acid 10 mg Zinc Gluconate 7.5 mg Passionflower 20 mcg L-Tyrosine 10 mg CIRCADIAN RHYTHMS Many biological functions are rhythmic such as the short rhythms of breathing and heartbeat. Longer patterns are common, such as monthly menstrual cycles and annual seasonal cycles. Daily rhythms are called circadian, from circa" meaning about, and "dies" meaning day. The daily rise and fall of blood pressure, excretions and changes in body temperature are known, but the most common is the melatonin induced sleep/wake cycle. By changing the length of time we are exposed to varying intensities of light during a day, it is possible to affect the timing of melatonin production and disrupt our sleep patterns. This can be experienced with jet travel. As we traverse several time zones, our production of melatonin gets out of sync with the new time causing jet lag. Also, if one's job requires them to work different shifts, it can take days to get used to the new time resulting in feeling tired most of the time. Understanding circadian rhythms can be meaningful. Vitality is lowest at midnight. For example, death after surgery occurs three times as frequently at midnight than noon. Benefits of taking medications and supplements can be maximized taking these cycles into account. Biological clocks are known to become disorganized in diseased states. This lack of synchronization may not be a mere symptom but part of the disease itself. PINEAL GLAND The pineal gland is located in the brain and serves as a "light detector" or "third eye." Light sets the timing mechanism of the brain's internal clock each morning as it enters the lens of the eye and stimulates the retina. Impulses are sent to the hypothalamus and transmitted along the optic nerve and into the sympathetic nervous system and the pineal gland. These impulses inhibit the activity of an enzyme required to produce melatonin, so melatonin production decreases. Then, each night the "clock" signals the pineal gland to secrete the sleep producing hormone melatonin. SLEEP Lowered levels of nighttime melatonin reduce the quality of sleep resulting in the need for more sleep. If your pineal gland does not produce adequate melatonin early enough in the evening, it is difficult to go to sleep. If secretion does not continue, you may wake up too soon. If your pineal gland secretes too much or for too long into the next day, you will have a tendency to be sleepy and not rested the next morning. Continuing melatonin production into the day can also result in depression and tiredness. If you do not get adequate sleep, mental acuity decreases, too. Insomnia exists when melatonin levels are low or when it is produced at the wrong time. Supplementing can help re-establish balance and help you set your biological clock. ENDOCRINE & IMMUNE SYSTEMS There is a close correlation between the pineal and the pituitary/adrenal endocrine glands. Low melatonin levels are associated with lessened thymus activity, steroids metabolism and depression. Much of the activity of the immune system takes place at night and it is thought that melatonin interacts with our immune system during sleep. Melatonin may be an anti-stress factor and its normal rhythmic release is a buffering device, quenching the adverse effects of stress on the immune system. Some researchers believe the steady increase in the incidence of cancer is partially because of the extended time we are exposed to artificial lighting. This results in extended hours each day that melatonin production is suppressed when levels would have been higher longer. Melatonin levels of breast and prostate patients are reduced to half the normal levels. Conditions associated with elevated estrogen levels such as uterine fibroids, endometriosis and premenstrual syndrome may be prevented by normal systemic levels of melatonin. BRAIN & CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM Melatonin stabilizes electrical activity of the central nervous system. The pineal, primarily through melatonin, acts as a synchronizing and stabilizing organ. Nighttime melatonin levels are low in people with major depressive and panic disorders. Individuals with noticeable mood swings or melancholy also have depressed melatonin levels. Both seasonal affective disorders and non-seasonal cyclic depressions are related to the peaks and valleys of melatonin levels. AGING Stress and/or dietary lack of tryptophan may make deficiencies of melatonin common. Older individuals have a reduced ability to produce melatonin. The relationships of endocrine rhythms, mood, sleep and the biological effects of light are complex. Since melatonin secretion declines with age, many researchers believe that it may help prevent age-related and free radical mediated brain damage. The melatonin corticoid relationship has significance since chronic hypercortisolemia has been associated with age related deterioration of the brain (including Alzheimer's disease), glucose intolerance, atherosclerosis, impaired immune function and cancer. Melatonin appears to mediate the entire aging process. PHYTOZYME BASE SOMNISET is formulated in the proprietary Life PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products. you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE IT The recommended range is from one to five tablets from about thirty to forty-five minutes before bedtime. SOMNISET is not a drug but a natural supplement supportive of natural metabolic rhythms, so several days supplementation may be needed to begin seeing results. Start with one or two tablets and increase as needed after three nights. More is not necessarily better if not needed. Suggested Use: One to five tablets thirty to forty minutes before bedtime. Product No: 0200 Package Size: 90 tablets $19.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-17IA012-000125-B012-180http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mmicro.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221131 text/html 11353HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:11:42 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:43:48 GMTContent-length: 11168Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with all-natural colloidal minerals Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... MICRO-MINS: Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals Each Capsule Supplies 600mg of: Calcium Boron Gadolinium Lithium Praseodymium Terbium Chlorine Bromine Gallium Lutetium Rhenium Thallium Magnesium Cadmium Germanium Manganese Rhodium Thorium Phosphorus Carbon Gold Mercury Rubidium Thulium Potassium Cerium Hafnium Molybdenum Ruthenium Tin Sodium Cesium Holmium Neodymium Samarium Titanium Sulfur Chromium Hydrogen Nickel Scandium Tungsten Antimony Cobalt Indium Niobium Selenium Vanadium Arsenic Copper Iodine Nitrogen Silicon Ytterbium Aluminum Dysrosium Iridium Osmium Silver Yttrium Barium Erbium Iron Oxygen Strontium Zinc Beryllium Europium Lanthanum Palladium Tantalum Zirconium Bismuth Fluorine Lead Platinum Tellurium TYPES OF MINERALS Three different types exist, metallic, chelated and colloidal. Metallic minerals are most commonly used in nutritional supplements, especially for the major minerals because larger amounts are indicated. They have the least degree of absorption. Chelated minerals are the next step up the ladder. The metallic mineral is "chelated" with an amino acid. The "mineral chelate" is more bioavailable. Colloidal Minerals occur in nature as small particles that either are or can be easily dispersed in a dispersion medium. Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals provide the best of all worlds because they are colloidal in nature and are associated with natural plant tissues, giving them all of the advantages of chelated minerals and more. Erosion and unwise farming methods have made mineral-rich soil a rare commodity. The result is mineral deficient plants and livestock, and mineral-deficient people. ORGANIC HUMIC SHALE The best quality plant derived colloidal minerals in the world are concentrated from the mineral rich natural organic humic shale in the Rockland Mine. About 75 million years ago, the Earth's mineral-rich soils produced succulent fruits, vegetables and lush forests. The soils contained at least 84 minerals, which is why some experts believe some trees grew ten feet the first year. Plant and animal life was extremely healthy and it is believed that a major reason is a direct result of the plants' access to at least 77 minerals from the soil. This is a far cry from the number of minerals available from the average soil throughout the world today. As the lucious vegetation died, it accumulated in deposits. It was compressed or compacted so that all of the moisture in it was eliminated. What remains today is a deposit of dried, prehistoric plant derivatives known as organic humic shale. This organic humic shale contains 77 plant derived hydrophilic minerals which are very small in size when compared to metallic minerals. Because the minerals in humic shale were assimilated by plants, they are naturally incorporated into the tissues of the plant and are more hydrophilic and more readily utilized COLLOIDS AND COLLOIDAL SOLUTIONS Colloidal science is devoted to the study of systems in which finely divided substances (colloids) are dispersed within a medium. A colloidal system can be a solid dispersed in a gas, solid-in-solid, solid-in-liquid, gas-in-gas, gas-in-liquid, liquid-in-liquid. etc. A colloidal system is not really a solution in which one substance is totally dissolved into the other hand, a colloidal system it is not really a suspension either. In a suspension, the particles of the substance being suspended are larger and remain in the solid state. Some people do not realize that solids can be colloids. A colloid is one thing and a colloidal solution is another. A colloidal solution is merely a system in which a colloid has been dispersed in a liquid. Most all of the so-called colloidal mineral nutritional products on the market today are liquids. Actually, most of them are not true colloids at all. They have been manufactured by extracting some source material such as shale, clay or sea bed with citric or some other kind of acid. In this process, the acid helps dissolve the minerals and breaks down much of the organic matter in the source material, which occurs naturally associated with the minerals. This acid extraction can actually destroy the plant-derived colloidal nature of most minerals and trace elements. THE ROCKLAND PROCESS The proprietary low-temperature Rockland process uses only cool, contaminant free water. By maintaining low temperatures, the integrity of the natural delicate state of plant derived minerals is maintained. A major advantage of the finished product is that the super highly concentrated plant-derived colloidal material is maintained in its natural state and can be easily hydrated by water to become a colloidal solution. The humic shale is mined in the natural dry state as it has existed for millions of years. It is then ground to smaller aggregates and placed in stainless steel vats, where it is leached slowly. No acids are used. Negative pressure is applied which makes the concentration more efficient at low temperatures. Only the water is removed and the solid plant-derived colloidal minerals are all that are present, but in a highly concentrated form. When the leaching is complete, the mother liquor contains 38.000 milligrams of the 7 major minerals and 70 trace minerals per quart of liquid. When dried, the colloidal powder is placed in capsules of 600 mg each so that one capsule is equivalent to one half ounce of liquid, in so far as mineral content is concerned. This unique method makes it possible to have a dry product that can be made into capsules containing high quality plant-derived colloidal minerals just as they were in their natural state. When swallowed with water, the minerals in Micro-Mins capsules readily return to their liquid colloidal state in the digestive tract and provide all the advantages of the liquid form without the disadvantages. Metallic minerals carry a positive charge in their ionic Form in solution and, in general, are just not very soluble. Scientifically, they are called hydrophobic because they are not very soluble in water. Minerals that have been assimilated by plants are hydrophilic, so they are very water soluble. They are negatively charged and form direct hydrogen bonds with water. Hydrophilic plant-derived minerals, which have not been destroyed by heat or acids or other chemicals, are enzymatically active and thus are highly bioavailable. ALUMINUM IN OUR FOODS Some people believe that the so-called toxic metals (minerals) are bad regardless of their source. Aluminum is found in the earth is, its metallic form. There is no question about its metallic form, which is well documented that it can be leached from aluminum cooking utensils and absorbed from antiperspirants and deposited in both brain and heart tissue. However, the aluminum, which comes from food, is hydrophilic as it has been assimilated by plants and it is naturally tied to oxygen or silica. The World Health Organization estimates the average adult dietary aluminum intake between 10 and 15 mg per day. Aluminum is one of the most abundant minerals on earth, second only to silica. It is in virtually everything we touch, most of the air we breathe and water we drink. It is in most foods that we eat. HOW TO TAKE MICRO-MINS No RDAs are established for most of the minerals in Micro-Mins, however it is known that many are needed for optimum health. They are packaged in bottles of 64 capsules making it convenient for the ideal dosage of two capsules twice a day for two weeks, or two capsules daily for a 30 day supply. Suggested Use: Two capsules once or twice a day, preferably with food. Product No: 2200 Package Size: 64 Capsules $26.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Take Action! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-18IA012-000125-B012-194http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mlyp.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221145 text/html 9915HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:11:55 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:41:58 GMTContent-length: 9731Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with a natural anti-inflammatory, anti-arthritic Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... LYPRINOL: A Natural Anti-Inflammatory to Help Relieve Joint Pain from Arthritis Each Capsule Supplies: 50 mg of LYPRINOL, a unique patented New Zealand Green-Lipped Mussel (Perna canaliculus) Concentrated Marine Lipid Extract Rich in ETA's LYPRINOL is a unique combination of marine-derived polyunsaturated fatty acids including the valuable ETA's (Eicosatetraenoic Acids) 7-1 1-14-17, 5-9-12-15, 5-9-12-16 and 5-9-12-15-18 The natural oil contained in each LYPRINOL capsule is stabilized against oxidation with Vitamin E. VALUABLE LIPIDS (PUFA'S) In recent years, interest has matured regarding lipid compounds, which have evolved as valuable nutritional substances. One group of these are the polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA's). These fatty acids are named by identifying the number of carbon atoms in their molecule and indicating the number of double or unsaturated bonds. For instance, a PUFA with eighteen carbons and three double bonds would be called 18:3 by scientists. Some well known sources of PUFA's are the unsaturated cooking oils such as sunflower and canola oils. Soybean oil is well known for its content of PUFA's. Fish oils, which have been researched for their ability to reduce cholesterol and improve health of the heart and circulatory system, also contain PUFA's. OMEGA 6 & OMEGA 3 Two basic categories of PUFA's that have received a lot of attention relative to human nutrition are the Omega 6 and Omega 3's. Omega 6 PUFA's are contained in all vegetable oils. Omega 6's are almost totally made up of linoleic acid (18:2) and it's derivatives. Some of the Omega 6's are considered more valuable, such as GLA (gamma linolenic, 18:3) found in evening primrose and borage oils. Omega 3's are found to a limited degree in some plants but are contained in all fish and shellfish. For instance, canola and flax oils contain alpha linolenic acid (18:3). The Omega 3 PUFA's contained in fish are from five to ten times more powerful in their biological activity than those found in plants. TERMINOLOGY There are three known valuable Omega 3 PUFA's in fish. They are EPA, DHA and the amazing LYPRINOL. EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid), the most well known, is usually accompanied by DHA (docosahexaenoic acid). Eicosa means 20, docosa means 22, pent means 5 and hex means 6. So then, eicosapentaenoic acid could be described as 20:5, and docosahexaenoic as 22:6. All this terminology is simply to bring us to a more detailed understanding for discussion purposes about LYPRINOL. We may call them "Super" Omega 3's. LYPRINOL The most current research is now demonstrating a whole new group of related, but different PUFA's. Over twenty years of research has produced a better understanding of ETA (eicosaetraennoic acid). ETA is a 20:4, a twenty carbon molecule with four double bonds. These newly found and isolated compounds have the greatest biological activity of all and show amazing promise for those who need to supplement with them. The most valuable ETA's have been extracted from the New Zealand Green-Lipped Mussel, Perna canaliculus. This unique mussel has been used as food for many years in that part of the world and seems to have added greatly to the health of those including it in their diet. One noticeable trait is that they seem to have a significant decrease in stiffness and joint swelling and discomfort as they age. This lead researchers to try to understand why this was so. Scientists have been conducting research on the New Zealand Green-Lipped Mussel now for over thirty years and have been learning some very important facts. It is acknowledged by many scientists and government committees around the world that the western diet provides more Omega 6 PUFA's relative to Omega 3's. This leads to our cellular membranes becoming rich in the Omega 6's such as arachidonic acid, which is a precursor to certain molecules that can cause inflammatory processes associated with arthritis, psoriasis and asthma to name a few. Many studies have reported that certain lipids from fish and other marine sources can have a beneficial effect on our overall health when they are a part of the diet on a routine basis. PERNA CANALICULUS Freeze-dried concentrated and encapsulated mussel tissue in it's raw state was used originally as a natural food supplement for the prevention of pain normally associated with older individuals experiencing joint and muscle discomfort. POTENCY There is no doubt among scientists who are aware of this state-of-the-art research that LYPRINOL has evolved as the most potent of all these "Super GLA's", regardless of their source. Independent studies carried out in Australia at the University of Queensland have shown LYPRINOL to be: 200 times more potent that Max EPA, 250 times more potent than Green-Lipped Mussel Extract, 350 times more potent than Evening Primrose Oil, 350 times more potent than Salmon Oil and 400 times more potent than Flax Oil. Following fifteen years of scientific research by independent scientists working closely with the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), the goal was achieved with the identification of the principal components responsible for the extract's high potency. The compounds were patented and named LYPRINOL. EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS LYPRINOL has been exposed to critical review by researchers at the Universities of Adelaide and Queensland in Australia. Leukotrienes are formed in the body and are known to be responsible for initiating and prolonging the process of inflammation. These leukotrienes are formed by what researchers call the lipoxygenase pathway. The concentrated ETA's (eicosatetraenoic acids) contained in LYPRINOL have been shown to be potent inhibitors of this lipoxygenase pathway and this is one reason it is believed that individuals with diets rich in ETA's seem to have less discomfort as they age. And, according to the University of Adelaide scientists, "the results were extraordinary" and "these compounds are really very potent nutritional inhibitors of the lipoxygenase pathway." HOW TO TAKE LYPRINOL Most people should begin with two capsules twice a day for one or two weeks. Some may try three times a day during this period. Then, decrease to one or two capsules once or twice a day as desired. The daily level needed to obtain maximum effect can vary for each individual. If your body requires less, temporary initial irritation of symptoms may occur with too high a dosage. If this occurs, simply decrease the amount taken. Some individuals with serious needs may not receive maximum benefit from LYPRINOL for four weeks, so it is important to not discontinue too soon. Suggested Use: Two capsules twice a day for seven to ten days, then decrease to one capsule once or twice a day as desired. More can be taken if needed. Product No: 1116 Package Size: 50 Capsules $30.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Be Healthy! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the ADVANTAGE! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! ADVANTAGE! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, ADVANTAGE! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-19IA012-000125-B012-210http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mcoq10.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221156 text/html 8052HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:12:11 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:21:00 GMTContent-length: 7868Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with co-enzyme q-10 quercetin & lecithin Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CO-Q-10: 50 mg of Co-Enzyme Q-10 Plus Quercetin & Lecithin Each Tablet Supplies: Co-Enzyme Q-10 50 mg Lecithin 50 mg Lemon Bioflavonoids 25 mg Quercetin 5 mg CO-Q-10 PLUS Co-Enzyme Q-10 is a nutrient necessary to the functioning of every cell in our bodies. Our bodies could not survive without it. If body levels start dropping, so does our general health. Scientists estimate that once levels drop below the 25% deficient levels, many disease states begin to flourish including high blood pressure, heart attack, angina, immune depression, periodontal disease, lack of energy, weight gain and even early death. CO-Q-10 AND ENERGY Co-Enzyme Q-10 is known as CO-Q-10 and also ubiquinone. It is a member of the quinone cyclic compounds that may be considered a relative of some potent anti-cancer drugs. CO-Q-10 can add or remove oxygen from biologically active molecules. Every cell of the body contains many subcellular components called mitochondria, which produce 95% of the total energy of the body. CO-Q-10 is an integral part of the membranes of the mitochondria where it is involved in the production of ATP the basic energy producing molecule of cells. THE IMMUNE SYSTEM AND AGING When immunity is low, so are the reserves of CO-Q-10. When body levels of CO-Q-10 are raised, so is the immune potential. AIDS victims and other people with depressed immune systems can receive some help from antibiotic and anti-viral drugs, but they will not rebuild the immune system. Mice have been shown to have a 50% extended life span by supplementing with CO-Q-10. Co-Enzyme Q-10 acts as an antioxidant, protecting cells against free radical damage and exerting a protective effect on cell membranes. CO-Q-10 can naturally stimulate the immune system and result in a wide range of beneficial and protective effects. THE HEART AND BLOOD PRESSURE Tissues that require the most energy (such as the heart) need the largest amounts of CO-Q-10. Angina is a condition where inadequate oxygen is available to the heart muscle itself. People with failing cardiac systems have shown to greatly benefit with increased strength and vigor when supplemented with CO-Q-10. People with high blood pressure usually have lower levels of CO-Q-10. CO-Q-10 AND WEIGHT LOSS It has been shown at the University of Texas and the University of Antwerp, Belgium that obese people can lose weight simply with the addition of CO-Q-10 to the diet. This research showed that obese people can have as much as a 50% deficiency of Co-Enzyme Q-10 in their tissues. People who eat a lot and yet stay slim have significantly higher levels of CO-Q-10 in their blood. This wonderful enzyme can increase metabolic fuel efficiency within your cells - stimulating natural weight loss. PERIODONTAL HEALTH Co-Enzyme Q-10 exerts its protective and strengthening action in all tissues. Working from the cellular level, it strengthens the gums as well as the heart muscle. Many scientists believe that periodontal (gum) disease is a good indicator of low levels of CO-Q-10 in other tissues. The American Dental Association states that at least 87% of the American population has some sort of gum disease. This has been shown to be somewhat related to nutrition and particularly to levels of CO-Q-10, which has been shown to have a good protective effect for gum tissue. THE CO-Q-10 FAMILY There are at least ten common CO-Q's, that is, different sized molecules from CO-Q-1 to CO-Q-10. The liver can utilize other CO-Q's to make CO-Q-10. If the liver is not functioning efficiently, body levels can be too low, especially with advancing age or if disease is present. Our internal ability to produce CO-Q-10 declines with age, and as we get older, we must rely more on our diet. IS CO-Q-10 SAFE? In tests of thousands of people, no toxicity has ever been shown, no matter how high the amount. Plants and animals get it from the soil, but we get it from the plants and animals that contain various CO-Q's. PHYTOZYME BASE CO-Q-10 PLUS is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE CO-Q-10 PLUS There is no definite amount determined, but remember that more is needed as more energy is required. This is especially so if extra nutritional support is needed for the immune system, the heart, to lose weight or to protect against degenerative disease. Life Plus CO-Q-10 PLUS tablets are packaged in bottles of 60. One to three tablets are recommended one to three times daily. Suggested Use: One or more tablets per day Product No: 1012 Package Size: 60 tablets $41.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Take Action! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-20IA012-000125-B012-223http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mtvm.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221204 text/html 9623HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:12:20 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:52:51 GMTContent-length: 9439Content-type: text/html Take Advantage! with iron free vitamins & minerals Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... TVM-49: Iron Free Vitamins & Minerals Foundational Nutrients Four Tablets Supply: Vitamins Vitamin A (Preformed) 2.500 iu Vitamin D-3 400 iu Vitamin E 60 iu Vitamin K 500 mcg Vitamin C 120 mg Vitamin B-1 5 mg Vitamin B-2 5 mg Vitamin B-6 5 mg Vitamin B-12 30 mcg Niacin 40 mg Folic Acid 1,000 mcg Pantothenic Acid 20 mg Biotin 300 mcg Vitamin A (as Beta-Carotene) 7,500 iu Minerals Calcium 600 mg Magnesium 300 mg Boron 250 mcg Phosphorus 270 mg Potassium 20 mg Zinc 15 mg Manganese 5 mg Copper 1 mg Iodine 150 mcg Chromium 250 mcg Selenium 25 mcg Vanadium 25 mcg Molybdenum 25 mcg Germanium 25 mcg Silicon 25 mcg Nutrients Hesperidin 5mg Choline 20mg Inositol 20mg Lecithin 20mg Lemon Bioflavonoids 10mg Betaine HCI 10mg PABA 10mg Kelp 10mg Bee Pollen 10mg L-Glutamic Acid 10mg L-Glutamine 10mg L-Tyrosine 10mg Rutin 5mg A Blend of 30 mg of Herbs Including: Rose Hips Acerola Alfalfa Parsley Ginseng Watercress COMPREHENSIVE TVM-49 is one of the most comprehensive, nutritional supplements ever formulated. It is the Life Plus basic, nutritional insurance policy for adults and older children. No other product in its category begins to compare with it when you consider the quality and quantity of ingredients, its broad spectrum base and cost per unit of nutrients. The body requires a good balance of a wide variety of nutrients as more than one nutrient is usually involved in each individual biochemical reaction in the body. If even one of those nutrients is lacking, the natural health supporting chain reaction cannot take place. If such a lack persists, the body will eventually suffer some form of degeneration or disease. TVM-49 is a unique, broad spectrum nutritional supplement TVM-49 ensures the necessary nutrients classified as present in a rational relationship and with numerous synergistic associated nutrients, including many ultra-trace elements, so they can work together harmoniously. BE SURE WITH TVM-49 TVM-49 goes far beyond just vitamins and minerals. It is manufactured by strictly controlled cold processing methods and contains many "super foods" such as Lecithin, Bee Pollen, Kelp and Bioflavonoids. These "super foods" contain many nutritional factors, presently unknown, which could be very essential to good health. The Life Plus proprietary PhytoZyme tablet base contains over thirty natural phytochemical plant concentrates from foods such as broccoli, carrot, cauliflower and several others. TVM-49 also contains the valuable special amino acids L-Glutamic Acid, L-Glutamine and L-Tyrosine, known not just for their traditional value, but for their more newly understood value against brain aging. TVM-49 contains numerous trace and ultra-trace minerals such as Chromium, Selenium, Vanadium (as Vanadyl Sulfate), Molybdenum, Germanium, Silicon and Boron, most of which are not contained in other multi-vitamin and mineral products on the market today. WHAT ABOUT IRON? Iron is intentionally not included in this great formula as it is becoming more apparent that only a small number of people need iron supplements. Men, in particular, usually do not need iron but some women do. It is believed that the reason some diseases, particularly heart disease and cancer, are more prevalent in men is that they do not routinely lose some of their iron through menstruation as women do. It is now known that excess iron can be responsible, or at least involved, in the production of damaging free radicals in the body. WHAT ABOUT MEGA VITAMINS? At Life Plus, we do not believe in taking large amounts of all the vitamins and minerals routinely on a daily basis. At times, the use of larger amounts of certain nutrients, such as Vitamin A, C or E may be worthwhile. You may want to use larger amounts of certain amino acids or enzymes. TVM-49 supplies you with a substantial amount of about every nutrient the average person needs daily. Four tablets a day will give you 100% of the RDA of everything except calcium and magnesium. TVM-49 contains calcium and magnesium, but due to their sheer bulk, six tablets are required to obtain the full RDA quantities. Our bodies are simply fantastic! If we furnish them with adequate amounts of the required nutrients, combined with a reasonable lifestyle, they maintain themselves against the various toxicants they are exposed to each day. Because our foods do not contain the quantities of nutrients they did in the past, and because we are exposed to more pollutants in our environment, in the foods we eat and the water we drink, it only makes sense to supplement daily with TVM-49. PHYTOZYME BASE TVM-49 is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE TVM-49 It is recommended that children over twelve years of age and adults take four tablets each day, usually two tablets with breakfast and two with the evening meal for the nutritional insurance you need. You may add to your program as desired with such products as CALMAGPLUS, PROANTHENOLS, INNER MAGIC M or INNER MAGIC F depending on your needs. Strongly consider the Life Plus SYNERGY PAK; it contains TVM-49 and three other synergistic foundational products making a great foundational nutrient supplement program. Suggested Use: Two tablets twice a day with breakfast and evening meal as a basic nutritional supplement. Product No: 1008 Package Size: 120 tablets $18.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 1009 Package Size: 360 tablets $51.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-21IA012-000125-B012-237http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mvitac.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221213 text/html 9278HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:12:28 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:53:06 GMTContent-length: 9094Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with time released vitamin C Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... VITA-C-1000 TR: Timed Released Buffered Vitamin C Plus Bioflavonoids Each Time Released Tablet Supplies: Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) 1,000 mg Lemon Bioflavonoids 100 mg Hesperidin 30 mg Rutin 30 mg Acerola 20 mg Cayenne 10 mg Formulated to release its ingredients over a prewdetermined period of between two and three hours to increase the utilization of its Vitamin C in the body. NEEDS VARY Vitamin C is the most talked about and most studied vitamin. It naturally reinforces hundreds of defense mechanisms in the body. With the exception of man, almost all other animals are able to manufacture their own. However, we must obtain it from food or supplements. Individual needs for Vitamin C vary from person to person and from day to day, according to the types and amount of stress that is experienced. Dr. Linus Pauling, the world's leader in Vitamin C research, consistently took 6,000 mg per day for years, which he considered to be the absolute minimum, even though the U.S. Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) is only 60 mg per day. Most doctors and scientist agree that we routinely need more since the RDA was determined to be enough to only prevent scurvy. Those who live in cities or near busy highways may suffer from carbon monoxide and lead poisoning. In large doses, Vitamin C has been shown to have a protective effect of pulling the carbon monoxide away from the hemoglobin in the red blood cells, so the oxygen can become attached and be carried to the cells. Pregnant women who take adequate amounts of Vitamin C have less problem with leg cramps, fluid retention and toxemia. It has been proven that Vitamin C increases certain biochemical reactions in white blood cells that kill bacteria. There are many bacteria, viruses, and allergies which can be associated in various ways with colds. Vitamin C does not provide complete protection against all of them. Nonetheless, your odds are probably better while taking it. If you smoke one pack of cigarettes a day, you have about 25C/o less Vitamin C in your blood than non-smokers. Those who drink a lot of alcoholic beverages need Vitamin C, because the liver depends on it to produce an enzyme that helps take alcohol out of the bloodstream. Aspirin depletes the body of Vitamin C and blocks the blood cells from absorbing it. The more exposure to drugs and chemicals, the more Vitamin C is needed to minimize harmful effects. Diabetics seem to lack the ability to transport Vitamin C across their cell membranes, which can result in serious blood vessel complications, which is common among diabetics. Dr. George Mann of Vanderbilt University states that "cataracts may be a late consequence of marginal intakes of ascorbic acid (Vitamin C), with the diabetic being more prone to cataracts because of their lack of insulin." COLLAGEN Vitamin C is necessary for healthy metabolism of skin and connective tissues. Collagen is the major component of skin and connective tissues in our bodies and is the "glue" that holds our bodies together. It cannot be manufactured without Vitamin C. As long as our tissues have the strength provided by collagen, they are able to resist the invasion of infections. Defective collagen assumes a watery consistency and leaks into the bloodstream. The cells are then easily permeated, and all kinds of diseases can run rampant. Dr. Constance Leslie of Pindersfields Hospital in Wakefield, England and many other doctors believe that Vitamin C causes cholesterol to come out of arterial plaque into the blood. It can then be used by the liver to make bile salts for digestion. The brain has a greater concentration of Vitamin C than most other tissues in the body. Dr. Pauling proved that insufficient Vitamin C can impair mentality. There is strong evidence that ascorbic acid helps brain functioning. CHELATION Studies show that Vitamin C reduces the danger of mercury, cadmium and lead poisoning. With cars emitting at least 500 million pounds of lead into the atmosphere each year, it is estimated that over 200,000 American children are victims of chronic lead poisoning. It is difficult to avoid cadmium. You get it from passive cigarette smoke, white bread, coffee and tea, to name a few sources. The FDA reported in Science Magazine that Vitamin C protects against cadmium toxicity. Vitamin C protects against nitrosamines, cancer causing chemicals that are made in the stomach from nitrates and nitrites in foods like hot dogs, bacon, luncheon meat and smoked fish. Thousands and thousands of papers have been published by reliable researchers from all over the world about Vitamin C. We cannot begin to list all the ways our bodies need Vitamin C, but these few things will give you an idea of its importance. Life Plus is careful to include a broad spectrum of bioflavonoids in VITA-C-1000-TR, as these substances occur with Vitamin C in nature. Bioflavonoids are involved with every major metabolic process of the body, and they act synergistically with Vitamin C. PHYTOZYME BASE VITA-C-1000 is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE VITA-C-1000 There is no generally accepted amount of Vitamin C to take as everyone has different needs. The RDA of only 60 mg is considered way too low and is only the amount necessary to prevent scurvy. However, larger amounts are needed in times of stress. Many experts believe that teenagers should probably take at least 2,000 mg per day, and most adults may do best on a minimum of 4,000 mg per day or more. Don't forget to include other Life Plus products you take that contain Vitamin C in computing your total consumption such as TVM-49, CARDIO-CHELEX, SUPPORT TABS, PROTX II and COMBAT. Suggested Use: One or more tablets per day as desired as a high quality source of timed-release Vitamin C and bioflavonoids. Product No: 4020 Package Size: 150 tablets $18.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Take Action! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-22IA012-000125-B012-247http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mvitae.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221222 text/html 8576HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:12:36 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:53:28 GMTContent-length: 8392Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with natural vitamin E Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... VITA-E-PLUS 400: Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Each Tablet Supplies: Vitamin E 400 iu This Vitamin E is the highest quality available and most natural d-alpha tocopherol succinate type. This form ensures stability against oxidation plus the best absorption into the body. IMPORTANT NUTRIENT Next to Vitamin C, Vitamin E has probably received the most attention from researchers and is probably the next most important vitamin. Doctors Wilfred and Evan Shute were the first to show, years ago, that Vitamin E saved lives from myocardial infraction, which is the most common type of heart attack. They also gave Vitamin E to women who were pregnant to help them avoid complications. They found Vitamin E to be of great value in preventing miscarriages. The best food source of Vitamin E is whole grains, especially wheat. However, most individuals use white flour which has been stripped of all its Vitamin E. Vegetable oils are our next best source. However, most of the vegetable oils that are available commercially have been exposed to radiation, so free radicals have formed in them. This even increases our need for Vitamin E. In addition, the processing of the oils removes most of their Vitamin E, leaving an oil that gives no protection against the free radicals it easily forms. A National Institutes of Health study has revealed that the average dietary intake of Vitamin E is about 14 international units. They have also established an RDA of 30 units. It is easy to see from these figures that the average person receives less than half of the RDA for Vitamin E. ANTIOXIDANT Vitamin E is one of the best antioxidants known. One of its roles is to see that the oxygen in our bodies is not used on harmful or useless substances before it reaches the cells. Having adequate amounts of Vitamin E is more important today than ever before, because we are exposed to so many pollutants that interfere with healthy oxygen metabolism. Vitamin E is especially valuable for tissues that require lots of oxygen, such as the heart, brain and sex glands. Without adequate amounts of Vitamin E in the blood, our red blood cells break open and are destroyed. This condition is referred to as hemolytic anemia and is common in newborn babies, especially those born prematurely. In the late 1960's astronauts on the Gemini mission developed this condition because their Vitamin E was quickly used up in the atmosphere they lived in. Since Vitamin E helps prevent anemia by protecting red blood cells from being destroyed by peroxides, it has been given to all astronauts since 1969 and this condition is no longer a problem. Breathing the air around some major cities can be hazardous to your health because of industrial and automotive pollution. The FDA has determined that a level as low as .05 parts per million of ozone is dangerous. They have shown that the toxicity of ozone is comparable to phosgene, a gas used in warfare. In Los Angeles, the ozone capital of the world, a typical concentration in the air is about 10 to 20 times the danger level. Vitamin E blocks the damaging oxidation of healthy cells by ozone and is therefore a natural defense. PREVENTION Vitamin E helps to develop new veins between the existing ones. This helps the blood get from congested veins or varicose veins to more healthy ones. This is referred to as developing collateral circulation so the blood can circulate back to the heart. Vitamin E can also help prevent intermittent claudication or lameness. Individuals with this condition can only walk short distances without developing severe leg cramps and pain. The estrogen related hormones in birth control pills neutralize Vitamin E and reduces its level in the blood stream. Because Vitamin E naturally dissolves fibrin, the protein that organizes the formation of blood clots, women on "the pill" are known to be more prone to develop clots because Vitamin E levels are low. They should supplement with Vitamin E. Research has shown that reasonable levels of both Vitamin E and Selenium are necessary for either one of them to benefit our bodies. Unfortunately, the soils in certain areas of the U.S. are very deficient in selenium. Interestingly, the citizens of Rapid City, South Dakota have the highest blood levels of selenium and the lowest cancer rate in the U.S. On the other hand, Lima, Ohio has the highest rate of cancer and the lowest level of Selenium in the blood of its citizens. It is a good idea to make sure that your selenium levels are up to par as well. Selenium is included in TVM-49 and CARDIO-CHELEX. It is intentionally not included in VITA-E-PLUS 400 to guard against over supplementing with selenium. Most Vitamin E supplements are gelatin capsules containing oil. Some of their Vitamin E is used up as an antioxidant protecting the oil. This is great for the oil, but it leaves less available for you. The natural d-alpha tocopherol succinate form of Vitamin E used in VITA-E-PLUS 400 is stable to oxidation, which ensures full potency. In addition, it is water soluble so it is more readily absorbed into the body. PHYTOZYME BASE VITA-E-PLUS 400 is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE VITA-E-PLUS 400 VITA-E-PLUS 400 is taken by those who want larger amounts of Vitamin E in their nutritional programs. Usually one or two tablets are taken per day, preferably after mid-day. Suggested Use: One tablet once or twice a day. Product No: 4017 Package Size: 90 tablets $14.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-23IA012-000125-B012-263http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msaurus.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221240 text/html 8524HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:12:56 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:48:10 GMTContent-length: 8340Content-type: text/html Have healthy children with chewable vitamins & minerals Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... VITA-SAURUS: Children's Chewable Multi-Vitamin Two Tablets Supply: Vitamins Associated Nutritional Factors Minerals Vitamin A 25,000iu Bioflavonoids 20mg Calcium 12mg Vitamin D-3 200iu Rutin 60mg Magnesium 3.2mg Vitamin E 15iu Hesperidin 10mg Manganese 2.5mg Vitamin K 20mcg Choline 10mcg Copper 100mcg Vitamin B-1 3.2mg Inositol 2mg Zinc 8mg Vitamin B-2 3.0mg PABA 10mg Iodine 100mcg Vitamin B-6 3.2mg Selenium 20mcg Vitamin B-12 10mcg Chromium 20mcg Vitamin C 100mg Molybdenum 10mcg Niacinamide 13.5mg Vanadium 10mcg Folic Acid 200mcg Panthothenic Acid 5mg Biotin 60mcg UNIQUE FORMULA VITA-SAURUS is a naturally flavored, good tasting, chewable, multiple-type supplement for children of all ages. Older adults and individuals that have difficulty swallowing tablets can take it, too. A great deal of work and experience has gone into developing it. It was developed by a panel including pediatricians, biochemists and a pharmacist with years of experience in this field. They saw a need for a totally comprehensive multiple for children and VITA-SAURUS was designed and developed for that reason. We have challenged people to look in any drug store or health food store and try to find one that even comes close to VITA-SAURUS. None can be found. All other children's multiples contains Vitamins A, C, D and a small amount of B-Complex. For all practical purposes, most all other chewable products available are made in a base of regular table sugar and flavored with synthetic substances so they will taste like candy. They are all loaded with different synthetic food coloring agents. (Studies have been done in several public school systems proving that the various food additives, including coloring agents, cause hyperkinetic children). These so called "nutritional products" usually gain their appeal by widespread intensive TV advertising, not because of their nutritional value. NATURAL FLAVOR VITA-SAURUS is flavored with a blend of natural extracts from citrus, pineapple, grape and cherry. It is sweetened with fructose, a natural fruit sugar that does not stimulate the insulin response by the pancreas like regular table sugar. VITA-SAURUS does not contain any artificial coloring, flavoring agents or preservatives. Natural Beta-Carotene, which is totally safe even in large amounts, is used as the source of vitamin A. As in all Life Plus products, the Vitamin D found in VITA-SAURUS is natural Vitamin D-3 from fish liver oil. Also included are oil soluble Vitamins E and Vitamin K. Very few children's supplements contain Vitamin E and we know of none that contain Vitamin K. MINERALS AND TRACE ELEMENTS VITA-SAURUS is the only children's product that contains all of the trace minerals, Manganese, Copper, Zinc, Iodine, Selenium, Molybdenum, Chromium and Vanadium, in addition to the two standard important minerals, Calcium and Magnesium. Trace minerals are every bit as important in nutrition as vitamins. Chromium supports the pancreas in its production of insulin, which controls carbohydrate metabolism. Since children have a tendency to eat far too much sugar and other refined carbohydrates, Chromium is an important ingredient in any children's supplement. Selenium, Molybdenum and Vanadium are antioxidants that help fight the free radicals formed because of various pollutants, such as food preservatives in the diet and radiation from TV sets. These free radicals can actually stimulate the formation of cancer. It is interesting to note that next to accidents, cancer is the leading cause of death today in children under the age of 19. In addition to the vitamins and minerals, VITA-SAURUS contains many additional associated nutrients. The Citrus Bioflavonoids, Rutin and Hesperidin, that are synergistic with Vitamin C, are included. VITA-SAURUS contains a full array of the B-Complex vitamins, plus Biotin and the valuable nutrients, PABA, Choline and Inositol. IRON FREE Iron is intentionally left out of VITA-SAURUS as the newest research shows that only slightly elevated amounts of it can cause the production of harmful free radicals in the body. VITA-SAURUS is the most rational and comprehensive general nutritional product for children on the market today. There is nothing like it anywhere. PHYTOZYME BASE VITA-SAURUS is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE VITA-SAURUS It is recommended that one tablet be chewed twice a day, morning and evening, for children under 4 years of age. Children from 4 to 12 should take 2 tablets twice a day. During periods of stress, such as colds, flu, infections, injuries, etc., double the dosage recommended. Older children and teenagers should begin taking TVM-49 instead. Suggested Use: Chew one or two tablets two times a day usually with breakfast and supper. Product No: 1914 Package Size: 240 tablets $19.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-24IA012-000125-B012-275http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mliver.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221304 text/html 6729HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:13:13 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:41:11 GMTContent-length: 6545Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with vitamins for your liver Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... LIVER PLUS IRON: With Vitamin B-12, Vitamin C & Folic Acid Each Tablet Supplies: Vitamins & Minerals Concentrated Tissue Nutrients Vitamin B-12 100mcg Liver 250mg Folic Acid 50mcg Stomach 25mg Vitamin C 125mg Spleen 25mg Iron (as chelate) 20mg Duodenum 25mg Bone Marrow 25mg Herbs Spinach Powder 10mg, Beet Root 10mg and Rhubarb Root 15mg HEMATINIC LIVER PLUS IRON is a "hematinic." It is a tonic for the blood. Liver has long been known as a blood building food. LIVER PLUS IRON is much more than just liver and iron. It is a special combination of carefully selected vitamins, minerals, herbs and concentrated tissue nutrients, which are all valuable in supporting the blood building process in the body. WHAT IS IRON POOR BLOOD? Hemoglobin is the substance in red blood cells that carry the oxygen from the lungs to all the tissues of the body. Iron is used in the formation of hemoglobin, and so a deficiency of iron in the diet can retard the production of hemoglobin. This could result in the tissues receiving a reduced amount of oxygen from the lungs and a feeling of tiredness may develop. People who feel tired all the time and have low hemoglobin, can get very good results by taking LIVER PLUS IRON. There have been many products on the market over the years, composed mostly of iron, designed to help prevent anemia. Nearly everyone has seen the old TV commercials about "iron poor blood." LIVER PLUS IRON is the ideal product for those who have a known condition of anemia or a tendency to develop anemia. LIFE PLUS ADVANTAGE Various iron supplements on the market today contain different types of iron. Some are very difficult to digest, but they are often used as they can be manufactured at low cost. Furthermore, the wrong kind of iron, or even too much iron supplementation, may cause constipation. Life Plus uses only a high quality chelated form of iron that is most easily absorbed and used by the body. Vitamin C ensures that the iron stays in its ferrous form so it can be used by the body. Therefore, Vitamin C is also included in LIVER PLUS IRON. Because the spleen produces red blood cells, it is valuable to the over all goal that a blood building supplement include support nutrients from bovine spleen tissue. For this reason, Life Plus has also included Vitamin B-12 and Folic Acid, as they nutritionally support both the liver and the spleen and are important factors in the absorption of iron. LIVER PLUS IRON also contains concentrated tissue nutrients from liver and spleen for the nutritional support they contain. Liver, of course, has been recommended by doctors for years for its nutritional value. Concentrated tissue nutrients from bovine stomach and duodenum are included as well because of their synergistic nutritional effects and because they aid in the absorption of iron. All of these tissue nutrients have been concentrated by the freeze drying method to preserve their nutritional values. Unlike other hematinics, LIVER PLUS IRON also contains Marrow and three special herbal substances that are also known for their hematinic effect. These are Spinach Leaf powder, Beet Root powder and Rhubarb Root. PHYTOZYME BASE LIVER PLUS IRON is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE LIVER PLUS IRON Generally, one tablet twice a day at breakfast and the evening meal is recommended when needed. It is best to take LIVER PLUS IRON with meals. Suggested Use: One tablet twice a day when needed. Product No: 1942 Package Size: 60 tablets $12.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Take Action! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-25IA012-000125-B012-284http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msyn.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221313 text/html 7159HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:13:29 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:50:44 GMTContent-length: 6975Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with our foundational nutritional program Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SYNERGY PAK: Foundational Nutritional Program NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT The four Life Plus products contained in the SYNERGY PAK work together synergistically to help you start your nutritional support program. Many of us want to begin a nutritional program but we do not know how or where to begin. SYNERGY PAK contains the four basic nutritional products to help get you started. TVM-49 TVM-49 is one of Life Plus' most complete and comprehensive supplement ever formulated. It is an important component of the SYNERGY PAK as it contains all the vitamins, minerals, trace and ultra trace elements that have been classified as essential. The herbs and associated synergistic nutrients it contains helps ensure a broad spectrum nutritional base. TVM-49 contains at least 200% of the RDA's of all vitamins that are classified. TVM-49 is manufactured by strictly controlled cold processing methods and contains many "super foods" such as Lecithin, Bee Pollen, Kelp and bioflavonoids. These "super foods" contain many nutritional factors. It is presently formulated to not contain iron as recent research shows that even slightly elevated iron levels can stimulate the production of damaging free-radicals in the body leading to disease. PROTX II The specialty formula contained in PROTX II supplies the nutrients for protecting body cells and our immune system from free radicals. Free radicals assault our cells ever minute of every day. They contain a super reactive type of oxygen that is eager to damage DNA. We obtain these from the food we eat, the air we breath, cigarette smoke) to name only a few. These Free radicals are generated by chemicals in our environment, our diets and are produced by various kinds of radiation, electrical and ultraviolet light. PROTX II supplies us with a wide spectrum of certain antioxidant nutrients such as Vitamin E, Vitamin C and Vitamin A (as Beta-Carotene) and actually present themselves to the free radicals. They then react with them so that the constituents of our cells are protected. PROTX II ensures the body is provided with a broad spectrum of antioxidant nutrients on a daily basis. SUSTENASE The unique method in which SUSTENASE is manufactured provides a product that employs a two phase method that naturally assists the digestion of the foods we eat. This two phase method assists the stomach (phase 1) and in the intestine (phase 2). It helps to ensure that we receive the nutrients contained in our foods. Proper digestion reduces stomach stress, relieves discomfort from overeating and aids in preventing symptoms of improper digestion, such as gas, bloating, burping and heartburn. In the stomach phase, SUSTENASE helps maintain acid pH by supplying Betain HCI which activates the protein digesting enzyme, Pepsin. In its intestinal phase, it helps maintain a more alkaline pH. Complete digestion of proteins is helpful in preventing food allergies. As a component of the SYNERGY PAK it is a basic product that everyone should have at every meal. COLODYNE The soluble fibers and herbs contained in COLODYNE help cleanse the lower intestine, especially the colon. They help ease conditions resulting from diets too low in fiber. Most leading advisory panels recommend that our diets contain a minimum of thirty grams of fiber per day which is accomplished by one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE. COLODYNE helps to naturally cleanse and correct chronic constipation. This great product contains beneficial bacteria that live in the digestive tract and promotes colon hygiene, manufacture vitamins and helps maintain proper pi-I and control overgrowth of yeasts. It also absorbs toxins that arise from incomplete digestion or contaminated foods. Studies show that people with high fiber diets are less likely to develop arteriosclerosis and colon cancer. HOW TO USE THE SYNERGY PAK Simplicity is the key to SYNERGY PAK. Not only do you get the advantage of an easy to use program, you also get quality products as well. Take one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE in juice in the morning, two TVM-49 with one PROTX II at breakfast and evening meal. Take one SUSTENASE with each meal. Suggested Use: Take one heaping teaspoon of Colodyne in juice each morning , two TVM-49 and one Protx II with breakfast and evening meal, and take one Sustenase with meals. Product No: 1015 Package Size: Kit $59.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-26IA012-000125-B012-303http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mqpak.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221323 text/html 12510HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:13:38 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:47:15 GMTContent-length: 12325Content-type: text/html Take Avantage with our advanced nutritional program Choose Your Advantage The most important thing is our health... maQ-PAK: Advanced Supplemental Program Supports The Circulatory, Immune and Digestive Systems: Contains Fiber, Antioxidants and Colloidal Minerals Each Pak Contains: 150 tablets Cardio-Chelex 90 tablets Support Tabs 64 capsules Micro-Mins 60 tablets Proanthenols Bio-Complex 50 mg 90 tablets Sustenase 10.7 ounce Colodyne The maQ-PAK is the more advanced Life Plus supplemental nutritional program. Like the SYNERGY PAK, it is basic to good health but contains a broader spectrum and larger quantities of more specialized products. CARDIO-CHELEX and SUPPORT TABS provide a full array of multiple vitamins and minerals divided into two products to be taken at different times for optimum results. This ensures you get the best of both worlds; the valuable immune system support and oral chelating cleansing of the circulatory system by CARDIO-CHELEX in the morning, plus the great anti-stress and energy benefits of SUPPORT TABS in the afternoon. In addition, the maQ-PAK contains MICRO-MINS for a full spectrum of 77 high quality, plant-derived colloidal minerals and the popular PROANTHENOLS BIO-COMPLEX antioxidant tablets that not only provide their own benefits, but help other antioxidants, like those in CARDIO-CHELEX, to work even better. The maQ-PAK also contains SUSTENASE digestive enzyme tablets that help digest food insuring you obtain the nutrients from the food you eat. COLODYNE is also included as just one heaping teaspoonful provides a major portion of the high quality soluble fiber that you need each day, plus herbs and beneficial microflora that support colon hygiene and ecology and helps keep bowel elimination regular. COLODYNE and SUSTENASE taken together greatly reduce discomfort from digestive stress such as gas, bloating, lack of regularity and tiredness. The maQ-PAK is packaged in a re-usable, vinyl drawstring tote. Q-PAK The original "Q-PAK" name came from "Quintessence" meaning "the pure concentrated essence." This kit helps make your nutritional program even more complete and more advanced yet simple and cost effective. We also call the Q-PAK, the maQ-PAK (mack pack) because most Members purchase it on their Monthly Automatic qualifying program where it is automatically shipped to them each month so they don't have to remember to order it. CARDIO-CHELEX CARDIO-CHELEX is specially formulated to help the body nutritionally cleanse itself of many environmental pollutants. Good circulation is extremely important, because without it oxygen and nutrients could not reach our cells, and life would come to a screeching halt. Poor circulation puts stress on all organs of the body. Several factors contribute to poor circulation such as diet, free radicals, pollution, certain drugs and chemicals, xanthan oxidase in homogenized milk, depressed immunity, a decreased ability of the blood to digest protein and anabolic disturbances in metabolism. When blood clots have a great chance of forming, heart attack, phlebitis, and stroke are more likely. CARDIO-CHELEX is the only product in existence that contains proteolytic enzymes and is catabolically balanced. Life Plus CARDIO-CHELEX contains 47 special nutrients that work synergistically for overall nutritional support. CARDIO-CHELEX contains Carnitine and Mucoploysaccharides. Large amounts of Vitamin A and C are included, because they are natural anti-oxidants, immune stimulants and natural cleansing agents as well. Trypsin and Chymotrypsin are potent pancreatic enzymes that naturally keep the proteolytic activity of the blood up to proper levels. CARDIO-CHELEX is designed with prevention in mind. Common symptoms of poor circulation are cold hands and feet, tiredness, high and low blood pressure, difficult breathing and diminished vision. People living in areas that have high pollution levels should strongly consider CARDIO-CHELEX. Improved circulation can improve energy and alertness, increase stamina, and increase oxygen and nutrition to every organ of the body. SUPPORT TABS SUPPORT TABS was originally formulated to support specific needs of alcoholics. The core formula is based on research at Rutgers University. The research was undertaken to determine specific nutritional needs for organs in the body damaged by the stress of excessive alcohol consumption. That is, to help them maintain healthy metabolic processes and also rebuild. SUPPORT TABS is helpful in breaking habits such as drinking alcohol, overeating, smoking and using drugs. SUPPORT TABS fight the afternoon "blahs" that often develop as the stress of the day wears on. The amino acids and tissue nutrients support the organs normally fatigued the most by stress, especially the adrenal glands, which are the primary organs that tight stress, the liver and pancreas. The amino acids, concentrated tissue nutrients, specific vitamins and minerals in SUPPORT TABS serve as fuel for the nervous system to provide energy, but also create a natural calming effect. They help greatly to maintain more consistent blood sugar levels helping the body maintain energy and control the ups and downs associated with low blood sugar levels. Many people have great results with SUPPORT TABS helping them control excessive appetite and cravings. MICRO-MINS Minerals are components of our connective and supportive tissues as well as the hormones and enzymes responsible for our biochemical life. U.S. Senate document 264 stated, "Our physical well-being is more directly dependent upon the minerals we take into our systems than upon calories or vitamins or upon the precise proportion of starch, protein or curbohydrates we consume." Trace minerals are only required in very small amounts, but this does not mean they are less important. A deficiency of any of them can be as serious as any vitamin deficiency. The 77 plant-derived colloidal minerals contained in MICRO-MINS are absolutely the most complete array of minerals available. PROANTHENOLS Free radicals damage our cells and cause premature aging, reduced immune function, inflammation and degenerative disease. Our primary defense is the antioxidant nutrients in our diets, especially Vitamins C and E. Life Plus PROANTHENOLS BIO-COMPLEX contain 100% bioavailable, 100% residue-free and standardized OPC's from Dr. Masquelier's patented grape seed and pine bark extract. This great antioxidant product contains a full spectrum of OPC's, plus the valuable bioflavonoids quercetin, rutin, hesperidin, lemon bioflavonoids and vitamin C. The OPC's are potent antioxidants in their own right, but also increase the effectiveness of others, such as Vitamin C and E contained in CARDIO-CHELEX and SUPPORT TABS as well. COLODYNE The soluble fibers and herbs contained in COLODYNE help cleanse the lower intestine, especially the colon. They help ease conditions resulting from diets too low in fiber. Most leading advisory panels recommend that our diets contain a minimum of thirty grams of fiber per day which is accomplished by one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE. COLODYNE helps to naturally cleanse and correct chronic constipation. This great product contains beneficial bacteria that live in the digestive tract and promotes colon hygiene, manufacture vitamins and helps maintain proper pH and control overgrowth of yeasts. It also absorbs toxins that arise from incomplete digestion or contaminated foods. Studies show that people with high fiber diets are less likely to develop arteriosclerosis and colon cancer. SUSTENASE This great product employs a two phase release method that naturally assists the digestion of the foods we eat. This two phase method assists the stomach (phase I)and in the intestine (phase 2). It helps to ensure that we receive the nutrients contained in our foods. Proper digestion reduces stomach stress, relieves discomfort from overeating and aids in preventing symptoms of improper digestion, such as gas, bloating, burping and heartburn. In the stomach phase, SUSTENASE helps maintain acid pi-I by supplying Betain HCI which activates the protein digesting enzyme, Pepsin. In its intestinal phase, it helps maintain a more alkaline pH. Complete digestion of proteins is helpful in preventing food allergies. As a component of the SYNERGY PAK it is a basic product that everyone should have at every meal. HOW TO USE Q-PAK The Life Plus maQ-PAK is more than just the basics. The six products that it contains are all important, leading products that provide many benefits. We recommend that you take them every day. Take 5 CARDIO-CHELEX, 2 MICRO-MINS, and 2 PROANTHENOLS BIO-COMPLEX in the morning with one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE shaken in about 3 oz of your favorite juice. Take 3 SUPPORT TABS in the mid-afternoon and 1 SUSTENASE digestive aid at the beginning of each meal. Each individual is different as far as their nutritional needs. You may change recommendation to better suit your needs, but begin with this recommendation. Add more of any of these products or others to your total health program as desired. Product No: 2625Package Size: Each Kit $119.00 + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-27IA012-000125-B012-313http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mcalmag.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221337 text/html 9023HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:13:48 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:19:28 GMTContent-length: 8839Content-type: text/html Take Advantage! with calcium & magnesium Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CALMAG PLUS: Calcium & Magnesium Ratio 1:1 Six Tablets Supply: Calcium (As PolyCalPlex) 1,000 mg Magnesium (As PolyMagPlex) 1,000 mg Boron 5 mg Vitamin D-3 100 iu PolyCalPlex and PolyMagPlex are proprietary blends of high quality Calcium and Magnesium sources including Calcium and Magnesium citrates, chelate, aspartates, gluconates, ascorbates, glycerophosphates and lactates. Contains Betaine Hcl 20mg and L-Glutamic Acid Hcl 20mg to assure adequate acidity to enhance calcium absorption Contains Alfalfa 40mg, Kelp 20mg and Dulce 20mg as natural plant source of numerous trace elements synergistic with calcium and magnesium CALCIUM AND MAGNESIUM We probably need more calcium and magnesium than any other vitamin or mineral because they are the primary building blocks of bones, teeth and muscles. Many foods contain these valuable minerals, especially calcium, so many people supplement their diets with calcium...yet calcium remains high on the list of minerals in which people are deficient. It is not how much calcium and magnesium you obtain from the foods you eat and supplements you take, but rather how much your body ABSORBS and UTILIZES. Very simply, calcium is difficult to absorb for most people. Life Plus understands that the name of the game is absorption and utilization; therefore, CALMAG PLUS is more than just a straight calcium supplement. It includes an abundant amount of magnesium and other specific nutrients your body needs in order to absorb and utilize both calcium and magnesium to its fullest potential. In taking CALMAG PLUS, you have a complete team working for you. THE CALMAG PLUS TEAM Your body needs adequate amounts of magnesium in order to absorb calcium and it also needs adequate amounts of calcium to utilize magnesium. Vitamin D-3 is also included because it is necessary for both the absorption and utilization of calcium, and calcium is needed to utilize vitamin D-3. Any calcium supplement that does not contain calcium, magnesium and vitamin D is simply not of much value in terms of absorption and utilization in the body. Betaine HCI, glutaminic acid and the citrate form of calcium ensure that CALMAG PLUS is pH balanced. Proper pH (acid base balance) in the digestive tract is very important for proper calcium absorption. Alfalfa, Kelp and Dulce are also included as good sources of calcium and magnesium and all three are rich sources of trace minerals helpful for calcium and magnesium utilization. Boron is added to help maintain calcium levels in the body once it is absorbed. Studies have shown that less calcium is excreted in the urine if adequate levels of Boron are present. TYPES OF CALCIUM & MAGNESIUM Many calcium supplements contain only inexpensive, inorganic forms of calcium, such as oxides or carbonates. In general, most of these products are not worthwhile because most of the calcium is not absorbed. Different individuals seem to be able to absorb different forms of calcium and magnesium. This is why Life Plus CALMAG PLUS contains numerous sources of calcium and magnesium including citrates, chelates, aspartates, gluconates, ascorbates, glycerophosphates and lactates. WHY TAKE CALMAG PLUS? Individuals who are allergic to dairy products (a major source of calcium in the American diet) can easily become deficient in calcium and need CALMAG PLUS to make up for the loss of this source of calcium. During pregnancy, mothers need a great deal of calcium and magnesium to ensure the proper development of the fetal bones, muscles and teeth and to ensure that the mother's own mineral stores are not depleted. For the same reason, lactating mothers should continue to supplement their diets with CALMAG PLUS. Growing children need extra calcium in their diets to ensure continuing development of muscles, bones and teeth. If they maintain proper levels of calcium, they will have less tendency toward cavities and broken bones. CALMAG PLUS is the perfect supplement for them, but they may prefer the chewable Life Plus CANDY CAL tablet. Anyone who drinks large amounts of soft drinks need extra amounts of CALMAG PLUS, because of the leaching effects of the ortho phosphoric acid. Carbonated, phosophorylated soft drinks are one cause of bone degeneration and the increased incidence of this problem has been shown to correspond to the increased consumption. Calcium and magnesium are absolutely necessary for healthy muscles. Inadequate levels can lead to muscle cramping, especially in the legs. Elderly people find it increasingly difficult to absorb calcium and in general don't seem to get enough magnesium. They often develop osteoporosis, a condition where calcium erodes from the bones causing them to become weak and brittle. Elderly people should supplement their diets with Life Plus CALMAG PLUS. Calcium and magnesium are often called "Nature's Tranquilizers" because of their natural calmative effect, not only for muscles but for the nervous system as well. PHYTOZYME BASE CALMAG PLUS is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE CALMAG PLUS It is usually recommended that most people take three CALMAG PLUS tablets two times per day, usually with meals. This supplies 1,000 mg each of both calcium and magnesium and represents 100% of the RDA for calcium and 250% for magnesium. Individual needs will vary. Older individuals and pregnant or lactating women should consider taking more. Suggested Use: Three tablets twice a day with meals provide 1,000 mg each of both calcium and magnesium. Product No: 1010 Package Size: 180 tablets $18.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Take Action! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-28IA012-000125-B012-331http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mcandy.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221350 text/html 8192HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:14:04 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:19:47 GMTContent-length: 8008Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with chewable calcium Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CANDY CAL: Good Tasting Chewable Calcium Complex Each Chewable Tablet Supplies: Calcium (As PolyCalPlex) 300 mg Boron (As Tri-Boron Chelate) 75 mg PolyCalPlex is a proprietary blend of high quality Calcium sources including citrates, chelates, aspartates, gluconates, ascorbates, glycerophosphates and lactates. Contains good tasting, natural flavoring agents and Sorbitol. CALCIUM As far as sheer quantities are concerned, we probably need more calcium and magnesium than any other vitamin or mineral as they are the primary building blocks of bones, teeth and muscles. Many foods contain these valuable minerals, especially calcium. Many people supplement their diets with calcium, yet calcium remains high on the list of minerals in which people are deficient. What really counts is not how much calcium and magnesium you obtain but rather how much your body ABSORBS and UTILIZES. Very simply, calcium is difficult to absorb for most people. Life Plus understands that the name of the game is absorption and utilization and therefore CANDY CAL is more than just a calcium supplement. In addition, CANDY CAL contains the trace element Baron as it has been shown that adequate levels of Boron in our system reduces calcium excretion. Therefore, Boron helps ensure that calcium stores remain up to the levels needed once in the body. TYPES OF CALCIUM & MAGNESIUM Many calcium supplements contain only inexpensive, inorganic forms of calcium, such as oxides or carbonates. In general, most of these products are not worthwhile because most of the calcium is not absorbed. Furthermore, different individuals seem to be able to absorb different forms of calcium. This is why Life Plus CANDY CAL not only contains calcium carbonate for its antacid effect, but also provides additional calcium as PolyCalPlex, a Life Plus proprietary blend of high quality calcium sources including citrates, chelates, aspartates, gluconates, ascorbates, glycerophosphates and lactates. WHY TAKE CANDY CAL? Individuals who are allergic to dairy products (a major source of calcium in the American diet) can become deficient in calcium and need to supplement with a reliable source of it. During pregnancy, mothers need a great deal of calcium and magnesium to ensure the proper development of the fetal bones, muscles and teeth and to ensure that the mother's own mineral stores are not depleted. Lactating mothers should supplement with a reliable source of calcium. Growing children need large adequate amounts of calcium in their diets to ensure continuing development of muscles, bones and teeth. If they maintain proper levels of calcium, they will have less tendency toward cavities or broken bones. CANDY CAL is the perfect supplement for them, especially when used with VITA-SAURUS. Anyone who drinks large amounts of soft drinks need extra calcium because of the leaching effects of orthophosphoric acid in these drinks. Carbonated, phosphorylated soft drinks are one cause of bone degeneration. The increased incidence of this problem has been shown to correspond to the increased consumption of soft drinks. Elderly people find it increasingly difficult to absorb calcium and don't seem to get enough magnesium. They often develop "osteoporosis," a condition where calcium erodes from the bones, causing them to become weak and brittle. Calcium and magnesium are absolutely necessary for healthy muscles. Inadequate levels can lead to muscle cramping, especially in the legs. They are often called "Nature's Tranquilizers" because of their natural calmative effect, not only for muscles but for the nervous system as well. It is obvious that both calcium and magnesium are not only essential but very important nutrients. Life Plus is well aware of this and provides different calcium and magnesium supplements. MAGNESIUM PLUS and HYDRO MAG are designed for taking larger amounts of magnesium when desired. CALMAG PLUS provides a unique one-to-one ratio of both for balanced supplementation. Both calcium and magnesium are bulky and difficult to get larger quantities in tablets. CANDY CAL is designed with three goals in mind; 1) provide a good source of extra calcium, 2) can be used as an antacid when needed, and 3) formulated in a pleasant tasting chewable tablet that is easy to use for both children and adults. PHYTOZYME BASE CANDY CAL is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus Phytozyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE CANDY CAL CANDY CAL can be used by those wanting only calcium supplementation. Chewing four tablets during the day provides 120% of the RDA. You can adjust your intake as desired. It can be chewed as an antacid as well when needed. Suggested Use: Chew or swallow one or two tablets, two or more times a day as a good tasting calcium supplement. Also, use as a natural antacid. Product No: 0113 Package Size: 120 capsules $11.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-29IA012-000125-B013-12http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mmag.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221358 text/html 8257HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:14:13 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:42:22 GMTContent-length: 8073Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with bioavailable magnesium Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... MAGNESIUM PLUS: Multiple Source Magnesium Each Tablet Supplies: Magnesium (As PolyMagPlexTM) 100 mg Glutamic Acid 20 mg PolyMagPlexTM is a proprietary blend of high quality magnesium from multiple sources including magnesium citrate, aspartat, gluconate aascorbate, glycerophosphate and lactate. MULTIPLE SOURCES Different individuals absorb various kinds of magnesium better than others. The great Life Plus formula MAGNESIUM PLUS is formulated in such a way that it contains a unique combination of various most active bio-available forms of magnesium. Over the past twenty years, a great deal of scientific data has been gathered about the importance of magnesium. Magnesium deficiencies result in excessive stress, high blood pressure, muscle cramps and spasms, fatigue, restlessness, irritability, depression, apathy, tremors, migraine headaches in pregnant women, asthma in young adults, severe tetanus and heart disease. RECIPROCAL RELATIONSHIP Calcium and magnesium experience a reciprocal relationship in every muscle of our body, including both the smooth muscles of the heart as well as the skeletal muscles, which give us strength. Calcium stimulates the muscles to contract and magnesium allows them to relax. When our bodies are deficient in calcium, we can borrow from the vast reserves in our bones. However, when the body gets low on magnesium, we must obtain it from our muscles, which can result in depletion. As magnesium disappears from the muscles, calcium rushes in. Then, the muscles exhibit a tendency to tighten up and become tense, which the doctors call hypertonic. Many researchers now believe that this lack of magnesium may cause the muscles of the arterial and venous walls to contract, causing high blood pressure, heart attacks and strokes. A prominent researcher has found that magnesium helps to prevent migraine headaches in pregnant women. There is a tremendous demand for magnesium by the developing fetus. It has been estimated that these women only get 50 to 60 percent of the RDA of magnesium in their diets. Research has also shown that women experiencing PMS had lower levels of magnesium in their red blood cells and concluded that many premenstrual symptoms may be caused by a magnesium deficiency. We are inundated with large amounts of sodium in our diets. It is a hidden "nutrient" in almost all processed foods and we often don't even know it is there. Even though we need a small amount of sodium, excesses are known to contribute to atherosclerosis and high blood pressure. Research in Scandinavia has recently been published that proves the addition of magnesium to the diet can offset some of the damaging effects of sodium. WHY ARE WE DEFICIENT? Just about every step in the chain of modern chemical farming and food processing depletes our source of magnesium. Chemical fertilizers used in agriculture today do not replace the lost magnesium. Unfortunately, nearly forty percent of the magnesium content of our foods leaches out when cooked. Some foods such as meat, ice cream and other "high fat" foods can cause a phenomenon known to scientists as "the magnesium trap." These foods are low in magnesium themselves, but the primary problem is that they actually impair absorption of magnesium through the intestinal wall. Several medications, such as diuretics used in the treatment of high blood pressure, may cause the loss of magnesium from the body. Studies have shown that individuals with a low serum magnesium level require a greater amount of anti-hypertensive drugs for the same degree of control of their blood pressure than those with normal magnesium levels. A French study found that a magnesium deficiency results in calcium deposits building up in the blood vessels as well. They concluded that magnesium deficiency may therefore contribute to the accumulation of fats within the arterial walls (atherosclerosis). A leading researcher at Howard University has found that people who have had a heart attack have low blood levels of magnesium. Others have found that the heart muscle of those who have died from heart attacks have lower levels of magnesium than other muscles in their bodies. PHYTOZYME BASE MAGNESIUM PLUS is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE MAGNESIUM PLUS The usual recommended amount is one to two tablets one to three times per day. Four tablets per day provide 100% of the RDA for magnesium. MAGNESIUM PLUS is for people of all ages and is usually best taken with meals. However, anytime is acceptable. Some individuals experience a feeling of relaxation when they supplement with magnesium. This can be a benefit them as they can take it before bedtime to help them sleep naturally. Magnesium can also cause loose stools in some people as it brings water into the digestive track. If you notice this effect, simply stop taking it for two days and start back with just one tablet and increase as you can. Taking it with meals can also help. Most people don't notice this effect so don't be unduly concerned. Suggested Use: One or two tablets from one to three times per day. Product No: 4029 Package Size: 90 tablets $13.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Take Action! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-30IA012-000125-B013-34http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mhydro.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221412 text/html 8458HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:14:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:24:27 GMTContent-length: 8274Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with magnesium for proper cardiac function Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... HYDRO MAG: Soluble Granular Form Multiple Source Magnesium Each Tablespoonful Supplies: Magnesium (as PolyMagPlex) 400 mg PolyMagPlexTM is a proprietary blend of high quality magnesium from multiple sources including magnesium citrate, aspartate, gluconate ascorbate, glycerophosphate and lactate. Hydro Mag is packaged in a moisture protective plastic envelope. The contents of the package are dissolved in one pint of purified water and one tablespoonful of the solution yields 400 mg of magnesium which is 100% fo the USRDA. IMPORTANT NUTRIENT Maintaining good levels of both calcium and magnesium is essential. They may be the most important nutrients required by man yet they are quite often deficient. In every muscle of our body, calcium and magnesium enjoy a reciprocal relationship. Calcium stimulates the muscles to contract and magnesium helps them relax. When we are deficient in calcium, we can borrow from vast reserves in our bones, but when we get low in magnesium we obtain it from our muscles. As magnesium disappears from the muscles, calcium rushes in and the muscles tend to become tense or cramp and we feel tired. MULTIPLE SOURCES Different individuals absorb different kinds of magnesium better than others. HYDRO MAG is formulated in such a way that it contains a unique combination of various, most highly bio-available forms of magnesium. Magnesium deficiencies result in excessive stress, high blood pressure, muscle cramps and spasms, fatigue, restlessness, irritability, depression, apathy, tremors, migraine headaches in pregnant women, asthma in young adults, severe tetanus and heart disease. RECIPROCAL RELATIONSHIP Many researchers believe a lack of magnesium may cause muscles of the arterial and venous walls to contract, causing high blood pressure, heart attacks and strokes. A prominent researcher has found that magnesium helps to prevent migraine headaches in pregnant women. There is a tremendous demand for magnesium for the developing fetus. It has been estimated that these women only get 50 to 60 percent of the RDA of magnesium in their diets. Research has also shown that women experiencing PMS had lower levels of magnesium in their red blood cells and concluded that many premenstrual symptoms may be caused by a magnesium deficiency. We are inundated with large amounts of sodium in our diets. It is a hidden "nutrient" in just about all processed foods, since many times we don't even know it is present. Even though we need a small amount of sodium, excesses are well known to contribute to atherosclerosis and high blood pressure. Research in Scandinavia has recently been published that proves that the addition of magnesium to the diet can offset some of the damaging effects of sodium. WHY WE ARE DEFICIENT Every step in the chain of modern chemical farming and food processing depletes our food of magnesium. Chemical fertilizers used in agriculture today do not replace the lost magnesium. Unfortunately, nearly forty percent of the magnesium content of our foods leaches out when they are cooked. Some foods such as meat, ice cream and other "high fat" foods can cause a phenomenon known to scientists as "the magnesium trap." These foods are low in magnesium themselves, but the primary problem is that they actually impair absorption of magnesium through the intestinal wall. Several medications such as certain diuretics used in the treatment of high blood pressure may cause the loss of magnesium from the body. Studies have shown that individuals with a low serum magnesium level required more anti-hypertensive drugs for the same degree of control of their blood pressure than those with normal magnesium levels. A French study found that magnesium deficiency results in calcium deposits building up in the blood vessels as well. The researchers concluded that magnesium deficiency may contribute to the accumulation of fats within the arterial walls (atherosclerosis). A leading researcher at Howard University has found that people who have had a heart attack have low blood levels of magnesium. Others have found that the heart muscle of those who have died from heart attacks have lower levels of magnesium in the heart than in other muscles in their bodies. Some foods high in magnesium include spinach, cabbage, tomatoes, bananas, and some fish such as salmon. HOW TO TAKE HYDRO MAG Dissolve contents of each 50 gm packet in 16 ounces of warm water and store in the refrigerator. The usual recommended amount is one or two tablespoonfuls per day. One tablespoonful provides 100% of the RDA for magnesium. Some people seem to feel better when they take two or more. Stir into three or four ounces of tomato or other vegetable juice. Most people prefer to take it at bedtime because they notice a natural relaxing effect. Some individuals may notice loose stools when they take magnesium. If you do, simply stop taking it for two days and start back with one teaspoonful and build back up. It will usually go away when you adjust to it. Both calcium and magnesium are very important. If you want to concentrate on calcium, you can take CANDY CAL. If you want just magnesium. you can take MAGNESIUM PLUS Tablets or HYDRO MAG Liquid. If you want to take calcium and magnesium together, rely on CALMAG PLUS. Suggested Use: One or two tablespoonfuls once or twice a day, usually in water, tomato or vegetable juice depending on the amount of magnesium desired. Product No: 0140 Package Size: 50 gram packets $6.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-31IA012-000125-B013-52http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mprotx.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221424 text/html 8080HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:14:35 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:46:49 GMTContent-length: 7896Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with antioxidant protection Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PROTX II: Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Two Tablets Supply: Vitamins & Minerals Associated Factors & Herbs Vitamin A (Beta-Carotene) 20,000iu Glutathione 5mg Vitamin E (d-alpha succinate) 100iu Citrus Bioflavonoids 25mg Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) 500mg Rutin 5mg Zinc (as picolinate) 5mg Hesperidin 5mg Copper (as aspartate) 500mcg Quercetin 5mg Selenium 50mcg Echinacea 255mg Germanium 25mcg Marshmallow 25mg Vanadium 25mg Aniseed 25mg Magnesium ( as aspartate) 40mg Bay Leaf 25mg Potassium (as aspartate) 20mg Chamomile 25mg ANTIOXIDANTS Until recent years, the primary role of vitamins and minerals was considered to be as organic molecules essential for normal metabolism and maintenance of tissues, and for preventing the well know deficiency diseases such as scurvy beriberi, pellagra and others. We now know that many of the vitamins and minerals such as vitamins A, E and C in the form of Beta-Carotene, Selenium, Germaniurn, Vanadium and others have additional other important functions as well. They work as antioxidants or free radical scavengers. Scientists have found that vitamins A, C and E prevent certain types of cancer by blocking the formation of cancer causing substances in the body. Researchers are using these vitamins to prevent nitrates from turning into nitrosamines, one of the most researched and most recognized cancer causing substances today. Nitrites and nitrates routinely are found in processed, packaged meats, in the water we drink and even in cigarette smoke. It is now known that second-hand cigarette smoke is even more dangerous than if you had been smoking. BETA-CAROTENE Vitamin A and its precursor, Beta-Carotene, which exists in carrots, spinach and other vegetables fight the cancer causing effects of cigarette smoke. In several studies it has been demonstrated that people who smoke stand a lower risk of developing lung cancer if they have diets high in vitamin A (BetaCarotene) containing foods. Beta-Carotene is not only a valuable antioxidant, but like vitamins C and E, it is an important nutrient in maintaining the immune system. VITAMIN C Thousands of articles have been written about the beneficial effects of vitamin C on health, especially in regard to the immune system and its antioxidant effect. It has been proven that vitamin C protects against the harmful effects of cigarette smoke and environmental pollution such as automobile exhaust, industrial chemicals, bacterial toxins and other free radical causing agents. Like Beta-Carotene, vitamin C is very capable of protecting against nitrosamines. These substances are produced in the stomach from nitrates and nitrites in such foods as hot dogs, bacon, luncheon meat and smoked fish. Many rural wells contain nitrates that have entered underground water supplies from the run off` of fertilizers and herbicides that have been applied to our agricultural lands. Next to Beta-Carotene and vitamin C, vitamin E has probably received the most attention. Doctors Wilfrid and Evan Shute first showed years ago that vitamin E saved lives. Vitamin E is classified as an antioxidant which protects our bodies when they are exposed to environmental pollutants that interfere with healthy oxygen metabolism. It helps "preserve oxygen." Vitamin E is also known to be of special importance to the heart and reproductive organs in our bodies as well. Because of industrial and automotive pollution, major cities can be hazardous to your health. The FDA has determined that the toxicity of the ozone is comparable to phosgene, used in gas war-fare, and that .05 parts per million of ozone is dangerous. Vitamin E blocks the damaging oxidation of healthy cells by this ozone and is therefore a natural defense. You may ask why Life Plus has PROTX II as a product when vitamin C, vitamin E and Beta-Carotene are in other products. Quite simply, it can be important to take more of these valuable antioxidants than ever before, as the need for them is growing every day. PROTX II is a convenient, single source of these valuable nutrients and a simple way to ensure you receive reasonable amounts every day. PROTX II is part of the Life Plus answer to living in the 20th century. PHYTOZYME BASE PROTX II is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE PROTX II Most individuals take one tablet twice a day with their multiple vitamin and mineral. Usually, this is adequate. If you are experiencing unusual environmental conditions or a stressful lifestyle, more tablets can be taken. Suggested Use: One tablet twice a day. Product No: 1013 Package Size: 60 tablets $17.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 1014 Package Size: 180 tablets $46.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-32IA012-000125-B013-65http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mlung.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221431 text/html 7666HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:14:47 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:41:31 GMTContent-length: 7482Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with herbs for your lungs Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... LUNG FORMULA: Herbs & Other Nutrients for Your Lungs Each Tablet Supplies: Pleurisy Root 170mg Thyme 60mg Slippery Elm 60mg Yerba Santa 50mg Fenugreek 60mg Chlorophyll 3.5mg Beta-Carotene 500 iu HERBALS Herbs have been used since creation to provide for the health and well being of entire civilizations. The Bible tells us that we were given herbs for healing and cites many examples of their usage. Main stream modern technology is now finally beginning to focus on herbs and natural plant therapies. This is usually referred to in the literature today as phytotherapy. We probably never will understand many of the secrets regarding how many natural extracts and concentrates work, but that is no reason to not take advantage of their benefits here and now. To the best of our knowledge, Life Plus is the only company that manufactures and distributes the unique kind of herbal based products we do by combining high quality herbs from all over the world with other synergistic nutrients known to work toward the same specific nutritional goals. These other synergistic nutrients include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, bioflavonoids, phytonutrients, antioxidants, and at times, concentrated tissue nutrients when appropriate. By combining modern technology with classical herbal knowledge, the Life Plus herbal based products are second to none anywhere in the world. RESPIRATORY SYSTEM Problems associated with the respiratory tract are among the most common health problems today. These maladies arise because of allergies, air pollution, smoking, infection, decreased immunity and poor nutrition, to name a few. Oxygen is the most important nutrient of all. The lungs pick up oxygen from the air we breath and expel carbon dioxide from the blood stream. Without adequate supplies of oxygen to the tissues, health simply cannot be maintained. In our highly industrialized society, our lungs are exposed to much higher levels of pollutants than before. This excessive strain causes our lungs to become irritated, and they begin to malfunction or degenerate. When they do not function properly, lungs cannot absorb oxygen from the air efficiently to nourish our bodies. The major percentage of our population lives in large cities, where the smog and air pollution levels are extremely high. If you live in Los Angeles, Denver, or Chicago, the pollution in the air you breath is equivalent to smoking two packs of cigarettes per day. Keep in mind that even one puff of cigarette smoke supplies about one hundred billion anti-oxidant hits, and the first hit is on the cells of the lungs as air is inhaled. Tons of lead are put into our atmosphere every year from automobile exhaust. It is known that if you live within 500 feet of a busy highway, the lead levels in the air are more than 50 times higher than average. Anyone who has suffered from colds, cough, flu, bronchitis, asthma, or pneumonia knows what a blessing it is to have healthy lungs and proper breathing. Vitamin A deficiency can be one of the major reasons for lung deterioration. It is the most important nutrient that supports epithelia tissues including the lining of the lungs. The Vitamin A in LUNG FORMULA is in the form of its natural plant source, Beta-Carotene. Life Plus LUNG FORMULA contains a representative amount to insure it is presented concurrently with the herbs in LUNG FORMULA. Larger amounts are intentionally not included to guard against obtaining too much Vitamin A from your overall nutritional supplement program. More can easily be obtained by taking CARDIO-CHELEX, an ideal companion to LUNG FORMULA. LUNG FORMULA contains five natural herbs that have long been used because of their special nutritional values for the lungs. These herbs include Pleurisy Root, Slippery Elm, Fenugreek, Thyme and Yerba Santa. Smokers and individuals who live or work in large urban areas should consider taking Life Plus LUNG FORMULA. PHYTOZYME BASE Life Plus LUNG FORMULA is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE LUNG FORMULA It is usually recommended to take one or two tablets three times a day. More can be taken if needed, especially in special times of need. For long term usage, it is recommended to take Life Plus LUNG FORMULA with additional sources of vitamin A, vitamin C, other antioxidants and enzymes. This can best be accomplished by taking CARDIO-CHELEX , PROTX II and SOMAZYME. Suggested Use: One or two tablets three times a day. Product No: 5016 Package Size: 90 tablets $12.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-33IA012-000125-B013-80http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mcardio.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221451 text/html 10337HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:15:05 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:20:17 GMTContent-length: 10152Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with chelating nutrients for the heart and circulatory system Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CARDIO-CHELEX: Naturally Chelating Preventive Nutrients Five Tablets Supply: Special Amino Acids Enzymes Herbs Cystine 250mg Trypsin 200mg Hawthorne Berry 60mg Dl-Methionine 150mg Bromelain 200mg Yarrow 25mg L-Taurine 100mg Lipase 50mg Cayenne 20mg L-Carnitine 12.5mg Chymotrypsin 5mg Red Clover 25mg Glutathione 10mg Papayotin 30mg Garlic 20mg Vitamins Minerals Associated Nutritional Factors Vitamin A 15,000iu Calcium 225mg Betaine Hcl 100mg Vitamin D 200iu Magnesium 250mg Choline 50mg Vitamin E 100iu Manganese 10mg Inositol 50mg Vitamin C 2,000mg Copper 215mcg Rutin 50mg Vitamin B-6 75mg Selenium 50mcg Glycerin 30mg Vitamn B-12 250mcg Vanadium 50mcg Bioflavonoids 25mg Niacin 25mg Silicon 50mcg Beta-Carotene 10,000 iu Folic Acid 400mcg Germanium 50mcg Biotin HEART DISEASE Heart and circulatory disease is the number one killer in America today. Heart disease and strokes kill over a million people each year -- more than accidents, cancer, diabetes, pneumonia and influenza combined! The circulatory system is one of the most critical systems in the body for our overall health It supplies all the organs and tissues with nutrients and carries away the waste products of metabolism. The heart and brain need enormous amounts of oxygen to function properly. Senility and heart disease (as often seen in older people) usually comes as a primary result of decreased circulation. Atherosclerosis is a condition of plaque build-up in the medium and larger sized arteries. Research indicates that there must be some form of injury to the lining and/or muscle tissue of the arteries for atherosclerosis to even begin. Because free radicals definitely cause irritation, inflammation and cellular destruction, it is believed that they can cause injury to the walls of the arteries allowing plaque to begin building up. Therefore, supplementing with substances that counteract free radicals only makes sense. The liver produces a protein called fibrinogen. It circulates in the blood and when it comes in contact with damaged or diseased tissue, it is changed into fibrin protein and sticks to the damaged tissue to form a clot. When free radicals cause injury to the lining of arteries, the fibrin protein sticks to the injured wall and forms a sticky net which traps cholesterol type compounds, heavy metals and other substances. As the lining heals, the proteolytic enzymes in the blood are then supposed to break down the fibrin. Individuals who have a lower activity of proteolytic enzymes have a great chance of developing excess blood clots and atherosclerosis. ANABOLIC AND CATABOLIC CARDIO-CHELEX is the only product of its kind because it is catabolically balanced and contains proteolytic enzymes, plus natural chelating vitamins and amino acids. Recent innovative research shows that all metabolism (the chemical reactions in the body) fall into one of two categories: (1) anabolic, or building-up processes, and; (2) catabolic, or tearing down processes. The formation of a blood clot is an example of an anabolic process because it "builds" the clot. In time, the clot must be "broken down" (a catabolic process) by the proteolytic enzymes. If the body is too anabolic, the clots and plaque will remain and begin to accumulate. It has been shown that both atherosclerosis and hypertension are correlated with too much anabolic activity which builds up plaque in the arteries. CARDIO-CHELEX contains many special nutrients that support catabolic activity. For this reason, several anabolic nutrients are intentionally not included in CARDIO-CHELEX. CARDIO-CHELEX is not designed as a multiple vitamin like TVM-49. It is formulated with specific nutrients for specific effect. However, when taken in the morning and with Support Tabs in the afternoon, you receive the value of a multiple type supplement as well as the advantage of the separate formulas. Prolonged stress causes the body to produce excess fatty acids and remain too catabolic. The body then reacts by producing excessive anabolic sterols like cholesterol, which can become trapped in the sticky fibrin on the cell walls. One important reason exercise is so important in preventing cardiovascular disease is because it burns the excess fatty acids produced in reaction to stress, thus less anabolic sterols are produced in the body. The special catabolically balanced nutrients in CARDIO-CHELEX, combined with a reasonable amount of exercise, is a winning combination in the prevention of heart disease. CARDIO-CHELEX contains over 47 special nutrients that work synergistically for the overall nutritional support of the circulatory and immune systems. They can be classified as (1) catabolic sulfur-containing amino acids, (2) proteolytic enzymes, (3) concentrated tissue nutrients, (4) vitamins, (5) minerals, (6) herbs, (7) natural chelating nutrients, (8) anti-oxidants, (9) free radical scavengers, and (10) immune stimulants. PHYTOZYME BASE CARDIO-CHELEX is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE CARDIO-CHELEX If you are under 40 and in relatively good health, five tablets once a day, first thing in the morning, is recommended. If you are over 40, or your family has a history of heart problems, or you have a special need, take 5 tablets twice a day, first thing in the morning and mid-day. Some individuals may notice an "uncomfortable feeling" at first when they begin taking CARDIO-CHELEX as it begins pulling pollutants and toxins out of the body. If this happens to you, wait two days and start again with one tablet daily for two days and then increase by one tablet every two or three days. Five tablets in the morning plus five tablets around mid-day is the ideal amount. Certain nutrients are intentionally deleted for specific effect. Combined with SUPPORT TABS as in the Life Plus QPAK , you get the best of both worlds. That is, you get the advantages of the specific effects of both products plus all the value of a multiple as well. Suggested Use: Five tablets once or twice a day preferably first thing in the morning and right before lunch Product No: 4035 Package Size: 150 tablets $28.75 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 4034 Package Size: 300 tablets $52.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-34IA012-000125-B013-89http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msoma.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221500 text/html 10087HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:15:14 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:48:40 GMTContent-length: 9903Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with active enzymes for the whole body Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SOMAZYME: Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Each Enteric Coated Tablet Supplies: Pancreatin (6XNF) 150 mg Super Oxide Dismutase 15 mg Papayotin 90 mg Alpha-Chymotrypsin 1 mg Bromelain 80 mg Magnesium Aspartate 10 mg Lysozyme* 50 mg Magnesium Sulfate 5 mg Trypsin 40 mg Zinc Aspartate 3 mg * Formulated in CytoVexTM, which is a proprietary Life Plus stabilized and buffered base plus the special bioflavonoids Rutin, Hesperidin and Lemon Bioflavonoids, Pure Culture Amino Acids and Glutathione. ENZYME REACTIONS There are thousands of different enzymes in our foods and in every cell of our bodies. Enzymes are needed to either initiate, accelerate or separate the distinct chemical reactions in the body. Without enzymes, most of the chemical reactions that make up our overall metabolism would never take place, let alone proceed efficiently in a healthy manner. They are involved in anabolic reactions in the body that manufacture or "build up" substances. The end products can be other enzymes or hormones that the body uses to complete certain functions. Enzymes are also involved in our catabolic or "breaking down" reactions. All of these are natural processes and enzyme levels are critical to them. WE NEED ENZYMES A quality diet containing a reasonable amount and variety of fresh, raw fruit and vegetables would supply our bodies with the enzymes it needs. However, most individuals do not eat this way and most enzymes are quickly destroyed when heated or cooked above 106"E Since almost everyone exists on mostly cooked foods today, or to a great extent on processed foods, it would be wise to consider supplementing diets with SOMAZYME. Even our fresh raw foods of today cannot support us with the enzyme nutrition we need, because they are frown in mineral depleted soils and thus don't have the enzyme content of food grown early in this century. Our continued exposure to many enzyme inhibitors contributes to decreased enzyme activity in the body. The average person is exposed to many enzyme inhibitors daily such as fluoride and chlorine in public water supplies, copper from plumbing, etc. Even soybeans and certain other legume's contain anti-trypsin factors, which interfere with the pancreatic enzyme, Trypsin. These factors may create a big need for enzyme supplementation in the diet for some individuals. SOMAZYME provides a wide variety of the enzymes that support thousands of biochemical reactions involved in good health. ENZYME SOURCES For maximum effect, the enzymes in SOMAZYME are obtained from both plant and animal sources. Pancreatin, Trypsin, Alpha-Chymotrypsin, Lysozyme and Super Oxide Dismutase are obtained from animal sources. They are present naturally in our bodies. Papayotin is obtained from papaya and Bromelain from pineapple. All of these enzymes are well known for their ability to breakdown proteins. Pancreatin also breakdown lipids (fat) as well. Even though the pancreas produces most of these enzymes, at times it may be stressed or unable to produce the quantities that may be needed for controlling many unwanted processes in the body. FIBRIN PROTEIN The single most important activity of these "proteolytic" enzymes (enzymes which break down proteins) is probably the natural role they play in the blood clotting mechanism. The liver produces a protein called "fibrinogen" and secretes it into the bloodstream. When fibrinogen contacts damaged tissue, it is changed into a unique protein called "fibrin:' a large, sticky, insoluble protein molecule. When tissue is damaged, the fibrin molecules rush to the scene and begin the formation of a clot to prevent bleeding. Soon after clots are formed, the proteolytic enzymes in the blood stream begin to break them down, so the tissue will not be damaged from extended lack of oxygen and nutrition due to impaired circulation over a period of time. Many of the enzymes in SOMAZYME, and in the diet as well, are produced in the body and break down this fibrin naturally. Excess fibrin proteins not broken down by proteolytic enzymes are a major component of plaque in the arteries. It is actually the main ingredient that lays down the foundation for the plaque and is the glue that holds it together. In addition, cholesterol, fats, calcium compounds, heavy metals and other ingredients make up other parts of it. Plaque in the arteries leads to arteriosclerosis (hardening of the arteries). With an adequate supply of proteolytic enzymes in the blood stream available to break down these fibrin proteins, there is less chance of plaque buildup. LYSOZYME Lysozyme is an enzyme that is a component of every lung cell in our bodies. It is in abundant supply in the fluids that are secreted from the eyes, nasal and sinus membranes, vagina, etc. It is a component of saliva and breast milk. It is a very important substance in the control of infections as it enzymatically attacks invading bacterial and viruses. Large amounts of sugar in the diet can cause Lysozyme levels to decrease. Studies have shown that taking antibiotics can cause the lysozyme levels to decrease dramatically in the saliva of infants. The Lysozyme in SOMAZYME is formulated as Cytovex, which is a proprietary Life Plus enzyme base that ensures stability and consistency. CO-FACTORS Reliable sources of the minerals Magnesium, Manganese and Zinc are included in the SOMAZYME formula because they act as a co-enzyme in many enzyme-controlled chemical reactions in the body and assist enzyme activity. The valuable bioflavonoids, Rutin, Hesperidin and Lemon Bioflavonoids are included for their nutritional value in maintaining the integrity of the circulatory system. Certain amino acids and glutathione help ensure ideal enzyme activity. Buffering agents help protect the enzymes from stomach acids and because enzymes are extremely heat sensitive, all the ingredients are prepared by the cold processing method to preserve activity. PHYTOZYME BASE SOMAZYME is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE SOMAZYME From one to five tablets are taken once, twice or three times per day, preferably on an empty stomach, away from meals as a systemic enzyme supplement for the whole body. Quite often, larger amounts are taken, particularly in short periods of need. SOMAZYME is a high quality enzyme supplement intended to be used by those who wish to increase their daily intake of proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes. Suggested Use: Take from one to five tablets, one to three times per day, preferably on an empty stomach away from meals as an enzyme supplement for the whole body. More can be taken if desired. Product No: 0176 Package Size: 90 Tablets $22.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No. 0179 Package Size: 200 Tablets $40.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-35IA012-000125-B013-103http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mshape.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221511 text/html 8398HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:15:26 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:48:19 GMTContent-length: 8214Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with an herbal appetite suppressant & Chromium Picolinate Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SHAPE PLUS: Herbal Appetite Suppressant with Chromium Picolinate Six Tablets Supply: Chromium (as chromium picolinate) 20mg Grape Skin Extract 420mg Raspberry 420mg Cranberry 420mg Camellia (Balck Tea) 300mg Carob 300mg Uva Ursi 300mg Guarana 300mg Valerian Root 300mg Rosemary 150mg Cleavers herb 150mg Fennel Seed 150mg Gota Kola 150mg Black Walnut 150mg Senna 150mg Oak Leaves 150mg Siberian Ginseng Wild Cherry Bark Blue Vervain 150mg Yerba Mate 150mg Kola Nut 150mg Buchu Leaves 150mg Ginger 30mg Nettle 30mg BEAUTIFUL IMAGE SHAPE PLUS can help you achieve the "beautiful image" you have always desired. Combined with other Life Plus products, a sensible diet and a reasonable amount of exercise, SHAPE PLUS is helping thousands lose weight. Most importantly, they are keeping it off. It was developed by a biochemist who is well known for his understanding of lipid (fat) metabolism. After much testing, Life Plus decided this effective herbal combination would make an exciting product to serve as an adjunct for individuals wanting to take a rational approach to weight management, not just a quick artificial, fad program. HOW IT WORKS SHAPE PLUS contains twenty-three different herbs and herbal extracts that contain higher levels of polyphenolic compounds. It also contains 200 mcg of Chromium in the form of Chromium Picolinate. The polyphenols in these herbs are tannin related compounds and are somewhat astringent. They have a natural appetite suppression action and help to reduce hunger if taken soon enough before hunger begins. These polyphenols are now becoming more well known in the literature and are generally considered to be some of the phytochemicals responsible for many health processes in the body. They have a natural cleansing effect on the whole body and help the body detoxify as it is cleansed during weight loss. The herbs in SHAPE PLUS can reduce the amount of dietary fat absorbed into our bodies, thereby reducing calorie uptake from fat. They tie up fats naturally in the digestive tract making them less susceptible to digestion. The net result is that they are eliminated rather than absorbed. They also help move food through the digestive tract at a more rapid pace, so that the extra "empty calories" do not linger and become absorbed. When fewer calories are absorbed, the body uses up its own fat for energy. The natural appetite control provided by SHAPE PLUS is a blessing to those trying to control their eating habits. CHROMIUM PICOLINATE The Chromium Picolinate in SHAPE PLUS reduces the craving for sweets and helps the body maintain proper blood sugar levels. The typical energy ups and downs normally associated with dieting are greatly reduced. Not only individuals attempting to lose weight, but body builders and weight lifters take Chromium Picolinate as it supports the conversion of fat to lean body tissue. By having a greater percentage of lean body tissue to fat tissue, your metabolic consumption of calories is higher and it is easier to "burn more calories" every minute of every day. This, of course, makes it easier to keep those excess pounds off forever. The most well liked feature of SHAPE PLUS is that it naturally reduces appetite. SHAPE PLUS can be taken anytime during the day. However, it must be taken at mealtime or when food is eaten to obtain its full benefit. People routinely loose five or more pounds per month. PROGRAMS SHAPE PLUS can be used by itself or as part of any weight program. When used as part of a total weight management, the best results are obtained. Always limit fats, processed foods and refined carbohydrates. Use common sense when eating, and it will be easier to avoid unwanted calories while taking SHAPE PLUS. The ideal weight management program is to eat sensibly and take SHAPE PLUS with four other synergistic Life Plus products, ENDOCRYN DHEA, SUPPORT TABS, PRO-MAX and COLODYNE. Take one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE in juice each morning, one or two ENDOCRYN DHEA tablets three times a day with meals, three SUPPORT TABS twice a day, and replace one or two meals a day with a PRO-MAX shake. Only eat fruits and vegetables between meals. PHYTOZYME BASE SHAPE PLUS is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO USE SHAPE PLUS It is best to take SHAPE PLUS between 15 and 30 minutes before each meal. If you get hungry, take it. Between two and four tablets are usually taken before meals and one with light snacks. Be consistent and take SHAPE PLUS every time you eat. Carry some tablets with you at all times, so that you have them whenever you decide to snack or "eat out". Suggested Use: Two to four tablets at least three times a day prior to each meal. One tablet should be taken if light snacks are eaten. Product No: 0103 Package Size: 180 tablets $22.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-36IA012-000125-B013-117http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mpromax.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221522 text/html 8754HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:15:35 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:46:07 GMTContent-length: 8570Content-type: text/html Take Advantage and lose weight with our low calorie meal replacement! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PROMAX: Low Calorie Meal Replacement Each Serving of Two Heaping Tablespoons Supplies: In Water In Lowfat Milk Calories 96 221 Protein 17.5 gm 32.4 gm Complex Carbohydrate 6.3 gm 21.7 gm Fat 0.2 gm 2.3 gm Fiber 1.0 gm 1.6 gm Typical Analysis of Amino Acids per 25 Gram Serving: Alanine 1,668 mg Lysine* 1,122 mg Arginine 1,525 mg Methionine* 225 mg Aspartic Acid 2,019 mg Penylalanine* 997 mg Cysteine 125 mg Glutamic Acid 2,244 mg Proline 846 mg Serine 850 mg Glycine 800 mg Threonine* 750 mg Isoleucine* 975 mg Histidine 528 mg Tryptophane* 175 mg Tyrosine 550mg Leucine* 1,319 mg Valine* 782 mg *Percentage of the USRDA of the Eight Essential Amino Acids: Isoleucine 176% Leucine 180% Lysine 202% Methionine 32% Phenylalanine 142% Threonine 194% Tryptophan 96% Valine 126% PROTEIN ASSURANCE PRO-MAX is a highly nutritious supplement that provides the daily requirements of protein for lasting energy while at the same time supplying complex carbohydrates for more immediate energy. Because of the combination of both high quality protein and high quality complex carbohydrate, PRO-MAX is particularly suitable for use by athletes and those with high energy expenditure requirements. PRO-MAX, especially when taken with TMV-49, is also suitable as a meal replacement for individuals on calorie restricted diets. It is ideal for adding to milk, juices or other foods, fortifying them with protein and complex carbohydrate. At the same time, it is relatively fat free and ensures adequate levels of high quality protein while minimizing fat intake. Because PRO-MAX is so easily digested, it is also excellent for fulfilling the nutrition requirements of both children and elderly individuals who have a tendency to not eat as they should. SOY & DAIRY FREE PRO-MAX is an unusual blend of natural plant source protein and complex carbohydrate that is both dairy and soy free. The high quality protein in PRO-MAX is obtained from natural Legume concentrates (Pisum Sativum) vegetable sources. It can be used freely by those individuals who have dairy and/or soy allergies. Plus, it is much better tasting than soy-based products. PRO-MAX IS SPECIAL Life Plus developed PRO-MAX to represent the state-of-the-art in protein supplements. We chose not to use any soy, milk or hydrolyzed protein. We were able to identify an excellent source of high quality vegetable protein, extracted for us from certain yellow peas under carefully controlled and monitored conditions. It contains a high percentage of essential amino acids. All proteins are not created equal. Different proteins contain various amounts of essential amino acids. Essential amino acids are those that the body cannot manufacture itself so they must be contained in the diet. PRO-MAX, with its high percentage of essential amino acids, is a leading product in its category. The P.E.R. or Protein Efficiency Ratio is a number that describes the quality of proteins. PRO-MAX has a very high P.E.R. of 2.7. Actually, PRO-MAX can supply the body's entire need for protein if enough were taken. PRO-MAX also contains complex carbohydrates, those that scientists refer to asamylaceous polysaccharides, from specially grown barley processed in such a way as to protect its other beneficial natural ingredients. The inclusion of thirty percent complex carbohydrate in this great product is consistent with current research. This research demonstrates that excess protein on its own may have adverse effects, especially in the case of persons who have any tendency towards hypoglycemia. The benefits of protein/carbohydrate combinations are becoming well established. In addition, PRO-MAX contains good, soluble dietary fiber and provides substantial quantities of natural vitamins and minerals from the specially grown barley. PRO-MAX is pleasantly palatable. It has a pleasant, somewhat bland taste which is superior to other protein powders. Therefore, PRO-MAX is the finest and most versatile protein supplement in both palatability and composition. It is useful for fast energy and for building up energy reserves for people of all ages. PHYTOZYME BASE PRO-MAX is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO USE PRO-MAX PRO-MAX is intended to be used in the form of a drink, although it can be used as an ingredient, which can be added to flour, baked goods and other cooked products. It can also be added to prepared foods such as dips, soups, sauces and gravies. For those wishing to gain weight we recommend that it be taken in the form of a shake at meal times in addition to your regular food. In the case of athletes, take in water or juice approximately one hour before exercise. As a meal replacement, use two or three heaping tablespoonfuls in skim milk or your favorite juice in place of the meal. Suggested Use: Mix two to four heaping tablespoons in liquid as a high energy quality protein drink . It can be used between meals or before or after exercise. Product No: Pro-Max 2615 Package Size: 16 oz $15.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-37IA012-000125-B013-126http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mpro100.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221535 text/html 8338HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:15:48 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:45:33 GMTContent-length: 8154Content-type: text/html Take Advantagge with 100% pure vegetable protein supplement Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PROMAX 100: 100% Pure Vegetable Protein Each Serving of Two Heaping Tablespoons Supplies: In Water In Lowfat Milk Calories 90 253 Protein 21.6 gm 33.0 gm Complex Carbohydrate 0 gm 11 gm Fat 0.9 gm 2.1 gm Fiber 0.5 gm 0 gm Typical Analysis of Amino Acids per 25 Gram Serving: Alanine 1,092 mg Lysine* 1,596 mg Arginine 1,861 mg Methionine* 68 mg Aspartic Acid 2,625 mg Penylalanine* 1,307 mg Cysteine 188 mg Glutamic Acid 3,265 mg Proline 1,028 mg Serine 1,092 mg Glycine 937 mg Threonine* 876 mg Isoleucine* 1,190 mg Histidine 566 mg Tryptophan* 244 mg Tyrosine 697 mg Leucine* 1,800 mg Valine* 1,168 mg *Percentage of the USRDA of the Eight Essential Amino Acids: Isoleucine 311% Leucine 344% Lysine 381% Methionine 53% Phenylalanine 268% Threonine 314% Tryptophan 177% Valine 263% PROTEIN ASSURANCE PRO-MAX 100 is a highly nutritious supplement intended to provide the daily requirements for protein. Because of its high quality protein, it is particularly suitable for use by athletes and others with high protein requirements. It is also suitable as a meal replacement for individuals on calorie restricted diets, although PRO-MAX is usually used for this purpose. On the other hand, PRO-MAX 100 is usually preferred as the supplement of choice for fortifying foods and drinks by persons who want to ensure they are getting plenty of protein in their diet. It is great to use for low fat diets as well because PRO-MAX 100 is virtually fat free and easily digested. Both of these products are excellent for fulfilling the nutrition requirements of children and for the elderly as it is easily digested. PRO-MAX 100 IS SPECIAL Life Plus developed PRO-MAX and PRO-MAX 100 to represent state-of-the-art in protein supplements. We chose not to use any soy, milk or hydrolyzed protein. We were able to identify an excellent source of high quality vegetable protein, extracted for us from certain yellow peas under carefully controlled and monitored conditions. It contains a high percentage of essential amino acids. All proteins are not created equal. Different proteins contain various amounts of essential amino acids. Essential Amino Acids are those that the body cannot manufacture itself, so they must be contained in the diet. PRO-MAX 100, with its high percentage of essential amino acids, is a leading product in its category. The P.E.R or Protein Efficiency Ratio is a number that describes the quality of proteins. PRO-MAX 100 has a very high P.E.R. of 2.7. PRO-MAX 100 could supply the body's entire need for protein if enough were taken. PRO-MAX 100 is very palatable. It has a pleasant, somewhat bland flavor superior to other protein powders. PRO- MAX and PRO-MAX 100 are the two finest and most versatile protein supplements in both palatability and composition. They are useful for lasting energy and for building energy reserves for people of all ages. WHAT IS THE DIFFERENCE? The only difference between PRO-MAX and PRO-MAX 100 is that PRO-MAX 100 does not contain the complex carbohydrates and fiber that are present in PRO-MAX. PRO-MAX 100 contains 100% protein whereas PRO-MAX contains 70% protein and 30% complex carbohydrate. Any given amount of PRO-MAX 100 contains 1.43 times the amount of protein than PRO-MAX. PRO-MAX 100 is for those individuals who, for one reason or another, wish to obtain their carbohydrate from other sources. While PRO-MAX is more nutritionally complete, carbohydrate-sensitive individuals may prefer PRO-MAX 100. PHYTOZYME BASE PRO-MAX 100 is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phyto nutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO USE PRO-MAX 100 PRO-MAX 100 is intended to be used in the form of a drink and as an ingredient added to recipes. It can be added to flour used in baked goods such as breads and cookies. It can also be added to dips, soups, sauces and gravies. For those wishing to gain weight, we recommend that it be taken in the form of a shake at meal times in addition to your regular food. In the case of athletes, take in water or juice approximately one hour before exercise. Many people claim both PRO-MAX and PRO-MAX 100 are great to control appetite and help maintain energy levels throughout the whole day. Suggested Use: Mix two to four heaping tablespoonfuls in liquid as a high enregy quality protein drink between meals and/or before or after exercise or as a meal replacement. Product No: 2616 Package Size: 12. 3 oz. $13.00 + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Yur Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-38IA012-000125-B013-139http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msupt.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221551 text/html 8645HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:16:05 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:49:54 GMTContent-length: 8461Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with our natural stress formula Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SUPPORT TABS: Natural Stress Formula Par Excellence Three Tablets Supply: Amino Acids Vitamins L-Glutamine 125mg Vitamin C 300mg L-Tyrosine 100mg Vitamin B-1 6mg L-Glutamic Acid 100mg Vitamin B-2 6mg Methionine 30mg Vitamin B-6 6mg Glutathione 3mg Vitamin B-12 252mcg Niacin-Niacinamide 70mg Pantoothenic Acid 35mg Vitamin E 90iu Folic Acid 300 mcg Minerals Special Herbal Extracts Chromium 500mcg Dioscorea (Wild Yam) 90mg Magnesium 69mg Ginko Biloba (50:1) 6mg Manganese 30mg Norwegian Kelp 30mg Phosphorus 44mg Gota Kola 30mg Potassium 15mg Siberian Ginsing 30mg Selenium 3.5mcg Zinc 15mg Copper 1.5mg Associated Nutritional Bioflavonoids 175mg SPECIFIC SUPPORT SUPPORT TABS is one of the leading Life Plus products. The original research this great formula is based on was completed at Rutgers University. The goal was to understand specific support needed by alcoholics because of the damage done to specific organs in their bodies by the excessive use of alcohol. Alcoholics are all hypoglycemic, a condition that is characterized by wide and varied blood sugar levels. Millions of Americans are affected by this condition to some degree. Our blood sugar levels fluctuate normally within a limited range, but problems can develop if those levels change too rapidly or if they get too high or too low. When they are too high for extended periods of time, diabetes is the result. If the levels become too low, a condition known as hypoglycemia can cause problems. BLOOD SUGAR LEVELS Carbohydrates stimulate the pancreas to produce insulin. Insulin transfers sugar out of the blood into the cells, where it is used for energy. The chronic eating of too much refined carbohydrate such as sugar over-sensitizes the pancreas and after a time it begins to over react to sugar in the diet. The pancreas then produces too much insulin and blood sugar levels fall too low. People then get the "blahs" and eat more sugar-containing foods to overcome the slump. The pancreas over reacts again with too much insulin and the "blahs" strike again. This condition is called hypoglycemia. The cycle continues until eventually the pancreas becomes exhausted and can hardly produce any insulin at all. This condition then becomes diabetes. The adrenal glands also stimulate the pancreas to produce insulin. Caffeine and nicotine stress out and exhaust the adrenals in a similar way. This aggravates hypoglycemia just like eating too much sugar. SUPPORT TABS nutritionally support the pancreas, pituitary, liver, adrenals, hypothalamus and the whole body as well. The hypothalamus has long been known to be involved in most habit forming processes in the body and needs special nutritional support when trying to break habits. Much research has been done more recently at MIT on "carbohydrate hunger." They have proven that Seratonin production in the brain is increased when increased levels of the amino acid, L-Tryptophan, getinto the brain. When enough Seratonin is produced, carbohydrate hunger increases. AMINO ACIDS SUPPORT TABS contain amino acids associated with the metabolic pathways of L-Tryptophan in the brain. Even though most people notice an energy boost when they take SUPPORT TABS, about 3% notice a feeling of relaxation, rather than increased energy. A reaction of this type should be considered positive. L-Glutamine is considered to be helpful in mental alertness. Vitamins B-l, B-2 and B-6 are included because they assist in the burning of glucose, which produces energy. However, the typical large amounts of B-vitamins, usually contained in stress formulas, are intentionally not included in SUPPORT TABS as they would cause the body to burn too much blood sugar quickly. Mega-doses of B-vitamins give temporary energy, but once the sugar is burned, the same hypoglycemic "blahs" return in full force. Thus, SUPPORT TABS contain a reasonable amount of B-vitamins to support the process naturally without creating a false stimulant effect that ultimately does more harm than good. PHYTOZYME BASE SUPPORT TABS are formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE THEM It is difficult to say exactly how one should take SUPPORT TABS as we all have different needs at different times. For best results, we recommend that you experiment. Take at least three tablets per day. The general recommendation is three tablets two times per day, usually three early to mid afternoon and three in the late afternoon or evening. Some people also prefer taking them in the morning. An ideal regimen is to take CARDIO-CHELEX in the morning and SUPPORT TABS in the afternoon. Suggested Use: Three tablets once or twice a day for energy and to fight stress or when trying to break habits such as overeating, smoking, etc. They are also useful in athletic programs. Product No: 1920 Package Size: 90 tablets $19.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 1948 Package Size: 180 tablets $36.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Chose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-39IA012-000125-B013-157http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mcolodyn.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221606 text/html 7910HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:16:18 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:20:30 GMTContent-length: 7726Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with fiber, herbs, and beneficial micro-flora Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... COLODYNE: 100% Natual Soluble Fiber, Herbs & Beneficial Micro-Flora Each Heaping Teaspoonful Contains: Psyllium Seed Whole Powder Psyllium Seed Husk Powder Flax Seed Guar Gum Marine Alginate Beet Root Bentonite Black Walnut Leaves Acidophiulus Culture Mannitol Contains CytovexTM, a proprietary blend of Lysozyme enzyme with the Pineapple enzyme, Bromelain and Papayotin enzyme from Papaya. Contains a stabilized miuxture of beneficial micro-flora including Lactobacillus Salivarius, Lactobacillus Acidophilus Lactobacillus Bulgaricus and Lactobacillus Bifidus. FIBER IS IMPORTANT Most people should begin a nutritional program with COLODYNE. A great majority of people have a sluggish digestive tract and would absorb many more nutrients if they had the good digestive tract hygiene provided by COLODYNE. Because of modern junk food diets, lack of vigorous exercise and the lack of adequate fiber in the diet, most people's colons are not healthy. When partially digested food remains in the colon too long it decays. Little pockets form in the colon, called diverticulae, which trap this decaying food and spawn harmful bacteria action. This often leads to serious infection and inflammation called diverticulitis. Many physicians believe that the toxic by-products of this decaying debris may actually be a major cause of colon and other cancers. It is imperative that these pockets be emptied and cleansed of any mucous build-up to avoid inflammation and infection. Fiber is the main dietary ingredient to accomplish this. HOW COLODYNE WORKS COLODYNE is an easy way to get a reasonable amount of fiber quickly. Its bulk helps promote good healthy muscle tone for the muscles of the colon wall. The Black Walnut, Beet Root, Papaya and Bromelain enzymes in COLODYNE help loosen the mucous build-up from the colon walls so it can be eliminated. Do not be alarmed if you pass strings of mucous after using COLODYNE for a couple of weeks as this is a good sign that you are detoxifying. If you set aside three days each month to eat only raw fruit and drink juices plus take COLODYNE three times per day in juice, you will give your colon a good opportunity to cleanse itself routinely. You will be surprised how good you will feel. COLODYNE also contains Lactobacillus Salivarius, Lactobacillus Acidophilus, Lactobacillus Bulgaricus and Lactobacillus Bifidus for beneficial bacteria that live in a healthy colon environment. These bacteria help in the synthesis of certain B vitamins, maintain proper colon pH, maintain normal consistency of stool and fight off` viruses, yeasts and harmful bacteria. COLODYNE also contains powdered Bentonite, a natural, high-quality clay that absorbs many toxins so they can be naturally eliminated. Alginate is a sea weed substance that absorbs many toxic metals, especially aluminum, which is normally difficult for the body to eliminate. Because aluminum cooking utensils have been so popular, aluminum toxicity is more widespread than recognized. It can lead to depression and psychoses and be very damaging to heart muscle. The liver attempts to eliminate aluminum by incorporating it into the bile. However, bile is ultimately secreted into the intestinal tract and most of the aluminum is reabsorbed. Alginate very efficiently holds the aluminum in the digestive tract so it can be eliminated through the stool. PHYTOZYME BASE COLODYNE is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO USE COLODYNE We recommend that COLODYNE be taken either in the morning right before breakfast or in the evening. Usually, one heaping teaspoonful, which provides 13 grams of high quality soluble fiber, is the recommended amount once a day. It is a good idea to take it twice a day for the first week or ten days. Place one to two heaping teaspoonfuls of COLODYNE in a small jar or glass (with a lid) with three to four ounces of your favorite juice. Usually, apple or orange juice is best. Shake briskly for about ten seconds and drink immediately. Do not let it stand after mixing as it will gel quickly and be difficult to swallow. We recommend following with water or more juice to ensure adequate liquid. Use the extra liquid to remove any remaining COLODYNE that may stick to the container. You may notice increased gas for a few days as you go through the initial phase of cleansing. Suggested Use: Take one or two heaping teaspoons mixed in water or juice once or twice a day as a fiber and bulk supplement. Shake vigorously and drink immediately. Product No: 0188 Package Size: 10.7 oz $16.50 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 0191 Package Size: 25 oz $26.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-40IA012-000125-B013-170http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mdiuplx.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221616 text/html 7610HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:16:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:21:23 GMTContent-length: 7426Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with an herbal diuretic Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... DIUPLEX: Herbal Diuretic to Eliminate Water Retention Each Tablet Supplies: Vitamins & Minerals Herbs Vitamin B-6 50mg Buchu Leaves 60mg Hydrangeia Root 30mg Potassium (as chelate) 10mg Couch Grass 60mg Uva Ursi 15mg Magnesium (as chelate) 10mg Corn Silk 40mg Peppermint Leaves 30mg HERBALS Herbs have been used since creation to provide for our health and well being, for entire civilizations for that matter. The Bible tells us that we were given herbs for healing and cites many examples of their usage. Main stream modern technology is now finally beginning to focus on herbs and natural plant therapies. This is usually referred to in the literature today as phytotherapy. We probably never will understand many of the secrets regarding how many natural extracts and concentrates work, but that is no reason to not take advantage of their benefits now. To our knowledge, Life Plus is the only company that manufactures and distributes the unique kinds of herbal based products we do by combining high quality herbs from all over the world with other synergistic nutrients known to work toward the same specific nutritional goals. These other synergistic nutrients include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, bioflavonoids, phytonutrients, anti-oxidants and, at times, concentrated tissue nutrients. By combining modern technology with classical herbal knowledge, the Life Plus herbal based products are second to none anywhere in the world. FLUID RETENTION Consistent use of DIUPLEX may result in frequent elimination of water from the body. When the tissues retain too much water, it can create hydrostatic pressure that works against the blood vessels making it harder for efficient circulation to occur. This can cause elevated blood pressure and be an increased work load on the heart. For efficient weight loss to occur, the constant flushing of water from the body is necessary. Adepoise (fat) tissue retains water and its reduction naturally assists excess water elimination. This is a natural and beneficial cleansing action that can be supported by taking DIUPLEX while dieting. The kidneys do not actually eliminate water but they do eliminate sodium. When the sodium is transported by the kidneys, it is followed by water and thus diuresis occurs. However, because potassium is chemically very similar to sodium in certain ways, the kidneys sometimes perceive potassium to be sodium and it is eliminated instead of the sodium. When excess potassium is eliminated, a feeling of tiredness is often experienced. Quite often, doctors prescribe high powered potassium salts to counteract this. Then, they often discover that potassium products that are commonly used have a tendency to irritate the digestive tract and can actually go so far as to cause duodenal ulcers. THE DIUPLEX DIFFERENCE The Life Plus DIUPLEX formula contains a small amount of potassium in each tablet. The small amount is not enough to cause any irritation to the intestines but it can help prevent possible depletion of potassium from the body due to the elimination of water. In addition, the potassium in DIUPLEX is in the form of a chelate, which is much more gentle on the digestive tract. A full 50 mg of Vitamin B-6 is included because of its natural diuretic effect when taken in this quantity. However, it should be taken with magnesium for best results. DIUPLEX also contains six different herbs including Buchu Leaves, Couch Grass, Corn Silk, Hydrangia Root, Uva Ursi and Peppermint. These herbs have been used for many years for their natural diuretic effect. This well liked product does not produce a strong "drug-like" effect that can be associated with unwanted side effects. Instead, it provides a gentle, yet reliable diuretic effect. PHYTOZYME BASE DIUPLEX is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE DIUPLEX Since DIUPLEX is not a drug, but a natural product, some individuals need to take several tablets to notice its effect. However, it is usually recommended that two to three tablets be taken in the morning and at mid-day. It is not wise to take it in the afternoon as its diuretic effect may carry over for several hours into the night, which could interfere with restful sleep. Suggested Use: Two or three tablets, once or twice a day, in the morning, not after mid-day. Product No: 5014 Package Size: 60 tablets $9.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-41IA012-000125-B013-184http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mwtpak.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221624 text/html 10510HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:16:40 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:53:55 GMTContent-length: 10325Content-type: text/html Advantage weight management pak! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... WEIGHT MANAGEMENT PAK: Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program Each Pak Contains: 16 oz. PRO-MAX 25 oz. COLODYNE 90 Tablets ENDOCRYN DHEA 180 Tablets SUPPORT TABS 180 Tablets SHAPE PLUS QUALITY NUTRITION The Life Plus WEIGHT MANAGEMENT PAK is a weight control program that is easy to use, yet extremely effective, especially when combined with a low fat diet and a reasonable program of regular exercise. The program consist of five great Life Plus products that are very synergistic when used together in the support of total weight management. PRO-MAX PRO-MAX is an unusual blend of natural plant source protein and complex carbohydrate. It contains high quality, soy-free protein from natural concentrated legume vegetable sources with a high P.E.R. (Protein Efficiency Ratio). This ensures a high ratio of all eight essential amino acids. It also contains a scientifically determined thirty percent complex carbohydrate from barley malt extract which contains many vitamins, minerals, micronutrients, enzymes and high quality soluble fiber. PRO-MAX is both dairy and soy free, so persons with dairy and soy allergies can use it. The taste of PRO-MAX is more pleasant than soy-based products. PRO-MAX was first developed to supply protein, carbohydrate and energy for athletes. In addition, it can be used as a low-calorie meal replacement when dieting, or as an excellent supplement in addition to regular meals. PRO-MAX is a highly nutritious supplement that provides the daily requirements of protein for lasting energy, while at the same time supplying complex carbohydrates for more immediate energy. Because of the combination of both high quality protein and high quality complex carbohydrate, PRO-MAX is particularly suitable for use by athletes and others with high energy expenditure requirements. PRO-MAX, especially when taken with TVM-49, is also suitable as a meal replacement for individuals on calorie-restricted diets. It is ideal for adding to milk, juices or other foods, fortifying them with protein and complex carbohydrate. At the same time, it is relatively fat free and ensures adequate levels of high quality protein while minimizing fat intake. Because PRO-MAX is so easily digested, it is also excellent for fulfilling the nutrition requirements of both children and elderly individuals who have a tendency to not eat as they should. COLODYNE COLODYNE provides the much needed fiber and bulk in today's diet. The various fibers and herbs in COLODYNE help cleanse the lower intestine, especially the colon. It helps to ease existing conditions resulting from a diet too low in fiber. Because COLODYNE supplies bulk. it also helps correct chronic constipation. COLODYNE contains beneficial bacteria that normally live in the lower digestive tract, which promote proper colon hygiene. They also manufacture certain vitamins, help maintain proper pH and control overgrowth of infectious yeasts such as candida albicans. The fiber and betonite absorb toxins in the digestive tract that can arise from incomplete digestion or from contaminated foods in the diet. COLODYNE helps with the elimination of excessive mucous build-up that can occur in the colon from eating low fiber diets. This mucous build-up can harbor unfriendly bacteria and restrict absorption of needed nutrients. Studies have shown that people with diets higher in natural fiber are less likely to develop arteriosclerosis and colon cancer. It contains natural fiber, herbs and beneficial micro-flora that help maintain a healthy colon. COLODYNE is an easy way to get a reasonable amount of fiber quickly. Its bulk helps promote good healthy muscle tone for the muscles of the colon wall. The Black Walnut, Beet Root, Papaya and Bromelain enzymes in COLODYNE help loosen the mucous build-up from the colon walls so it can be eliminated. Do not be alarmed if you pass strings of mucous after using COLODYNE for a couple of weeks as this is actually a good sign that you are detoxifying. ENDOCRYN DHEA ENDOCRYN DHEA contains 30 mg of real DHEA along with a highly concentrated and standardized blend of Mexican and Asian varieties of Dioscorea (Wild Yam). Dioscorea contains natural substances that serve as precursors for the body's endocrine system to manufacture its own DHEA. DHEA is used by our bodies to produce at lease 50 other hormones that are important in overall health. DHEA levels decrease as we age. One of the most exciting benefits of DHEA is its ability to burn fat and help you lose weight, plus keep it off by converting fat to muscle. DHEA's ability to facilitate this burning of fat may became one of the most significant finds in weight control. This effect does not seem to be so diet dependent as are other weight control supplements. No matter what you eat, DHEA still provides benefits of weight loss. DHEA's ability to block an enzyme named G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase) may be one of the most significant finds of the century. This enzyme is not only essential for fat tissue but also promotes cancer cell growth. By blocking it, DHEA's action of reducing body fat and helping to prevent against cancer may be explained. SUPPORT TABS The amino acids, concentrated tissue nutrients, specific vitamins and minerals in SUPPORT TABS serve as fuel for the nervous system to provide energy, but also create a natural calming effect. They help greatly to maintain more consistent blood sugar levels helping the body maintain energy levels and control the ups and downs associated with low blood sugar levels. SUPPORT TABS are great for high stress situations such as those dieting, smokers or those trying to stop smoking, those trying to get off mind-altering drugs, heavy caffeine ingestion from coffee, chocolate or soft drinks, busy executives, students, people who travel a lot and individuals who seem to always be on the run. Many people have great results with SUPPORT TABS in helping them control excessive appetite and cravings. SHAPE PLUS SHAPE PLUS is a unique herbal-based product that contains 23 different herbs selected for their high content of naturally occurring polyphenolic compounds. These polyphenols have an astringent effect on the stomach and act as natural appetite suppressants. They are natural cleansing or detoxifying agents for both the digestive tract and throughout the whole body. These herbs, because of the natural polyphenols they contain, can reduce the amount of fat that is absorbed, thereby reducing calories. They also help move food through the digestive tract at a normal rate, so those extra "empty calories" do not linger and become absorbed. When fewer calories are absorbed, the body will use up its own fat for energy. The natural appetite control provided by SHAPE PLUS is a blessing to those trying to control their eating habits. The Chromiurn Picolinate in SHAPE PLUS reduces the craving for sweets and helps the body maintain proper blood sugar levels so the typical energy level ups and downs normally associated with dieting are greatly reduced. Chromium Picolinate also supports the conversion of fat to lean body tissue. HOW TO USE THE WEIGHT MANAGEMENT PAK Mix two or more heaping tablespoonfuls of PRO-MAX and one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE in juice or skim milk as a meal replacement twice a day. Take two SUPPORT TABS and one ENDOCRYN DHEA three times a day with meals. Take two or more SHAPE PLUS before meals and snacks. Product No: 3609 Package Size: Kit $97.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-42IA012-000125-B013-193http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/rain.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221639 text/html 13231HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:16:55 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:54:57 GMTContent-length: 13046Content-type: text/html Save the rainforest and improve your health! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... We have found the secret ADVANTAGE of a healthier world living in the rainforest. The new RAINFORCE Line of Products: CATAGESIC, Synergistic energy and anti-inflammatory rainforest herbs for athletic performance and recovery formula. CATIMUNE, Cat's Claw plus other synergistic immune supporting rainforest herbs. CAT'S CLAW FORTE, Concentrated Cat's Claw Drops! WONDER GEL provides soothing topical relief of muscle and joint pain. Contains herbal concentrates of the jaborandi and copaiba plants, along with aloe vera and other natural healing agents. TOUCHFIRE HIS, TOUCHFIRE HERS for igniting the spark between them. TOUCHFIRE HIS contains extracts of muira puama, nettle root and others. TOUCHFIRE HERS contains chuchuasi, catuaba, and five other rainforest herbs. RICH'N GREEN is a powerfully concentrated phytonutrient energy source. Each tablet blends rainforest vegetables with super green algae, barley, wheat grass juice, herbs and mushrooms. BERRY'D TREASURE provides the benefits of plant derived colloidal minerals. Life Plus has bottled 77 colloidal minerals with a Rainforest herbal base in a pleasant berry flavored liquid. JUNGLE ADE is a refreshing concentrated fruit drink mix rich in synergistically formulated health-supporting phytonutrients.Combine camu-camu, passion fruit, cashew fruit, guava and cupuacu with other fruits and ingredients. JATOBA TEA is a great tasting, healthful tonic for renewed energy. Contains extract from the bark of the rainforest jatoba tree. Yet, every year, mankind destroys an area of rainforest nearly one-half the size of Texas. Earth's greatest natural resource is quite literally going up in smoke, as over 320 square miles of irreplaceable primary rainforest are burned or logged every day. Only twenty years ago, rainforests covered about fourteen percent of the earth's land area. Today, rainforests are less than six percent. At the current rate of destruction, this miraculous web of life will be totally wiped out in forty years. With it will be lost untold treasures and irreplaceable resources available only within these unique environments. The importance of these fragile eco-systems to the health of our world cannot be overstated: Over half of Earth's living species live there. Two-and-a-half acres of Amazon Rainforest contain over seven hundred-fifty types of trees, more than all of North America. One rainforest reserve in Peru is home to more species of birds than the entire United States. According to estimates, twenty percent of the world's oxygen is produced in the Amazon Rainforest. Two-thirds of the Earth's fresh water is found in the Amazon River basin. Perhaps even more distressing is the loss of countless ingredients that could provide improved health and a better life for millions of people throughout the entire world: Seventy percent of the plants currently found to be active against cancers come from the rainforests. Over one hundred and twenty prescription drugs and twenty-five percent of all pharmaceuticals originate from rainforest material. Eighty percent of all fruits ad vegetables in our modern diet originated there. And yet, the rainforest is so rich with life, less than one percent of its three hundred thousand plant species have even been studied by scientists. One rainforest plant, the Madagascar Periwinkle (now extinct in the wild), has produced a drug that has increased the survival rate in children with leukemia from 20% to 80%. How many lives have been saved by this one plant? How many more can be saved by other plants that grow in the rainforests? A seemingly endless list of fact after fact present the importance of saving the world's remaining rainforests. If we act today, the world we pass on to our children's children can be a healthier, better world for all. The RainForce, providing a force for a healthier world. The key to turning this tide of destruction lies in providing long-term, economically viable alternatives to the current exploitation of the rainforest by timber companies, oil companies, agra-business and others. Sustainable, non-destructive harvesting of the riches contained in the rainforests of the world is vital to the on-going health of our world. Not only is it environmentally sound, but sustainable harvesting of rainforest plants makes more economic sense than the alternatives. It is estimated that sustainable harvesting of one acre of Peruvian Amazon rainforest can produce over $2400 annually for the Peruvian people. In contrast, clear-cutting for timber nets only $400 per acre and cattle grazing earns only $60 per acre. A Complex Problem Like many of the world's problems, rainforest deforestation is a complex problem. Yet, in reality, the solution is simple. If you and enough people like you, show concern and start to take positive actions, change will occur. In this case, it is as simple as using, and encouraging others to use, products that have been sustainably harvested from these endangered rainforests of the world. The RainForce, A Solution Life Plus is proud to introduce the RainForce. As a catalyst for progressive change, it encompasses people and organizations working towards a healthier planet. The moral imperative we all should feel to leave the world a little better than it was when we arrive is an underlying concept of the RainForce. Truly, the RainForce is many things: Life Plus Members using products, and telling others about these products that are sustainably harvested from the unique web of life, are part of the RainForce. Indigenous peoples of the rainforest areas earning a livable income from non-destructively harvesting the fruits of the forest are part of the RainForce. Life Plus, working together with the indigenous peoples of the rainforest and utilizing sustainably harvested botanicals from the rainforest in its new product line, is part of the RainForce. Consumers through-out the world, seeking products that are sustainably harvested from the rainforest are part of the RainForce. Most importantly, YOU are part of the RainForce. Joining Is Easy There are no membership dues. No forms to fill out. When you order Life Plus RainForce products, you become a member of the RainForce. When you tell your friends about these products, or talk about how we can change this cycle of destruction; you are a member of the RainForce. Will It Work? Yes. The only way to save the world's remaining rainforests is to provide an alternative that offers the local people and local governments an economic solution that is better than the current destructive exploitation. Life Plus firmly believes that the biggest problems we face, now or in the future, can best be solved through individual effort. When millions of people, each one making an individual effort to contribute, are all working toward the same goal - the world changes! The Life Plus Difference Life Plus is proud of the RainForce. We think that it WILL make a positive difference. Both for the future health of the world's remaining rainforests and in the lives of all of those who join us in this effort. We know the power and determination of the Life Plus Members. We know the strength of the RainForce products. Making a positive difference in people's lives is nothing new for Life Plus and our Members. It is the fundamental concept behind our business. Life Plus is dedicated to providing our Members with a life of better health. A life of financial opportunity and prosperity. A life of self-empowerment. Now Life Plus and the RainForce are dedicated to making the world a healthier place to live. The Pharmacy of the World To the people who have lived in the rainforest for thousands of years, it is a sacred place. A place of life. A place of health. Through countless generations, these indigenous peoples of the rainforest have learned many of the health secrets hidden within dense vegetation, utilizing over eighteen-hundred species of plants for medicinal and health purposes. Life Plus has tapped this ancient wisdom in developing the RainForce product line. Studying with indigenous Amazon healers and integrating this age-old knowledge with the advanced technology and product application expertise that is he hallmark of Life Plus; we developed the RainForce product line. A line of healthful products combining the best of both worlds. Utilizing some twenty-five rainforest plants in these formulation, Life Plus uses costly cold-processing techniques, without chemical agents to refine and concentrate active ingredients as standardized whole complexes, complete with all the naturally occurring enzymes and other phytonutrients that create their synergistic effectiveness. The result? Health enhancing products that capture the complex, symbiotic life force of the rainforest itself. Products that can enhance your health in ways that now synthetic product can match. Products that reward indigenous peoples and promote sustainable harvesting of precious rainforest botanicals: Life Plus RainForce products: combining the wisdom of traditional rainforest healing with the benefits of modern science and technology. Life Plus RainForce products: using sustainable harvesting of rainforest botanicals to enhance your health, and the health of our planet. Life Plus is committed to preserving the world's rainforests for the generations to come. We are determined that we should not only help build a market for rainforest products, but also contribute directly, on a sustained basis, to organizations devoted to the same cause. Life Plus is dedicating a portion of all sales of any product we develop from rainforest materials to be donated to non-profit organizations actively and directly working in the local communities to preserve rainforest. Special emphasis will be given to programs that: Increase and enhance the educational opportunities for the local population. Protect large tracts of primary rainforest from destruction. Foster research on rainforest bio-diversity, ecology, medicinal plants and sustainable development. Be a Part of the RainForce We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple. And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee. How to Order Online Order Form Contact us at Advantage! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-43IA012-000125-B013-208http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfytab.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221657 text/html 7376HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:17:02 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:24:17 GMTContent-length: 7192Content-type: text/html Take Advantage & stay young  and beautiful Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS: Beauty from Within Two Tablets Supply: Special Marine Concentrate 390mg Acerola Extract 27mg Rice Protein Concentrate 300mg Vitamin A 2,000 iu Microcystalline Cellulose 90mg Vitamin D-3 100 iu Norwegian Kelp 66mg Vitamin E 10 iu Zinc (as picolinate) 4mg Vitamin C 30mg Silica 30mg The Special Marine Concentrate is a unique nutritional substance extracted and concentrated by a patented process from certain types of deep, cold water fish. No shellfish are used. AGING SKIN Premature aging of the skin due to excessive exposure to sunlight is an increasing problem across the world today. It is characterized by thinning of the skin, wrinkles, yellowing, mottling and leathery dryness. It can easily lead to skin cancers of all types. Photodamaged skin actually undergoes structural changes, along with the simultaneous loss of collagen and elastin. This loss causes less resilience in the skin making it appear aged. MARINE CONCENTRATE The unique marine concentrated extracts contained in FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS are obtained from certain cold water fish. These have been shown to provide special nutrients that support both collagen and elastin production in the body and Lit the same time help protect them from destructive ultraviolet light and enzymes. This specific concentrated extract is made up of over 50% polysaccharide and 30% protein. OTHER NUTRIENTS Other synergistic nutrients are included in FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS to help support healthy, vibrant skin including Vitamins A, D, E and C, Silica from herbal sources, Norwegian Kelp, hydrolyzed bovine collagen, rice protein and zinc. These nutrients synergistically support healthy, youthful skin. All the ingredients in FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS are as completely natural as possible. The active ingredients are either in their totally natural occurring state or have been concentrated for maximum results. YOUTHFUL RADIANCE Your skin is the largest organ of your body and is the first thing someone sees when they look at you. As the aging process continues, the most visual changes occur here. Our outward appearance influences how we feel about ourselves and how others see us. By taking FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS, you can ensure that your skin receives many important nutrients valuable in revitalizing and preserving that youthful glow. Younger skin cells are more vibrant and look more youthful than older ones. When they are supplied with the proper nutrients, they are able to retain moisture and contain more collagen, which results in healthy, thicker skin that is more elastic. FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS help your skin regain and retain its youthful radiance from within. It provides essential nutrients that feed the lower skin levels where new skin cells develop. The combination of these fantastic tablets with the FOREVER YOUNG topical skin care products is the best way to have that youthful skin you have always wanted. PHYTOZYME BASE FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS are formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS It is recommended to take one tablet twice a day, usually first thing in the morning and at bedtime. This is the minimum amount to take, and at the same time usually produces great results. However, if you have damaged skin, or would like to get maximum results as soon as possible, more tablets should be taken. If you intend to be in the sun, it is a good idea to take several tablets for additional protection. For maximum results, use FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS with the four great FOREVER YOUNG topical skin care products, EMOLLIENT CLEANSER, FACIAL PERFECTING GEL, DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX and BODY PERFECTING LOTION. However, the tablets can be taken alone if desired. Other Life Plus products that are especially synergistic with FOREVER YOUNG TABLETS are PROANTHENOLS and PROTX II. Suggested use: The usual amount taken is one tablet twice a day in the morning and at bedtime. More can be taken if desired for faster results. Product No: 0150 Package Size: 60 tablets $42.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-44IA012-000125-B013-227http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfyem.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221714 text/html 8358HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:17:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:23:26 GMTContent-length: 8174Content-type: text/html Take Advantage by cleansing, restoring & protecting your skin Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOREVER YOUNG EMOLLIENT CLEANSER: Cleanses, Restores & Protects Facial Skin EMOLLIENT CLEANSER Contains: Specially Processed Soybean Oil: Dissolves dirt, makeup and environmental contaminants; removes excess facial oils; supplies antioxidant and nutrients to the skin; removes devitalized cells when washed off Rosemary Extract: Natural antioxidant Chamomile Extract: Anti-inflammatory, soothing agent for tender skin; also provides antioxidation Anthocyanidins (pycnogenol): Natural poerful antioxidant, which assists in skin repari; also strengthens blood vessels Vitamin E: Antioxidant when absorbed into the skin Oat Oil: Powerful antioxidant and emollient; provides deep antioxidant activity Polysorbate 80: Surface active agent that provides smooth and complete spreading of the cleanser Lavender Extract: Anti-inflammatory, soothing agent Propylparaben & BHT: Preservative SEBACEOUS GLANDS Detergents and soaps solubilize lipids on the skin and remove them, thereby disrupting the protective barrier of the skin. They also deplete the opening of the sebaceous gland of oils. This acts as a stimulus to the sebaceous gland to secrete more oil. This sets up a vicious cycle which creates more oil requiring more detergent use, thus more oil is produced. This action functions through a feedback system within the gland that senses the surface tension of the oil in the sebaceous duct, which serves to regulate the amount of oil produced by the gland. The action of the FOREVER YOUNG EMOLLIENT CLEANSER does not disrupt this healthy mechanism, but works in supporting it. Consequently, the glands sense that adequate oil is in the duct and normalizes its production of oils. FREE RADICALS A little known fact about skin is the high potential that it has for generating free radicals. This is inherent because of its protein nature. Rubbing and grinding proteins has been shown by the scientific community to be an established method of generating lots of free radicals. Using harsh abrasives on the skin not only breaks its surface, but also causes free radical formation, which further results in an inflammatory reaction in the skin. This inflammatory reaction will attract white blood cells to the area. These cells carry highly irritating peroxides that are part of the defense mechanism used by the body to prevent infection in areas of damaged skin. So when the skin is artificially damaged by physical abrasion and chemicals in non-biologic cleansers, the body reacts in a way that can be easily monitored. FOREVER YOUNG EMOLLIENT CLEANSER is designed to be totally compatible with skin physiology and not produce free radicals when applied. WALL OF DEFENSE Functioning as the first line, or outer wall of defense, the skin needs a healthy set of mature cells at its periphery or outer layer. This is the true battle zone, designed to withstand abrasions, infections, heat, moisture and cold. It takes time to mature these outermost cells -- anywhere from 18 to 28 days. When the skin is irritated, the cells must move out faster to replace those that are injured or sloughed off. This is the basis of the many so-called "natural acid" products -- they are primarily nothing more than skin irritants. These cells are immature cells, not younger cells! You cannot send a child to do an adult's work. Even soaps can create this type of damage in about ten percent of individuals who have sensitive skin. They coagulate the keratin proteins and denature them, which causes the lower cells to step up production to replace them. With repeated use of soaps, some individuals experience a chronic inflammation of the skin. Housewives, nurses, dishwashers and those exposed to chemical cleansers and soaps frequently have this condition. As FOREVER YOUNG EMOLLIENT CLEANSER is spread over the skin, it removes peroxidized lipids and foreign matter, makeup and environmental contaminants. As it is removed with a soft, non-abrasive cloth or cotton, all this debris is carried away. A soft, well moisturized, texturized and protected skin is the result. The skin is protected with Vitamin E, Proanthocyanidins, Herbal Ingredients and other free radical scavengers, as well as deep penetrating skin, softeners that prepare the skin for the application of FOREVER FACIAL PERFECTING GEL and DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX. This is accomplished by adjusting the partition coefficient of the stratum corneum, providing retained moisture in the outer layer of the skin providing a silky pathway for the FACIAL PERFECTING GEL and/or DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX and allowing greater penetration of them. HOW TO USE EMOLLIENT CLEANSER Place a small quantity of EMOLLIENT CLEANSER in the palm of your hand. Apply the cleanser using a circular motion covering all areas of the face with a very thin layer. The circular motion is effective in removing dirt and makeup, while stimulating the skin cells at the same time. Remove the cleanser with a warm, damp, clean wash cloth. Do not use dry tissues, as they obtain harsh fibers, which may be unkind to delicate facial skin. Go over the face gently until all traces of makeup and dirt are removed, then pat dry. Your skin is now prepared to apply the FACIAL PERFECTING GEL. Suggested Use: Use once or twice a day to remove makeyp and the build-up of debris and environmental contaminants before applying FACIAL PERFECTING GEL. Product No: 3603 Package Size: 4 oz. $18.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-45IA012-000125-B013-240http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfyfp.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221723 text/html 8942HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:17:39 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 8758Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with our facial perfecting gel! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOREVER YOUNG FACIAL PERFECTING GEL: Contouring and Firming Facial Gel FACIAL PERFECTING GEL Contains: Theophylline Complex: Active ingredient encourages the body to burn fat Glycerine: Humectant and solubilizer PEG-7 Glyceryl Cocoate: Emollient and co-emulsifier Dimethicone Copolyol: Complex of natural sillica, acts as a spreading agent for easy applicatin of product; also functions as a moisturizer Octoxynol-9: solubilizer, spreading agent Chamomile Extract: Anti-inflammatory agent Algisium Complex: A natural maine-derived complex, which functions as a natural anti-inflammatory agent, and also functions to control the delivery of the theophylline into the skin Anthocyanidins (pycnogenol): Natural powerful antioxidant which assissts in skin repari; also strengthens blood vessels Dioscorea Extract: Natural anti-aging agent Carbomer: Gelling agent Echinacea: Assista immune function, anti-inflammatory Paraguay Tea: Augments action of theophylline, also cntains antioxidant to help maintain healthy skin Aminomethyl Propanol: Neutralizer Carbormer to form gel Quaternium-15: Preservative Wint Mint Oil: Stimulating fragrance Ginkgo Biloba: Anti-inflammatory agent Forever Young Powder® Carbohydrate complex and protein extract of marine origin that functions to assist the body's immune system, to maintain healthy skin. Provides glucosamines, which is essential to healthy exracellular matrix FACIAL SKIN Facial skin is the most exposed area on the body. Sunlight, extremes of temperature, blasts of hot and cold air, environmental toxins and other offenders like cigarette smoke insult it every minute of every day. It is never covered. Yet, this small area of less than nine percent of our total skin surface suffers more than the other ninety one percent. Also, our skin is stressed by internal factors that arise from internal emotional and metabolic factors. Think of the phrase "putting on a good face" and understand the meaning of that phrase in terms of emotional stress pumped into our skin. Stress produces adrenalin related products, which not only restrict blood flow to our skin, but also generates potent, destructive free radicals. All of these forces combine to wreck havoc with the texture, color and resiliency of our skin. To help correct these problems with a view toward efficacy and ease of use, and to meet the demands placed on facial skin, FOREVER YOUNG FACIAL PERFECTING GEL was developed. STRENGTHENING AND FIRMING The ingredients in FACIAL PERFECTING GEL include antioxidants such as Vitamin E and Anthocyanidins, as well as moisturizers and FOREVER YOUNG marine concentrate. In addition, it includes theophylline conjugated with Algisium Complex. All of these ingredients act to prevent free radical damage, either by quenching the free radicals, stopping a chain reaction of lipid peroxidation, or binding iron so that it does not react with the reactive oxygen species to form hydroxyl radicals. The overall action of the ingredients is to strengthen and firm the connective tissues in the dermis, particularly elastin and collagen. Along with the fat deposits beneath the skin, these proteins are responsible for the shape and tone of the facial skin. Daily use of the product will result in firmer skin that resists wrinkling and sagging. Sagging is mainly a gravitational effect, while wrinkling is an inflammatory response induced by free radicals. Both of these result from both exogenous (external as in sun exposure or cigarette smoke), or endogenous (internal as in toxic drug intake or alcohol abuse). Careful balancing of repair and protection functions in FOREVER YOUNG FACIAL PERFECTING GEL allow the use of several active ingredients that sense the need for repair at particular areas of the face. The enzymes that replace worn or damaged collagen and elastin are assisted by these ingredients, which then effect the repair. Critical to this process is the compatibility of the ingredients, not only to work in a synergistic manner with the normal skin physiological processes that maintain the skin in good repair, but also to aid and stimulate these processes as needed by the skin. The end results are the firming of the tissues and laying down of fresh, vibrant tissue that is responsible for the skin's strength and more youthful beauty. ANTIOXIDANTS The antioxidants contained in FACIAL PERFECTING GEL not only slow down the peroxidation of the lipids, which destroys cells, but actually protects many vital cellular functions, particularly the DNA in the cell. The long term benefit from using FOREVER YOUNG FACIAL PERFECTING GEL is that there is less tissue damage, fewer abnormal cells and a better protected skin. The net result is that chronic inflammation of the skin, which is associated with aging, is markedly reduced, so that continuing skin damage is averted and skin repair is now possible on a continuing basis. Supplying the skin with antioxidants makes good sense, since the body does not give the skin the best it has to offer. The skin, especially the facial skin, needs antioxidants every bit as much as any part of the body. HOW TO USE FACIAL PERFECTING GEL After cleansing the face with the EMOLLIENT CLEANSER, apply a small amount of FACIAL PERFECTING GEL to the five designated areas of the face. Smooth gently under the eyes, on the forehead and around the cheeks and lips. Do not apply to the lips. Then put a small amount under your chin and spread over the entire front of your neck area down to the collar bone. This will help to tighten and smooth your neck area. Allow the gel to dry completely for 1 to 2 minutes. Your skin is now prepared to use the DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX. Men also get the most benefit when they cleanse with EMOLLIENT CLEANSER, but if they prefer to just use the PERFECTING GEL, they can. The best time for them to apply it is immediately after shaving. Suggested Use: Apply twice a day to all areas of the face. Maximum restructuring results are seen if applied after FOREVER YOUNG EMOLLIENT CLEANSER. Product No: 3604 Package Size: 1 oz. $29.50 + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advanatge! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-46IA012-000125-B013-249http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfydn.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221731 text/html 8160HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:17:46 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:23:08 GMTContent-length: 7976Content-type: text/html Take Advantage & restore your skin day & night Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOREVER YOUNG DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX: Protects & Restores Facial Skin DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX Contains: Sweet Almond Oil: Emollient, moisturizer, natural antioxidant Forever Young® Powder: Carbohydrate complex and protein extract of marine origin that functions to assist the body's immune system, to maintain healthy skin. Provide glucosamines, which is essential to healthy extracellular matrix Oat Derived Polysaccharide: Natural complex derived from oats that functions to assist the body's immune system, to maintain healthy skin Vitamin E Acetate: Antioxidant Anthocyanidins (pycnogenol): Natural powerful antioxidant which assists in skin repair; also strengthens blood vessels Polyquatrnium-37 Glycerine/Dicaprylate-Dicaprate/PPG-1/Trideceth-6: Emulsifier C12-15 Alcohols Benzoate: Emollient and provides a dry, silky feel to skin Jojoba Oil: Moisturizer, emollient Fragrance Polysorbate 80: Spreading agent Phenyl Trimethicone: Emollient, moisturizer Diazolidinl/Urea/Methyl/Paraben/Propyl/Paraben: Preservative Retinyl Palmitate (Vitamin A): Essential skin nutrient, necessary for healthy skin maintenance and repair Suggested Use: Apply to all areas of the face twice a day, morning and at bedtime, after cleansing and applying FOREVER YOUNG FACIAL PERFECTING GEL. REPAIRING THE SKIN The ingredients in the FOREVER YOUNG DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX take advantage of the circadian rhythm characteristics of the body. Nighttime is reserved for repair of body tissues and the rebuilding of damaged systems, plus conserving and replenishing energy stores. Cell division and growth occur at a much greater rate at night than during the day. This serves two purposes. The energy required for cell division need not be diverted for other causes, and the exposure to ultraviolet rays is less at night than during the day, which protects the vulnerable mitotic cell from radiation injury. The skin needs more nutrients to supply the raw materials for repair. These nutrients include amino acids, fatty acids, vitamins, minerals and fuel to make it all happen. During the skin's repair process, the increased metabolic rate in some cells generates more free radicals through oxidative phosphorylation. Antioxidants are needed to keep cellular damage in check; therefore, adequate antioxidants must be available both internally and topically as well. Vitamin C and Vitamin E are not well supplied to the skin by the body, so supplements are very worthwhile for the skin. As a matter of fact, the overall nutritional status of an individual can be evaluated by looking at the skin. The use of Proanthocyanidins and glutathione provide a cytoplasmic and extracellular source of super potent antioxidants that work with and support activity of other antioxidants. VITAMIN A High levels of Vitamin A in FOREVER YOUNG DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX provide retinol, which is ultimately converted to retinoic acid. It, then, acts as an inducer and controller of cell proliferation and creates a delicate balance of maintenance and new growth for repair of the skin. The beta glucans contained in FOREVER YOUNG Marine Concentrate act primarily as a Langerhans cell stimulator which initiates a cascade of events that activates helper T-cells. This, in turn, activates macrophages that send out specific interleukens to turn on fibroblasts, enthothelial cells and kerationcytes. This action results in a comprehensive physiological repair process that is an essential part of the biological surveillance and maintenance system of the body. New blood vessels and new connective tissues are laid down along with a renewal of epidermal cells. This stimulation of the Langerhans cells is a daily process, for they are the sentinel cells of the skin. In sun damaged skin they are markedly reduced so that the effectiveness of beta glucan is also reduced. This is a major reason that it is best to avoid extensive exposure to the harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun. ELASTIN FORMATION The FOREVER YOUNG Marine Concentrate contained in the DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX stimulates the formation of elastin by an unknown mechanism. It stimulates epidermal growth and repair and balances skin tones for a smooth, even complexion. These physiological responses are most likely immune in nature, and function through second messenger relays. Most of the reactions we see with the FOREVER YOUNG Marine Concentrate are immune reactions representing a complex series of steps that are largely unknown at this time, but are mainly mediated through helper T-cells and macrophages. HOW TO USE THE DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX After using FOREVER YOUNG EMOLLIENT CLEANSER and applying FACIAL PERFECTING GEL, you are ready to apply the DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX. It is a very highly concentrated cream and can produce fantastic results if used on a consistent basis. Apply lightly and easily over the entire face. Do not get it in the eyes. The day application is important to provide protection from the free radical action from exposure to the environment. The nighttime application enhances the body's ability to repair the facial skin while this process is most active. Gently massage FOREVER YOUNG DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX to the neck area as far back as the ears. It will penetrate into the skin leaving no unpleasant residue. You will love its soft, pleasant feel and appreciate its non-greasy clean, smooth feeling. Product Number: 3605 Package Size: 4 Oz $33.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-47IA012-000125-B013-262http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfybp.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221743 text/html 8931HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:17:56 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:22:55 GMTContent-length: 8747Content-type: text/html Take Advantage & reduce cellulite naturally! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOREVER YOUNG BODY PERFECTING LOTION: Reduces Cellulite BODY PERFECTION LOTION Contains: Theophylline Complex: Active ingredient encourages the body to burn fat Diazolidnyl (Urea/Methylparaben/Propylparaben): Preservative Oat Oil: Powerul antioxidant and emollient; provides deep antioxidant activity Cetereth-20/Ceteryl Alcohol: Emulsifier Oat Protein: Anti-inflammatory agent, antioxidant, acts as controlled delivery agent for theophylline Algisium Complex: A natural maine-derived complex, which functions as a natural anti-inflammatory agent, and also functions to cntrol the delivery of the theophylline into the skin Anthocyanidins (pycnogenol): Natural powerful antioxidant which assists in skin rewpair; also strengthens blood vessels Stearic Acid: Moisturizer and emollient PEG-20 Stearate: Co-emulsifier Paraquay Tea: Augments the action of theophylline; also contains antioxidants to help maintain healthy skin Xanthan Gum: Thickening agent and stabilizer Glycerine: Humectant Aloe Vera Gel: Anti-inflammatory, healing and moisturizing TYPES OF SKIN The areas of the thighs, legs, arms, abdomen, buttocks and along the trunk are a different type of skin than the face. These areas have certain regional characteristics that must be respected when formulating a total skin care system. Body skin tends to be thicker and contain more fatty material than the facial skin. This body skin can tolerate a more vigorous cleansing and will actually shine when cleansed well. HOW FAT IS BURNED The natural xanthine compounds contained in the FOREVER YOUNG BODY PERFECTING LOTION are theophylline conjugates. These facilitate penetration of theophylline into and through the skin, all the way down to the fat tissues, which are special cells known as lipocytes or adipcytes that contain the fat. In order for fat to be burned, it must be broken down by the enzyme lipase. In order for this to happen, lipase must be activated. The activation of lipase takes place after the completion of a series of other enzyme reactions involving protein kinases. This series of reactions is called a "kinase cascade." That is, one kinase activates another, which activates another, etc. until lipase is finally activated. Another substance, Cyclic AMP starts this cascade. The level of Cyclic AMP has to be controlled so the body's fat stores are not completely used up. Another enzyme called PDE inactivates Cyclic AMP. This happens rapidly as PDE destroys Cyclic AMP almost as fast as it is formed. Theophylline inhibits PDE so the action of Cyclic AMP can be prolonged. In this way, breaking down of fat by lipase can continue longer. This results in the burning of fat, a restructuring of the body and loss of weight. MOST BENEFIT It is important that when you use FOREVER YOUNG BODY PERFECTING LOTION for cellulite loss, weight loss and re-shaping, that you understand what is happening so you can receive the most benefit. It facilitates the body's natural process of breaking down fat so that it can be used up and eliminated. You will receive maximum benefit if you exercise after you apply it to the areas you want to reduce. When you apply it, calories are liberated from fat breaking down. If you exercise when this is happening, the specific calories from fat will be burned. The result is specific weight loss from fat, which is ideal. Lean body mass percentage will increase and it will be easier to maintain the loss. It is not necessary to be over zealous with your exercise. Usually reasonable amounts of regular exercise like walking or cycling is adequate. For example, apply BODY PERFECTING LOTION to thighs and abdomen and take a brisk walk. You will be surprised at the positive results. FOOD INTAKE Food intake can play an important role. When we eat, insulin levels increase. Insulin blocks the action of lipase, which slows down body fat breakdown. This lessens the effect of theophylline. Therefore, if you desire maximum effects for cellulite or weight loss, delay eating for a while after applying BODY PERFECTING LOTION. MULTI-FUNCTIONAL FOREVER YOUNG BODY PERFECTING LOTION is not just for reducing fat and cellulite. It is a wonderful, general body lotion that makes the skin feel soft and supple and look great, too. The special concentrated oat protein contains antioxidants, anti-inflammatory agents and iron chelating agents. It provides a soft matte finish to the skin, which tends to reduce the appearance of aging lines. At the same time, this finish tends to scatter sunlight, which reduces its energy and thus provides more protection from ultraviolet damage. The application of the FOREVER YOUNG BODY PERFECTING LOTION results in multiple benefits, as it is multi-functional. Its hydration of the skin permits a softer feel, and at the same time does not interfere with healthy skin physiology. It provides a good moisturizing function to combat dry skin. Not only does dry skin not feel good, but it also sends signals to lower tissues to produce more cells. SUGGESTIONS The contouring action of the BODY PERFECTING LOTION is aimed at reducing those areas of fatty tissue, which protrude into the skin's surface. The system is based on the enzymes described above and works best when combined with mild exercise and a slight reduction in diet. It is important, however, to understand that its many special synergistic ingredients have been designed to meet the needs of skin, regardless of the activity level one has. A mild exercise program, coupled with the use of the BODY PERFECTING LOTION, will provide maximum benefit to the skin. It increases the skin's blood supply, which in turn allows more of the active ingredients to reach deeper levels of the skin. When you can, vigorously cleanse your body with the FOREVER YOUNG BODY SPONGE, then apply BODY PERFECTING LOTION where desired action is wanted, especially where cellulite is present. Suggested Use: To reduce fat deposits or cellulite, gently apply to the abdomen, thighs, butocks or other areas being re-shaped. It is best to then walk or exercise to burn the fat calories that are liberated. Also, use as a high quality, body lotion everywhere. Product No: 3606 Package Size: 6.7 oz. $29.00 + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-48IA012-000121-B027-228http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfypak.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221758 text/html 6962HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:18:11 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:24:00 GMTContent-length: 6778Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with our total skin care system! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOREVER YOUNG TOTAL SKIN CARE SYSTEM: Clinically Proven, State-of-the-Art Each Kit Contains 5 Forever Young Products: Oral Tablets 60 tablets Emollient Cleanser 4 oz. Facial Perfecting Gel 1 oz. Day/Night Renewal Complex 2 oz. Body Perfecting Lotion 6.7 oz Body Sponge One Audio Casette One Instruction Booklet One AGING Aging is a continuous process of gradual loss of functionality associated with chronic inflammation. The body has an enormous capacity to repair damage if given a little help from our diets, supplements, reasonable exercise and good skin care. Some of the oxygen we breathe is converted to dangerous free radicals. Our skin is exposed to numerous toxins every minute of every day. Free radicals damage our DNA, which results in aging and disease. This does not have to happen, especially at the rate it is happening today. It can be controlled. AGING SKIN The skin ages due to DNA damage, which is induced by both chemical and physical means. The first signs we see in any individual in regards to aging is their skin. The first signs we see are structural changes like wrinkles and sagging then color and texture changes. Red spots and dilated veins appear. Brown spots appear on hands and face and the skin becomes thinner and less elastic. Structural changes result when collagen and elastin quantity and quality are reduced. Your skin is an open book to your state of health. Of all things the skin tells us the most about a person. SKIN PHYSIOLOGY Your skin is not just a covering for the body, it is your largest organ. It is a dynamic, ever growing organ that is vital to your existence. It must remain healthy to keep the good things in and the bad things out. It serves to control your body heat and acts as a kind of garbage disposal for the body. That is. it is a major organ of detoxification. Our skin controls the rate of water loss from our body and prevents water from the outside from entering our body as well. The FOREVER YOUNG TOTAL SKIN CARE SYSTEM can be a major factor in your efforts to maintain healthy skin and to feel better about your appearance for years to come. THE SCIENCE The science behind the FOREVER YOUNG TOTAL SKIN CARE SYSTEM is based on a thorough knowledge of skin physiology and the real biological needs of the body to maintain itself in good repair. Since skin is damaged both from the inside and outside the body, a system that recognizes the need for comprehensive treatment, to correct the combined problems simultaneously, is the only one that can be truly effective. The FOREVER YOUNG TOTAL SKIN CARE SYSTEM meets these requirements by supplying you with the most sophisticated skin care system modern science has ever achieved. The FOREVER YOUNG TOTAL SKIN CARE SYSTEM topically corrects underlying skin damaged by assisting the body's repair mechanism to restore the skin to a youthful appearance; then, internally helps in preventing further damage by blocking and neutralizing free radical activity with powerful antioxidants. WHAT TO EXPECT There are two things that determine the result you obtain. The first is based on your commitment. The second is based on the degree of damage you now have. The more severe the damage, the longer it will take. Many years of sunbathing or heavy smoking produce leathery skin that takes longer to repair, but positive results can be achieved if you continue the program. While most users see results in as little as a month, others will require three to four months. Using it twice a day will produce better results than using it once daily. Suggested Use: For the face, cleanse morning and at bedtime with EMOLLIENT CLEANSER, then apply FACIAL PERFECTING GEL followed with DAY/NIGHT RENEWAL COMPLEX. For the body, cleanse skin with the BODY SPONGE when showering or bathing. Also apply BODY PERFECTION LOTION to soften and moisturize the skin. Apply to specific areas to reduce cellulite. Product No: 3607 Package Size: Kit $129.00 + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-49IA012-000121-B027-246http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mecol.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221815 text/html 11435HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:18:26 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:21:51 GMTContent-length: 11250Content-type: text/html Take Advantage by nutritionally establishing bowel ecology Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... ECOLOGY PAK: Nutritionally Establishes Bowel Ecology YEAST Candida Albicans is the technical name for a yeast that is a normal inhabitant of the human body. It is passed to us from contact with others either at or shortly after birth, and remains with us throughout our lives. It quickly finds its way onto our skin and into our intestinal tracts where it takes up residence with other microorganisms. Under normal conditions, Candida Albicans live and perform normal vital tasks in harmony with all of their neighbors within our body. Over the past forty years the occurrence of elevated levels of yeast have increased dramatically in many people to the point that it has become a problem for hundreds of thousands of individuals. Part of the reason is the more extensive use of some of the modern immune system depressing drugs such as the steroids like hydrocortisone and antibiotics. They help create an environment that is ideal for overgrowth of Candida yeast. When the Candida balance is shifted slightly, the result can be a vaginal discharge, anal itching, or an oral yeast infection usually called thrush, which deposits an aggravating white coating on the tongue. In the severely debilitated person, the yeast can grow very rapidly, creating a number of problems ranging from headaches, joint pain, night sweats, fatigue and allergies to severe mental and physical disorders. Quite often people have a general overall feeling of malaise. They don't feel good and have difficulty concentrating. Many people with this problem seem to walk around in a daze. NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT PROGRAM A comprehensive nutritional support program is important in interrupting the self perpetuating cycle of yeast overgrowth. The use of a carefully selected nutritional program along with dietary measures can help restore the normal balance necessary to keep these microorganisms in check. The basics of such a diet are to severely limit the simple carbohydrates (sugars) in your diet, avoid fungus or yeast containing foods like mushrooms, wines, etc., concentrate on foods that are known to be good for the immune system and supplement with specific products that fight the yeast naturally and help restore healthy ecology of the digestive tract. ECOLOGY PAK is the only program of its kind that supplies the many special amino acids such as L-Cysteine and L-Tyrosine, along with others known for their natural detoxifying and immune supportive effects. They also help maintain consistent blood sugar levels that is so important in yeast management. Also included in ECOLOGY NO. 1 are the synergistic herbs, Pau d' Arco, Clove and Horse-radish. These special herbs are known for their nutritional effect of naturally supporting the healthy ecology of the intestinal tract. Restoring normal colon ecology plays a key role in maintaining a healthy immune system. The normal healthy colon contains a considerable amount of fatty acids as byproducts of the bacterial breakdown of dietary fiber and other organicmaterial. These fatty acids play a key role in maintaining the proper balance between yeast, healthy bacteria and other microorganisms that inhabit our digestive tracts naturally. ECOLOGY NO. 1 supplies many of the nutrients necessary for support of the immune system while at the same time helping the body deal with the toxicity created by an imbalance of yeast organisms. Along with generous amounts of Vitamin A in the form of Beta-Carotene and Vitamin C as Calcium Ascorbate, ECOLOGY NO. 1 supplies concentrated tissue nutrients from Thymus, Lymph and Spleen, all of which provide nutritional support for the immune system. Also included is Zinc, which is also well known as a natural immune stimulant. ECOLOGY NO. 2 provides a generous amount of these short-chain fatty acids as Caprylic Acid and Undecylenic Acid. These fatty acids are carefully manufactured in a special tablet form to ensure a constant slow release along the intestinal tract. They work in combination to help restore and preserve the body's normal ecological balance between yeast and bacteria. ECOLOGY NO. 3 is a concentrated form of a synergistic combination of different bio-cultures from Lactobacillus Acidophilus, Lactobacillus Bulgaricus, Lactobacillus Bifidus and Lactobacillus Salivarius. Normally these microorganisms help maintain proper pH in the colon and provide a number of other health supporting benefits. They are normally present in low levels when yeast overgrowth is present. Supplementing with ECOLOGY NO. 3 is the ideal way to help re-establish them in the colon. PHYTOZYME BASE Both ECOLOGY NO. 1 and ECOLOGY NO. 2 are formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO USE ECOLOGY PAK Take two ECOLOGY NO. 1 tablets three times a day with meals. Take one ECOLOGY NO. 2 tablet plus one-half teaspoonful of ECOLOGY NO. 3 and one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE twice a day between meals. Take one heaping teaspoonful of COLODYNE twice a day between meals. For best results it is important to avoid refined carbohydrate-s (sugars) in the diet as well as known fungus and yeast containing foods such as mushrooms, wines and yeast breads. Eat foods known to be of value for the immune system. Eat lots of vegetables and plenty of fiber. ECOLOGY NO. 1 tablets are a broad spectrum supplement that provide many nutrients that support the immune system, while helping the body deal with toxicity of yeast imbalance. It contains Pau d'Arco herb because of its natural ability to fight yeast. Six Tablets Supply: Vitamin A 18,000iu Vitamin B-1 60mg Vitamin B-2 60mg Pyridoxal-5 Phosphate 60mg Biotin 100mcg Calcium Ascorbate 2,250mg Selenium (yeast free) 30mcg Zinc (as chelate) 18mg Manganese (as chelate) 60mg Magnesium (as aspartate) 450mg L-Cystine 450mg L-Tyrosine 360mg L-Glutamine 360mg L-Asparagine 60mg L-Glutamic Acid 60mg L-Leucine 60mg Betaine Hcl 60mg Sorbic Acid 300mg Horseradish 300mg Clove 300mg Pau d'Arcco 300mg ECOLOGY NO 2 contains Para-Cide-400 and specific nutrients that fight yeast. Two Tablets Supply: Caprylic Acid 150mg Undecylenic Acid 50mg Coconut Oil 300mg Para-Cide 400 50mg ECOLOGY NO. 3 powder is an ultra-concentrated, stabilized, highly potent, combination of biocultures that help maintain colon ecology. Each One-Half Teaspoonful Supplies: A minimum of 10 billion active microorganisms from a specially prepared bio-culture including Lactobacillus qcidophilus, Lactobacillus Bulgaricus, Lactobacillus Bifidus, and Lactobacillus Salivarius. COLODYNE provides fiber that naturally cleanses the colon. Each Heaping Teaspoonful Contains: Psyllium Seed Whole Powder Psyllium Seed Husk Powder Flax Seed Guar Gum Marine Alginate Beet Root Bentonite Black Walnut Leaves Acidophiulus Culture Mannitol Contains CytovexTM, a proprietary blend of Lysozyme enzyme with the Pineapple enzyme, Bromelain and Papayotin enzyme from Papaya. Contains a stabilized miuxture of beneficial micro-flora including Lactobacillus Salivarius, Lactobacillus Acidophilus Lactobacillus Bulgaricus and Lactobacillus Bifidus. Suggested Use: Ecology No. 1: Two tablets three times a day with meals. 180 tablets - product no.2619 $36.00 U.S. + Shipping Ecology No. 2: One tablet twice a day between meals. 60 tablets - product no.2620 $11.00 U.S. + Shipping Ecology No. 3: One-half teaspoonful twice a day between meals. 4.5 oz - product no. 2621 $39.00 U.S. + Shiping Colodyne: One heaping teaspoonful twice a day between meals. 25 oz. - product no. 0191 $26.00 U.S. + Shipping Ecology Pak: kit (includes Ecology 1, 2, 3 and Colodyne)- product no. 2622 $99.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-50IA012-000121-B027-258http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/minner.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221838 text/html 7523HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:18:39 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:40:34 GMTContent-length: 7339Content-type: text/html Take Advantage using an herbal laxitive Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... INNER ACT: Herbal Laxitive Each Tablet Supplies: Cascara Sagrada 150mg Licorice Root 30mg Senna Leaves 110mg Prune Concentrate 20mg Aniseed 50mg Irish Moss 5mg Fennel Seed 40mg Parsley 5mg Rhubarb Root 40mg Chlorophyll Concentrate 4mg INNER ACT Herbs have been used since creation to provide for our health and well being, for entire civilizations for that matter. The Bible tells us that we were given herbs for healing and cites many examples of their usage. Main stream modern technology is now finally beginning to focus on herbs and natural plant therapies. This is usually referred to in the literature today as phytotherapy. We probably never will understand many of the secrets regarding how many natural extracts and concentrates work, but that is no reason to not take advantage of their benefits now. To our knowledge, Life Plus is the only company that manufactures and distributes the unique kinds of herbal-based-products we do by combining high quality herbs from all over the world with other synergistic nutrients known to work toward the same specific nutritional goals. These synergistic nutrients include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, bioflavonoids, phytonutrients, anti-oxidants, and, at times, concentrated tissue nutrients. By combining modern technology with classical herbal knowledge, the Life Plus herbal-based-products are second to none anywhere in the world. UNIQUE COMBINATION INNER ACT is a unique combination of herbs and herbal extracts, which can be a very important product if you need it. The lack of fiber in the diets of most individuals today often results in the muscles of their colons not receiving adequate "stretching" because of a lack of bulk. As a result, they do not get enough stimulation for contraction which can result in too slow movement of food through the lower digestive tract. This is usually referred to as a sluggish colon. INNER ACT contains ten herbal ingredients. They include Rhubarb Root, Licorice Root, Fennel Seed and Anise Seed. The Irish Moss in INNER ACT contains a high proportion of a natural gum that lubricates and soothes the colon and absorbs toxins. A small amount of dehydrated Prune Concentrate is also included. Prune Concentrate contains a high percentage of natural compounds that are known to be good detoxifiers and cleansers and it also helps to stimulate peristalsis (movement of the muscles in the colon helping the process of elimination). Parsley is a natural cleanser and works well with the other herbs in this preferred preparation. The predominant herbal ingredients in INNER ACT are Cascara Sagrada Bark and Senna Leaf Powder. These two herbs have been used for many decades as natural herbal laxatives. PHYTOZYME BASE INNER ACT is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO USE INNER ACT A high percentage of older people love INNER ACT because they often have sluggish colons. They comment that they have more energy and feel better when they take steps to ensure that their lower digestive tracts (colons) stay cleaned out. Many of them do not have regular elimination. But many younger people have the same problem, including teenagers. It is strongly recommended that almost everyone use COLODYNE every day and then take INNER ACT when needed. In general, it is a good idea to take INNER ACT for one or two days each month. Some people may need it weekly. You will have to be your own judge and tailor its use to your needs. Usually two to four tablets are taken at one time. It is recommended to take them at bedtime. Usually an elimination will occur the next morning. It is not recommended to take them in the morning or afternoon as elimination may occur during the day. In the past it has been thought that consistent use of INNER ACT could result in dependence. This, of course, is of consideration when it, or any other laxative, is used on a daily basis, over a long period of time. We have not seen this to be a problem and recommend that you concentrate on eating a natural diet as much as possible, take COLODYNE daily, walk a reasonable amount each day and take Life Plus INNER ACT as needed. Suggested Use: Two to four tablets at bedtime as needed to produce a gentle elimination the next morning. Some individuals may need more. Product No: 0124 Package Size: 60 tablets $7.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 5013 Package Size: 120 tablets $10.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-51IA012-000121-B027-277http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msust.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221855 text/html 8273HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:19:10 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:50:24 GMTContent-length: 8089Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with proper digestion Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SUSTENASE: Two Phase Digetive Enzymes Buffered with Micro-Flora Each Two Phase Tablet Supplies: Phase One (stomach) Phase Two (intestine) Pepsin 70mg Pancreatin 100mg Papayotin 30mg Pancrelipase 110mg Bromelain 30mg Amylase 50mg Betain HCl 170mg Ox Bile Concentrate 45mg L-Glutamic Acid 20mg Lipase 25mg Peppermint Leaves 30mg Potassium Bicarbonate 20mg Contains a unique blend of the Lysozyme enzyme with beneficial micro-flora in a stabilized media including Lactobacillus Salivarius, Lactobacillus Acidophuilus, Lactobacillus Bulgaricyus and Lactobacillus Bifudus, plus 20mg each of Aloe Vera Powder, Beet Root Powder and Lecithin. ABSORPTION SUSTENASE is designed to help us digest our foods naturally and properly so we can absorb the nutrients we eat. It helps to maintain a healthy digestive tract by reducing the amount of undigested foodstuffs remaining and to maintain healthy pHs throughout the digestive tract. It also supplies a representative amount of beneficial micro-flora also supporting bowel ecology. It has been said that "we are what we eat." That is only partially true. We are made of what we eat, digest, absorb and assimilate into our bodies. DIGESTION OF FOODS Digestion starts in the mouth with chewing the foods we eat. In the saliva is an enzyme, Ptylin, that begins to break down starches into more simple sugars. When food is swallowed, the stomach takes over by secreting Hydrochloric Acid and the enzyme, Pepsin. Hydrochloric Acid further digests the starches and begins protein digestion. In about 30 minutes the food leaves the stomach and enters the small intestine, where it is exposed to more digestive enzymes secreted by the pancreas. They consist of (l) Proteases to digest proteins, (2) Amylases to digest starches, and (3) Lipases to digest fats. In addition to these, the gall bladder secretes bile for the emulsification and digestion of fats. INDIGESTION If the body is healthy and working properly, it should produce all of these enzymes in sufficient quantities to ensure proper digestion. However, many people do not produce enough of these enzymes. As a result, they often get the common symptoms of indigestion, such as gas, bloating, heartburn and constipation. Unfortunately, thousands of people take antacids because they have seen the ads on TV that convince them they have too much stomach acid when, in most cases, the reverse is actually true. Antacids actually slow down or even stop the digestive process and give only temporary relief. Antacids only postpone the long term problems that arise from improper digestion. It is much more rational to supplement the body with natural enzymes to ensure that the digestive tract can digest the food properly. TWO PHASES SUSTENASE is a two-phase digestive supplement formulated in a unique manner so that it releases certain enzymes and buffering agents in the stomach and others in the small intestine. To provide supplemental acid in the stomach, SUSTENASE releases Betaine HCl and Glutamic Acid HCl. In addition, SUSTENASE releases the active protein digesting enzymes Pepsin, Papayotin and Bromelain in the first phase in the stomach, where protein digestion begins. When food leaves the acidic stomach, it enters the more alkaline intestinal environment. Each phase of the SUSTENASE tablet is buffered to conform to each environment to provide maximum activity of the enzymes in each location. In its second phase, SUSTENASE releases Pancreatin, a concentrated mixture of enzymes that digest proteins, fats and complex carbohydrates (starches). It also releases Pancrelipase, a highly active form of concentrated pancreas enzymes that is especially good for fat digestion plus Ox Bile concentrate for the emulsification and digestion of fats. Because indigestion is such a widespread problem, SUSTENASE is one of the most popular Life Plus products, one that should be taken by just about everyone. Without proper digestion, the food we eat is of no value to us, no matter how many nutrients are in it. Improper digestion may also cause food allergies as well as other types of allergies. PHYTOZYME BASE SUSTENASE is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE IT Take one or more SUSTENASE tablets with each meal. It is best to take them as you begin the meal so the digestive enzymes and buffering agents can be mixed well with the food being eaten. With large meals and those high in fats and heavy proteins such as large steak dinners, etc. more tablets can be taken if desired. If you should forget and not take your SUSTENASE at the beginning of the meal, take it later in the meal or even after the meal is eaten. You will still obtain benefits from it. Suggested Use: One to two tablets at the beginning of each meal. But can be taken during or just after meals. Do not refrigerate. Product No: 0182 Package Size: 90 tablets $17.75 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 0185 Package Size: 210 tablets $35.50 + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-52IA012-000121-B027-293http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msali.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221911 text/html 10145HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:19:27 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:47:39 GMTContent-length: 9961Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with l-salivarius & other micro-flora Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... SALIVAREX: L-Salivarius Plus Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Each Capsule Supplies: L-Salivarius Bioculture 275 mg yielding a minimum of 2.75 billion micro-organisms with a synergistic bioculture containing together a minimum of 150 million micro-organisms from Lactobacillus Acidophilus, Lactobacillus Bulgaricus and LactobacillusBifidus The beneficial bacteria in SALIVAREX is compounded with a scientific formulation including CytovexTM the amino acid Glycine and Ascorbic Acid. Cytovex is a trademark of Life Plus identifying a special ingredient containing Lysozyme and other enzymes in a scientifically formulated base. BACTERIA Bacteria are everywhere. We swallow them with our food, drink them with water, they are in the air we breathe, on our skin, in our mouths, digestive tract, sinuses and other areas of our bodies. In so far as health is concerned, some of them are harmful, some neutral and some are very beneficial. Some are extremely valuable for good health as they work harmoniously with our immune system. In a healthy colon, there are literally billions of beneficial or "friendly" bacteria. Under favorable conditions, they multiply at a fast enough rate to keep pace with the large numbers that are lost during elimination. Bacteria is also referred to as micro-organisms. When they are located in the intestinal tract, they are referred to as "intestinal flora," micro-flora or sometimes just "flora". These friendly bacteria synthesize many important vitamins in the digestive tract including vitamin K and some of the B vitamins. A very important function they perform is helping the colon maintain a proper pH or acid-base balance. It is necessary for the pH to stay in the correct range in order for other health supporting bacteria to exist. It is also important to keep levels of antagonistic micro-organisms under control. LOW LEVELS At times, the taking of antibiotics can be necessary, even life saving. When we take them to kill off the infectious bacteria, we also destroy large amounts of the beneficial flora in our digestive tracts. When the level becomes disturbed, or when the bowel ecology becomes out of balance, health problems can develop. In this instance, it is important to replenish the friendly bacteria as soon as possible in order to maintain good health. They can be replaced by concentrating on eating foods they are contained in and supplementing with SALIVAREX. Dairy products are a good source of friendly lactobacillus, especially yogurt and kefir. However, the milk that most people drink today is pasteurized, or heated to about 165 degrees F. So, for the most part, we have lost this source of lactobacillus in our diets and are not receiving the quantities of these bacteria in our diets as we used to. It is a good idea to routinely eat some live culture containing foods such as yogurt, kefir, etc. Be sure the products are guaranteed to contain live cultures. It is actually best to make your own yogurt to be assured of bacteria content. Bad breath is usually a good indication that normal bacteria levels are low. When lactobacillus levels are low in the colon, partially digested food decays, produce foul gas and toxemia. The prevalence of cold sores (herpes simplex), constipation, diarrhea, acne, vaginitis, headache, symptoms of hypoglycemia, yeast infections and others are often signs of low flora levels. DAIRY & LACTOSE Many people seem to be allergic to dairy products. The primary reason is quite often not that they are truly allergic to them but that they cannot deal with the lactose (commonly called milk sugar) contained in the dairy products. They cannot digest lactose, or milk sugar, and this can lead to allergies, headaches, cramps, mucous formation and many other health problems. The various kinds of Lactobacillus bacteria can digest it. This is why many people can eat yogurt, cultured milks and kefir even though they cannot handle dairy products like milk, cheese, ice cream, etc. VIRUS AND YEAST Cold sores, caused by the herpes simplex virus, are a reliable indicator that micro-flora is becoming lower than acceptable. Constipation and diarrhea can develop from decreased levels of friendly bacteria. It is believed that yeast infections, including thrush, vaginitis, and vaginal infections with abnormal amounts of discharge, are associated with decreased micro-flora levels. Anyone with chronic infections should consider supplementing with lactobacillus as they support the immune system and help restore healthy ecology. People with toxemia and those going through any kind of detoxification program should supplement with SALIVAREX. UNIQUE FORMULA SALIVAREX contains the four most lactobacillus for supplemental use. The Acidophilus and Bulgaricus strains quite often occur together in nature. Bifidus is an extremely beneficial strain and usually not contained in this type of supplement as it is expensive and difficult to produce. Bifidus is normally present in the digestive tracts of newborn babies. While the babies are breast feeding it usually maintains its levels and can multiply. As they grow older and are exposed to whole milk and other foods, Lactobacillus Bifidus disappears. One special feature of SALIVAREX is that it contains a large quantity of Lactobacillus Salivarius, a unique strain of highly specialized super micro-flora. This highly active organism neutralizes many pathogens which thrive in an unhealthy colon. It has the ability to dramatically increase energy levels by breaking down undigested proteins making them available for use. PHYTOZYME BASE SALIVAREX is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus Phytozyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE SALIVAREX SALIVAREX capsules should be kept in the refrigerator. It is a good idea to take a bottle of SALIVAREX every three or four months for routine replenishing. When low levels of lactobacillus are obvious, four capsules can be taken three to six times a day until one bottle is used to build up levels quickly. Then, one or two capsules twice a day. Many people supplement once or twice a day as an ongoing way to keep their levels of friendly bacteria up to par. SALIVAREX capsules can also be opened and placed into baby formula or sprinkled on food. SALIVAREX is nutritionally helpful to maintain a healthy colon. The Life Plus Products ECOLOGY NO. 3 and COLODYNE are compatible with SALIVAREX. ECOLOGY NO. 3 is a highly concentrated powder that contains large quantities of all four lactobacillus strains, but SALIVAREX is more concentrated with L-Salivarius. Suggested Use: One or more capsules two or three times per day. Refrigerateand keep tightly closed. Product No: 0170 Package Size: 30 Capsules $18.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 0173 Package Size: 90 capsules $36.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-53IA012-000121-B027-316http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mtranq.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221933 text/html 7177HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:19:49 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:52:10 GMTContent-length: 6993Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with a natural herbal relaxing aid Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... TRANQUILON: Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Each tablet supplies: Herbs Valerian Root 115mg Passionflower 90mg Hops 70mg Skullcap 30mg Black Cohosh 40mg Wood Betony 30mg Chamomille 30mg Lady's Slipper 15mg Cayenne 10mg Chlorophyll 5mg Minerals Elemental Calcium 40mg STRESS In today's fast paced, stressful times it is no wonder that tranquilizers are the largest selling category of prescription drugs sold in America. The lack of physical exercise, especially when combined with the lack of a nutritious diet is thought by most experts to be the biggest contributor to nervousness, anxiety and depression. EXERCISE Exercise is our first line of defense against tension, anxiety and depression. Exercising increases circulation to all of the organs of the body. Supplying them with more oxygen and nutrition helps the muscles relax. In addition, it lowers the build-up of metabolic end products and we feel better. However, it is difficult for most people to stick with exercise programs. It takes real dedication but does pay off over the long term. DIET Diet is one of the real culprits responsible for anxiety. Most people eat too much, and in addition, their diets do not contain the sufficient nutrients. Our modern "convenience diets" are high in calories and low in vitamins and minerals. The B vitamins and the minerals, calcium and magnesium, are very important for the immune system, yet the diets of many people are deficient in these nutrients. The high consumption of sugar is probably the leading dietary contributor to nervousness and anxiety. Over a period of time this can lead to a condition known as hypoglycemia, which is very prevalent today. Hypoglycemia is a condition where our blood sugar levels get dangerously low at times. This, too, contributes to nervousness, tension, restlessness and even depression. STIMULANTS Quite often, people plagued with hypoglycemia, which is commonly expressed in tiredness and nervousness, resort to caffeine, nicotine, drugs, and sugar when they get the blues. However, these things merely aggravate the situation further, and so many get into a vicious cycle, usually without even knowing it. A NATURAL ALTERNATIVE It is wise to eat a quality diet with adequate amounts of all the food groups. Make certain that your diet contains a good cross section of all the vitamins and minerals, especially the B vitamins, calcium and magnesium. You may consider supplementing with a well rounded foundational multiple product like TVM-49 and CAL MAG PLUS. In addition, the Life Plus natural herbal blend TRANQUILON may fit your program as well. Thousands of people like it because it does not produce the side effects of drowsiness, tiredness, etc. The TRANQUILON formula contains ten natural herbs that work together for their synergistic effect including Valerian Root, Passionflower, Hops, Black Cohosh, Wood Betony, Chamomile, Lady's Slipper, Cayenne, Chlorophyll and Skullcap. PHYTOZYME BASE TRANQUILON is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE TRANQUILON Most people take one or two tablets, two to three times throughout the day, which is usually adequate. However, three tablets can be taken each time if desired. Some individuals take it at bedtime by itself, or with SOMNISET. Other Life Plus products synergistic with TRANQUILON are TVM-49, CANDY CAL, MAGNESIUM PLUS, CALMAG PLUS. SUPPORT TABS and INNER MAGIC F for women and INNER MAGIC M for men. Suggested Use: Take from one to three tablets two or three times a day as desired. Product No: 5017 Package Size: 90 tablets $11.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-54IA012-000121-B027-325http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mfood.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221941 text/html 7773HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:19:57 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:22:49 GMTContent-length: 7589Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with ginkgo biloba & huperizia serrata & amino acids & co-enzyme q-10 Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... FOOD FOR THOUGHT: Ginkgo Biloba & Huperizia Serrata & Amino Acids & Co-Enzyme Q-10 Each Tablet Supplies: Herbs Amino Acids Hyperizia Serrata 150mg L-Glutamine 40mg Gota Kola 150mg L-Taurine 40mg Ginkgo Biloba Concentrate 50mg L-Tyrosine 20mg Ginseng 25mg Other Nutrients Lecithin 100mg N-Acetyl Carnitine 25mg Co-Enzyme Q-10 3mg THE BRAIN Mankind has long been fascinated by that gray, wrinkled matter contained within our skulls. Just as the heart, liver or stomach has been thought of as the seat of the emotions in various cultures, so also the brain has been regarded as the seat of intelligence. What we eat can affect our moods, mental alertness and memory causing much interest and research in brain function related to special nutrients in recent years. The brain is a complicated, well organized matrix of intricate nerve endings connecting each brain cell with many others. Billions of electrical nerve impulses travel back and forth within the brain every second. Many chemicals act as neurotransmitters that transport these impulses from one cell to another. If the brain has an inadequate supply of the nutrients it needs to manufacture these substances, it will be hindered in its ability to function properly. ALZHEIMER'S Malfunctions of the brain seem to be an increasing problem in western societies today with Alzheimer's Disease being one of the most common and most serious. It is the fourth leading cause of death among adults with about 100,000 deaths annually. It afflicts between 2.5 and 4 million Americans and it is predicted to rise to 14 million victims in the year 2040. At age 65, your chance of getting Alzheimer's is 6%, at 75 it is 20% and is an incredible 47% at age 85. The disease begins with early confusion and progresses to the point of major forgetfulness, incontinence, difficult sleeping and major personality changes. Then, just about all motor activity is lost to the point of not being able to even eat without help. SPECIAL FORMULA This unique herbal based product contains the special Hyperizia Serrata, Gota Kola and Ginkgo Biloba concentrate plus Ginseng herbs. In addition, it contains the very special valuable amino acids L-Glutamine, L-Taurine, L-Tyrosine plus N-Acetyl Carnitine. Go-Enzyme Q-10 is included because of its fantastic anti-oxidant effect. FOOD FOR THOUGHT provides the nutrients specifically synergistic for support of healthy brain function. Many individuals find FOOD FOR THOUGHT helpful for alertness and stamina. The amino acids in FOOD FOR THOUGHT serve as precursors, which the brain needs to produce important neurotransmitter serotonin. If inadequate amounts of these types of amino acids are not in the diet, too little serotonin is produced causing you to become nervous or have trouble sleeping. L-Glutamine is an amino acid that penetrates the barrier separating the brain from the rest of the body's circulatory system. Once inside the brain, L-Glutamine has the unusual ability to provide fuel for brain cells. Consequently, it is an energy source for the brain and has been used to improve learning and I.Q. Some alcoholics have been helped dramatically by L-Glutamine supplements. Even though the body manufactures its own Glutamine, some people seem to need more than they can produce by themselves and supplementation is needed. Tyrosine is a precursor to Norepinephrine and Dopamine (two important neurotransmitters) in the brain that are excitatory and seem to keep you alert, sexually interested and ambitious. Dopamine is deficient in people with Parkinson's disease. Results are now becoming apparent about the nutritional value of Tyrosine in the prevention of depression. FOOD FOR THOUGHT contains the special nutrients for those who desire to keep an alert mind and a sharp memory. Some of them have been well known in other cultures for centuries and some are just now becoming understood. This formula is great for students, absent-minded professors and the elderly. Many believe the herbs and other nutrients help to prevent feelings of being depressed and nutritionally supports those who want to stay alert without resorting to caffeine or other harmful stimulants. PHYTOZYME BASE FOOD FOR THOUGHT is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE FOOD FOR THOUGHT Usually, one tablet is taken two times a day. More tablets can be taken if desired. Suggested Use: One tablet two times a day. Product No: 1011 Package Size: 60 tablets $19.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-55IA012-000121-B027-333http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mlifnpwr.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221949 text/html 8239HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:20:04 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:40:49 GMTContent-length: 8055Content-type: text/html Take Advantage & have high energy Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... LIFE-N-POWER: High Energy Lozenge with Vitamin B-12 Each Lozenge Supplies: Vitamin B-12 480 mcg Dibencozide 20 mcg Malto Dextrins 500 mg Sorbitol 125 mg Mannitol 25 mg Dibencozide, otherwise know as Co-Enzyme B-12, is the primary active form of Vitamin B-12 in the body and is directly involved in the body's building of lean muscle tissue. Malto Dextrins are a source of complex carbohydrate and Sorbitoal and Mannitol are more intermediate forms. Aall three are easily assimilated and utilized by the body for energy. VITAMIN B-12 Experts agree that the essential nutrient Vitamin B-12 often increases energy and improves memory, appetite (when needed) and digestion. It is an absolute must for the maintenance of a healthy nervous system and is considered by many to play an important role as an anti-aging nutrient. Many of the functions of Vitamin B-12, such as building blood cells, promoting DNA synthesis, naturally interfering with inflammation and strengthening the immune system are fundamental to a healthy body. Thousands of doctors have given Vitamin B-12 injections over the last several decades to help patients cope with stress, depression and exhaustion to name only a few. It is true that some of its uses may not be "proven", but it is unlikely that its use would have been continued over the years if both doctors and their patients did not receive benefit from it. Vitamin B-12 has been used to help increase fertility in livestock for many years. A study actually demonstrated that Vitamin B-12 injections increased the sperm count in 27% of men participating that began the study with low levels. SUBLINGUAL It is well known that the body has a difficult time absorbing Vitamin B-12 through the digestive tract. This is the primary reason that Vitamin B-12 injections became so popular in the doctor's office. LIFE-N-POWER is a slow dissolving lozenge that releases its ingredients in the mouth so that they can be absorbed by the tiny sublingual capillaries. The term "sublingual'' simply means "under the tongue." The majority of the Vitamin B-12 and its metabolite, Dibencozide, contained in LIFE-N-POWER are absorbed this way, assuring much more reliable and consistent uptake in the body. The majority of the complex carbohydrate is also absorbed this way as well, providing more instant energy. DIBENCOZIDE Vitamin B-12, also known an Cobalamine or Cyanocobalamine, plays an important role in nucleic acid and protein synthesis as well as in nitrogen retention, cell division and growth. Target tissues include the central nervous system and skeletal muscle. The primary active form of Vitamin B-12 in the body is a coenzyme commonly called Dibencozide. The body stores the major portion of it vitamin B-12 in the form of Dibencozide and the Dibencozide form is retained in the body by as much as three times better. Dibencozide is directly involved in the body's building of muscle tissue. Many doctors specializing in sports medicine recommend Dibencozide as a non-hormonal anabolic agent that is natural and effective in helping build strong muscles. It certainly offers the athlete a safe and effective alternative to steroid hormones and is not banned by the international sports community. ENERGY Our bodies rely on carbohydrates for its primary fuel for energy. Many people routinely experience drastic changes in blood sugar levels. The continual ingestion of simple carbohydrate (sugars) sensitize the pancreas to over produce insulin which results in low blood sugar levels. This process continues with time until hypoglycemia and/or diabetes develops. However, the pancreas is able to handle more complex carbohydrates as they break down to their more simple components and do not create such a demand on the pancreas. LIFE-N-POWER contains complex carbohydrates that can easily and quickly be utilized by the body for energy, yet it does it safely, without the dangers of simple carbohydrate or sugars. PHYTOZYME BASE LIFE-N-POWER is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE LIFE-N-POWER As an energy boosting supplement, LIFE-N-POWER lozenges are simply dissolved slowly in the mouth whenever they are needed. They are useful as a "picker upper'' when dieting, working late, driving at night, or just for the afternoon "blahs." When used to help build muscle, it is best to make sure you take at least three tablets per day. Use them at workout times for energy and increased stamina. LIFE-N-POWER is helpful in maintaining blood sugar levels and each tablet only contains about two calories so they can be used by people wanting to lose weight, too. Suggested Use: One or two lozenges two dissolved slowly in the mouth, sublingually as desired. Product No: 0131 Package Size: 120 lozenges $12.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-56IA012-000121-B027-345http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/moxygen.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216221958 text/html 9830HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:20:13 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:44:36 GMTContent-length: 9646Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with stabilized anaerocidal atomic oxygen for fast energy! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... OXY-GEN CAPS: Stabilized Anaerocidal Atomic Oxygen Each Capsule Supplies: Stabilized Anaerocidal Atomic Oxygen and Magnesium Peroxide, in a proprietary blend of stabilized aloe vera, herbs and herbal extracts of Ginkgo Biloba, Ginseng, Suma, Mint Tea, Bee Pollen, Citrus Pectin and Myrrh. The special oxygen is produced by a proprietary method of super saturating a stabilized carrier of concentrated aloe vera with magnesium peroxide and pure anaerocidal oxygen. MOST ABUNDANT ELEMENT The earth is composed of over 100 elements and the most abundant of all of them is oxygen. Oxygen is absolutely essential for the existence of all living matter. We can go for weeks without food and days without water but we cannot live over four minutes without oxygen. There is no other substance on earth that we are so dependent on for our existence. In addition, all living matter contains oxygen, which is combined with other elements, not only as water in all cellular and circulatory fluids, but also as a component of all organic compounds such as carbohydrates (sugars, starches, cellulose, fiber), glycogen, fats and proteins. Even the clay and rock structures of our soils are loaded with oxygen-containing compounds in the forms of oxides, hydroxides, carbonates, sulfates and others. HOW DO WE GET IT? P> We mostly think of the oxygen in the air we breathe, but it is everywhere. However, it is a major component in the water we drink and an ingredient of tens of thousands of different molecules that make up our foods. We breathe it, drink it and consume it in our food. Today, we can even supplement with it. THE KINDS OF OXYGEN In its simplest form, oxygen is an atom that exists as one atom all by itself and is referred to just as "O" (singlet oxygen). The most well known and most common form of oxygen is when two atoms of oxygen combine to make molecular oxygen known as 02. Many attempts have been made by medical researchers to provide oxygen to the tissues of the body. Hyperbaric chambers have been developed to put oxygen under pressure, forcing it into the tissues and blood stream. Ozone is a very reactive form of oxygen that contains three atoms of oxygen and is symbolized by 03. Hydrogen peroxide has been given extensively, both orally and intravenously. However, magnesium peroxide is the form of choice today. The magnesium peroxide in Life Plus OXY-GEN CAPS is more stable than regular hydrogen peroxide and when it is utilized in the body it also provides the beneficial mineral, magnesium. Magnesium peroxide is also easier to handle and can be encapsulated in the dry form. Life Plus OXY-GEN CAPS are an excellent method of supplementing the body with the quality oxygen needed for optimum health for energy, fighting infections and detoxifying. FREE RADICAL FLAP A commonly misunderstood aspect of hydrogen peroxide is that it is a free radical. This is simply not true. By definition, a free radical has an unpaired electron. They are very short lived, usually only one ten-thousandth of a second. If left unchecked, they can cause damage, but they also provide a much needed function in the body as well. Therefore, balance is always the key. When hydrogen peroxide enters the blood stream, catalase enzyme immediately breaks it down into water and atomic or singlet oxygen. As mentioned above, this singlet oxygen does not exist long enough in the body to harm cells. As a matter of fact, hydrogen peroxide is formed in the special white blood cells known as macrophages. They have a special enzyme called peroxisome, which produces hydrogen peroxide. The singlet oxygen they produce literally kills invading bacteria as the singlet oxygen stimulates the oxidation-reduction cycle, which includes detoxification functions in the body as well as the destruction of anaerobic pathogens. Environmental contaminates in the air are not only harmful to every cell of our body, but also replaces the amount of oxygen percentage we breathe. This can result in various problems such as a sense of fatigue, the inability to concentrate, repair of damaged cells and the inability to fight off infection and degenerative diseases, such as cancer and heart disease, the leading causes of death today. Many researchers believe that the increased discomfort experienced by those suffering from arthritis before a storm or in more humid climates may result from a reduced amount of oxygen in the air. OXYGEN DEPLETION Several factors contribute to oxygen depletion. One of the most overlooked factors that may be contributing to the increased incidence of degenerative disease is the reduction of oxygen content of the air we breathe from about 35% to 19%. This is about a 50% reduction of the oxygen in the air around us. Mineral deficiencies are another factor. Minerals help inhibit the formation of toxins in our soils and the lack of minerals throws an extra burden on oxygen. In addition, overeating can cause oxygen deficiency as more oxygen is required to complete the digestive process and additional metabolic waste. Improper breathing contributes to the oxygen debt. All infections reduce oxygen reserves, and researchers have shown that fluoride in our drinking water slows down the process of oxidation of our foods. ENERGY Probably the most recognized result of decreased quality oxygen uptake in the body is the lack of energy and, on the other hand, increased energy levels are common place with higher levels. Even though the oxygen saturation in the veins of modern man is only 60-70%, some experts see a need for supplementing oxygen to supply up to the 80% range. FORMULATION Life Plus OXY-GEN CAPS are based on original research and formulation of Dr. Kurt W Donsbach, D.C., N.D., Ph.D. His famous oxygen-saturated aloe vera based formula is meticulously manufactured with cold processed aloe vera used as a stabilized carrier for numerous nutritional constituents, including magnesium peroxide and pure anaerocidal oxygen. Each OXY-GEN capsule contains singlet oxygen equivalent to twelve drops of 35% food grade hydrogen peroxide derived from magnesium peroxide and pure anaerocidal oxygen. It is formulated in a proprietary blend of herbs and herbal extracts of Ginkgo Biloba, Ginseng, Suma, Mint Tea, Bee Pollen, Citrus Pectin and Myrr. SUGGESTED USE OXY-GEN CAPS are packaged in bottles of 64 capsules and are recommended to be taken two capsules at one time with water from one to three times per day as desired. It is recommended that they be taken between meals away from food, at least one-half hour before meals or two hours after. This is simply to help provide for the most efficient absorption. Children usually take one capsule per day for each forty pounds of body weight. Suggested Use: Two capsules one to three times per day with water as an oxygen supplement at least one-half hour away from food before meals or two hours after. Children usually take one capsule for each 40 pounds of body weight. Product No: 2201 Package Size: 64 Capsules $27.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-57IA012-000121-B028-3http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/msalt.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222012 text/html 7783HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:20:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:47:52 GMTContent-length: 7599Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with a natural corrected salt Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CORRECTED SALT: Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment Containing Magnesium 10 Shakes from an average salt shaaker equals approximately 1 gram of CORRECTED SALT and contains: Sodium 14.7 milliequivalents Chloride 14.8 milliequivalents Sulfur 0.16 milliequivalents Magnesium 1.10 milliequivalents Pure Sodium Chloride and Elemental Magnesium as PolyMagPlexTM which is a proprietary blend of high quality magnesium sources including magnesium citrate, aspartate gluconate and glyerophosphate plus Sulfur and Sea Salt for trace amounts of other minerals. PLAQUE Hardening of the arteries is caused by a build-up of "plaque," a deposit made up of fats, cholesterols, proteins, minerals, especially calcium, toxins and heavy metals. Plaque reduces the size of the arteries, making it more difficult for the blood to flow through them properly. It reduces their elasticity. High blood pressure can result, and therefore the heart must work harder to pump our blood. Eventually, the heart wears out and serious health problems arise. Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in the Western World. Laboratory tests have shown that both table salt and regular salt substitutes contribute heavily to the build-up of plaque in the arteries. Regular table salt contains sodium chloride and as many as forty other ingredients such as acids, sugar, silicates for flowing characteristics and others. Commercial salt substitutes usually contain potassium chloride plus the same additional ingredients contained in table salt. Both sodium chloride (when its effect is not offset with magnesium) and potassium chloride are strongly anabolic substances and their continued use can contribute heavily to the build-up of plaque in the blood vessels. When people develop arterial plaque or when high blood pressure develops, the first thing their doctors tell them is to cut down their salt intake. CORRECTED SALT is one of the most revolutionary nutritional products ever developed. Some of the negative effects of both sodium and chloride are balanced by a unique formula of magnesium and sulfur. HOW CORRECTED SALT WORKS There are two general classifications of normal chemical reactions in the body: (1)Anabolic, which are constructive and "build-up"; and (2) Catabolic, which break substances down. Research has proven that our metabolism shifts, or cycles back and forth, from anabolic to catabolic, depending on which type of reactions may be dominant in the body at that time. To maintain optimum health, our metabolism should cycle back and forth daily. If it doesn't, certain conditions are more likely to develop if we are "stuck" in an anabolic mode, yet others are more likely to develop if we are catabolic most of the time. According to theory, the depositing of plaque in the arteries is an anabolic process, because it is characterized by a "build-up". It so happens that both sodium and chloride (the ingredients in table salt) are strongly anabolic and stimulate anabolic processes in the body. The same is true of potassium. Therefore, potassium chloride (the most common salt substitute) can be just as damaging. CORRECTED SALT contains a predetermined balance of both anabolic and catabolic minerals. The anabolic nutrients, sodium and chloride in CORRECTED SALT are balanced by the catabolic minerals, magnesium and sulfur. CORRECTED SALT also contains trace elements from natural sea salt. It tastes like salt, because it contains salt; but instead of being heavily anabolic, it is balanced because of its formulation. You get the same great flavor of regular table salt but you don't have to be concerned about the bad effects of regular salt. PHYTOZYME BASE CORRECTED SALT is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus Phytozyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. Other salt products contain numerous other ingredients, but CORRECTED SALT is 100% pure with only the PhytoZyme base added. HOW TO USE CORRECTED SALT CORRECTED SALT is intended to be used as you would normally use table salt. Simply throw out all your regular salt and fill your salt shakers with CORRECTED SALT. Use it in cooking or baking. It does not contain any preservatives, acids, starches or flowing agents. It has a tendency to "cake up" in high humidity after it has been opened. Therefore, it is recommended that you place it in a dry place. If it does cake up, simply place it in the oven (not the microwave) for a while to drive off the moisture. Then, simply break the clusters apart so it will flow through your salt shaker. Suggested Use: Use freely as a condiment a the table or in cooking and baking as you would regular table salt. Product No: 2617 Package Size: 6 oz Trial Shaker $7.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 2618 Package Size: 25 oz Bulk Pak $15.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-58IA012-000121-B028-15http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/malko.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222019 text/html 8757HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:20:35 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:18:44 GMTContent-length: 8573Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with immune supporting shark oil Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... ALKO-MAR: Immune Supporting Concentrated Alkoxyglycerols Each Capsule Supplies: Shark Liver Oil 500 mg Concentrated Alkoxyglycerols 250 mg Shark Liver Oil concentrated and prepared to ensure high levels of alkoxyglycerols without vitamin A and D HISTORY Interest grew for researchers to study alkoxyglycerols because Scandinavian fisherman in the northern waters used to apply the oil from shark livers to cuts and other wounds while at sea because they healed quickly. They also began taking it internally when they were not feeling well. Over a period of years, researchers have learned that the alkoxyglycerols in shark liver oil provided a fantastic immune supporting nutritional effect. It has been learned that when larger quantities of it are used internally, care must be exercised to make certain that the levels of the oil soluble vitamins A and D are not concentrated in the final product. The concentrates used in the manufacturing of ALKO-MAR are of the highest quality and can be relied on to not contain significant amounts of these vitamins. IMMUNE SYSTEM The immune system is a complex network of various defenses against harmful microorganisms of bacterial nature and other foreign substances that try to invade and affect the body in a negative way. It protects against such offenders as fungi and viruses and is also protective against aging along with other health providing factors. It is the immune systems job to neutralize and destroy any invading organism that could cause harm, either by infecting body tissues or by releasing poisons or toxins. The immune systems principal method of functioning is through its white blood cells. They are manufactured by the billions, primarily in bone marrow. Unlike red blood cells, white cells can move on their own and are able to pass through the cell walls, allowing them to move rapidly to the site of infection or injury. There is basically two different types of them. They consist of the leukocytes that live in and travel through the blood stream and the lymphocytes which are found in the lymphoid tissue of the spleen, lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow. There are two basic types of them, the B-lymphocytes and the T-lymphocytes. In general the T-lymphocytes are the most involved in fighting infections and diseases in the body. A primary benefit of the Alkoxyglycerols contained in ALKO-MAR is that they provide special nutrients that naturally support the body's immune system's ability to fight infections and degeneration. Lymphocytes destroy invaders by several methods including: I)releasing antibodies that attach to the surface of invading proteins (called antigens) to neutralize them or make them easier to devour by the large scavenging cells known as macrophages, 2) ingesting them, or 3) releasing or causing surrounding cells to release enzymes or chemical agents such as histamines. IMMUNE MEMORY One of the remarkable aspects of the immune system is its ability to recognize past invaders, allowing it to respond to a second attack quickly. Disease causing viruses and bacteriainvade and reproduce rapidly, so this ability is extremely important. After its first exposure to an antigen. certain lymphocytes become memory cells, which keep a blueprint of the invader. This is how immunizations work. By exposing the immune system to small or non-active amounts of disease causing antigens, the immune system remembers how to respond at a later date and protects us if we are exposed at a later date. OTHERS The immune system is equally involved in many other protective processes in the body such as its response to allergy producing substances, controlling the rate and aspects of aging, protection from free radicals and protection against degenerative diseases such as arthritis, cancer, arteriosclerosis and others. Probably the most well understood and studied is allergies and cancer. Nutritionally supporting the immune system with natural substances like alkoxyglycerols has much more value then just helping the body fight off infections. SOME DISORDERS Many conditions associated with the malfunctioning of the immune system are much more well known today than ever before. AIDS, more completely known as Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, cancer, auto-immune disorders and allergic reactions. The primary problem with AIDS is that the immune system becomes so inefficient that the body becomes at an extreme risk to just about all other possible attacks including infections of all kinds. Having one of these problems is indicative that the immune system is not working up to par. ANTIOXIDANTS The immune system is extremely sensitive to the need of antioxidant nutrients. Actually, it is the most sensitive system or organ in the body to their need. The immune status of any individual is a good indication of the status or need for antioxidants in their diet. The immune system is very sensitive to free radicals and cannot handle their attack as well as other functioning systems in the body. Supplementing with immune system supporting nutrients like ALKO-MAR is very synergistic with supplementing with other Life Plus immune supporting, antioxidant products such as PROTX II, CO-Q-10 PLUS, CARDIO-CHELEX and PROANTHENOLS. HOW TO TAKE ALKO-MAR No specific number of ALKO-MAR capsules have been determined to take routinely. From one to three capsules are within the range. It is a totally natural substance and larger amounts can be taken when needed. Taking more than twelve capsules (four capsules three times a day) is not productive. It is usually recommended to take between two and twelve capsules per day depending on the need. Suggested Use: Take between one and twelve capsules throughout the day as desired. Product No: 1931 Package Size: 60 tablets $18.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-59IA012-000121-B028-25http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mcombat.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222027 text/html 7637HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:20:42 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:20:43 GMTContent-length: 7453Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with immune supporting nutrients against colds & flu Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... COMBAT: Immune Supporting Nutrients Each Tablet Supplies: Vitamins Herbs Vitamin A (Preformed) 500 iu Propolis 10mg Beta-Carotene 1,000iu Pollen 30mg Vitamin C 300mg Garlic 50mg Vitamin B-6 3mg Cayenne 50mg Vitamin B-12 10mcg Pleurisy Root 20mg Niacinamide 5mg Echinacea 10mg Folic Acid 150mcg Yarrow 10mg Pau d'Arco 4:1 extract 70 mg Minerals Calcium 20mg Magnesium 10mg Zinc 2mg IMMUNE SYSTEM SUPPORT COMBAT contains various concentrated tissue nutrients obtained from bovine tissues which contain natural, proportionate amounts needed by the tissues of our immune system. They are very synergistic with the other nutrients in COMBAT. THE STRATEGY BEHIND COMBAT The Thymus gland plays a major role in the action of the immune system. The Thymus both produces and activates T-cells, or T-Lymphocytes, which travel through the lymphatic system, destroying bacteria and some larger viruses when we are invaded. Quite often people get swollen lymph nodes when infection is present in the body due to this activity. The Adrenal glands play an important role in the stress that we are exposed to, including colds, flu and other kinds of infections. The Spleen is also involved in the protective mechanisms maintained by the body. The Life Plus formulation in COMBAT contains concentrated tissue nutrients from Thymus, Adrenal and Spleen to supply many of the micronutrients they need to function efficiently. COMBAT also contains substantial amounts of both Vitamin A in the form of regular natural Vitamin A and its precursor, Beta-Carotene. Vitamin A helps to maintain the integrity of the mucous membranes that are a part of the linings of the sinuses, lungs and other parts of the respiratory system. It is important to maintain them as they are the first line of the body's defense against air born infections that attack through the respiratory system. During allergy attacks or colds, these tissues often become irritated and secrete more than normal amounts of mucous and fluid. Actually, mucous secretion is the way the body protects itself by "washing away" contaminants. This fluid contains significant amounts of the lysozyme enzyme that kills harmful bacteria. Since people generally find this condition of excess mucous production undesirable, they often take antihistamine drugs to counteract the mucous secretion. Usually, these drugs dry up the mucous too much, prevent the body from protecting itself and actually slow down the healing process. VITAMIN C Vitamin C is thought to be a natural antihistamine that does not have the side effects of many synthetic drugs. Vitamin C also helps the white blood cells fight bacteria. Like vitamin A, it is a natural antioxidant which ensures that oxygen is available to the cells for metabolism and fighting infection. It is thought by many researchers that vitamin C can prevent certain viruses from multiplying. COMBAT contains Propolis, nature's own antibiotic. It is obtained from beehives and is a product that honey bees produce to protect the hive from infectious invaders. They wall off the area with Propolis as it is well known that infectious bacteria cannot penetrate it. COMBAT also contains Bee Pollen, which has the reputation of supporting the immune system. In addition, COMBAT contains Garlic and Cayenne herbs, which have been used for centuries to fight infection naturally and to detoxify the body. Pleurisy Root, Echinacea and Yarrow are other herbs included in COMBAT for their abilities to support the immune and respiratory systems. PHYTOZYME BASE COMBAT is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE COMBAT There are no set amounts of COMBAT to take but it is recommended to take several tablets the first day or two when early signs are noticed. Usually, two to four tablets every hour for the first day and decrease from there. Suggested Use: Two or more tablets, three or more times a day. More tablets should be taken at first signs of need. Product No: 1902 Package Size: 60 capsules $11.00 U.S. + Shipping Product No: 1925 Package Size: 180 capsules $25.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-60IA012-000121-B028-39http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mparatox.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222038 text/html 8831HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:20:54 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:45:05 GMTContent-length: 8647Content-type: text/html Take Advantage and detoxify yourself of parasites Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PARATOX: Herbs & Amino Acids Detoxifiers and Vermifuge Each Tablet Supplies: Herbs Black Walnut 100 mg Alginate 50 mg Wormwood 100 mg Goldenseal 25 mg Garlic 70 mg Norwegian Kelp Parsley 70 mg Cayenn 10 mg Fenugreek 60 mg Chlorophyll 5 mg Amino Acids Methionin 20 mg Cystine 10 mg HERBALS Herbs have been used since creation to provide for the health and well being of entire civilizations. The Bible tells us that we were given herbs for healing and cites many examples of their usage. Mainstream modern technology is now beginning to focus on herbs and natural plant therapies. This is usually referred to in the literature today as phytotherapy. We probably will never understand many of the secrets regarding the way in which many natural extracts and concentrates work, but that is no reason not to take advantage of their benefits. To our knowledge, Life Plus is the only company that manufactures and distributes the unique kinds of herbal-based products we do by combining high quality herbs from all over the world with other synergistic nutrients known to work toward the same specific nutritional goals. These other synergistic nutrients include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, bioflavonoids, phytonutrients, anti-oxidants and, at times, concentrated tissue nutrients. By combining modern technology with classical herbal knowledge, the Life Plus herbal-based products are second-to-none anywhere in the world. DETOXIFICATION The two primary organs of metabolic detoxification in the body are the liver and the kidneys. The liver filters pollutants out of the blood and dumps many of them into the digestive tract by secreting them through the bile. One problem is that many of the toxins are reabsorbed in the intestinal tract back into our system. PARATOX contains two amino acids, Methionine and Cysteine. These wonderful natural substances are not only essential to life and an important component of the proteins in our bodies, they also support proper liver function and cleanse the body. They contain a sulfhydryl grouping in their molecules, which contain sulfur having a chelating capacity that binds toxins and helps the body eliminate them. Also included with the amino acids is Alginate, an herbal extract obtained from seaweed. As the Alginate contained in PARATOX is swallowed and passes through the digestive tract, it naturally binds with toxic metals like aluminum, strontium, tin, cadmium, mercury and lead that are often secreted into the digestive tract through the bile. Then, since our bodies cannot absorb Alginate (particularly when it is complexed with the heavy metals) into the body, it passes through and is excreted, taking the heavy metals with it. PARASITES Many people often find it amusing when they hear they may have worms or other parasites. Yet this problem is very prevalent all over the world. We routinely worm our horses, cattle, dogs, cats and other animals but few think to care for themselves in the same manner. A parasite, by definition, lives off of other living things. The parasites that infest our bodies not only live off the nutrients in the foods we eat but they actually live off our tissues. They secrete toxins into our bloodstream that circulate and often cause damage. One factor not normally considered is that they are a constant drain on our immune systems. Parasites can be obtained from the leaves of certain vegetables, from the stools of pets, such as dogs and cats, horses, cows and other farm livestock and from meat that hasn't been cooked adequately to kill them off. It has been shown that it is impossible to kill some of the parasites in pork by cooking. Many water supplies in countries around the world are definite sources of parasites, so those who travel should definitely take precaution. TWELVE SPECIAL HERBS A substance taken to expel or control parasites (most often referred to as "worms") is technically called a "vermifuge." The unique combination of the twelve special herbs in PARATOX are great as a natural supplement. They include Black Walnut, Wormwood, Garlic, Parsley, Fenugreek, Alginate, Goldenseal, Norwegian Kelp, Cayenne and Chlorophyll. PHYTOZYME BASE PARATOX is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE PARATOX In most cases, Paratox does not need to be taken daily on an on-going basis. It is usually recommended to take a round of PARATOX once a quarter (every three months). The regimen is to take one or two bottles each cleansing. The first time you take PARATOX, take two bottles and then one bottle is usually adequate for repeat usages. On day one, take one tablet three times a day. On day two, take two tablets three times a day. On day three, take three tablets three times a day. On day four, take four tablets three times a day. Stay at this level until one or two bottles are used. Some individuals may develop a feeling of the "blahs" as the toxins are coming out of their body. If this happens to you, just decrease the dosage. This feeling should subside as your system is cleansed. If you travel to other countries, it is a good idea to take one or two tablets three times a day, using a full bottle, while you travel. It is strongly recommended that you drink plenty of fluids while taking PARATOX to help your body eliminate toxins. Good pure water is best, but some fruit or vegetable juice is acceptable as well. Avoid alcohol, milk and soft drinks during this time. Suggested Use: One to three tablets three times per day. Product No: 5015 Package Size: 90 tablets $12.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-61IA012-000121-B028-50http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mprost.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222047 text/html 7777HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:21:01 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:46:29 GMTContent-length: 7593Content-type: text/html Take ADVANTAGE with herbs & nutrients for your prostate Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PROSTATE FORMULA: Herbs and Other Nutrients for Prostate Each Tablet Supplies: Saw Palmetto Herbal Extract (1:4) 150mg Jotoba Herbal Extract 100 mg Pau d'Arco Herbal Extract 50 mg Other Herbs Other Nutrients Defatted Pumpkin Seed Concentrate 75 mg L-Alanine 50 mg Corn Silk 75 mg L-Glycine 50 mg Alfalfa 75 mg L-Glutamic Acid 50 mg Parsley 75 mg Zinc (as picolinate) 5 mg Cayenne 15 mg Beta-Carotene 5,000 iu AGE Younger men are more likely to be affected than most people realize. Pre-cancerous lesions have been found in men who have died in accidents as young as 20 years of age. Over 25% of the men autopsied who have died in their 30's were found to be affected and over 55% of them in their 40's. Even though prostate cancer is slow growing, it is always better to have an early diagnosis. It is surprising that less than half of the men over the age of 40 have ever had the traditional digital exam that is recommended by both general practitioners and urologists. The lack of early diagnosis is one reason why as many as 60% of the cases that are diagnosed have already spread. The newer PSA Test (prostate specific antigen test) is a blood test that result in more cases being diagnosed sooner. THREE CATEGORIES The prevalence of this condition is not well known. As a matter of fact, a survey has revealed that as many as 11% of American men were unaware that they even had a prostate gland. Needless to say, the symptoms of prostate trouble are even less well known. The conditions are usually categorized into one of three; 1) prostatitis (inflamed prostate), 2) benign prostatic hypertrophy (BHP), and 3) prostate cancer. Prostatitis is usually a result of an infection but quite often is thought to be caused by stress. Infections are usually treated with antibiotics or other anti-infectives, while cases associated with stress are usually treated with muscle relaxants or exercise. BHP In cases of BHP, the gland may grow many times its normal size, say from the size of a walnut, possibly in a young man in his 20's or early 30's, to as large as an orange or grapefruit in his 50's. Most researchers agree that this growth, at least in part, is associated with the male hormone testosterone or its metabolites. Although not malignant, BHP can be very uncomfortable as over growth of the prostate usually causes physical blockage of the urethra. This results in urinary tract problems because the urethra, which carries urine from the bladder, travels through the middle of the prostate and can become blocked by the overgrowth of prostate tissue. Also, bladder and kidney infections, as well as increased frequency of urination and discomfort, can result. Several different surgical techniques have been developed that remove all or some of the prostate tissue when used in the treatment of BHP and prostate cancer. Even though they can be life prolonging and go a long way to relieve pain and discomfort, they are not without their side effects and limitations. More recently, the importance of diet and exercise has come to light. HIGH FAT DIETS High fat diets have been linked to both BHP and prostate cancer. Autopsies have shown that cases of BHP have greatly increased the amount of cholesterol in their prostate tissues. It has also been shown that increasing body weight increases the incidence of prostate cancer. Moderately overweight men have more than double the risk, while those truly obese are four times more likely to develop the disease. Other studies have shown that men with prostate cancer consume more meat and dairy products. The incidence of prostate cancer goes up with decreased Vitamin A consumption and with increased exposure to Cadmium. Reduced activity and lack of exercise are also culprits in this whole scenario. The Missouri Cancer Registry found that by studying 17,000 men with occupations that required a lot of physical activity had a lower incidence of prostate cancer. In another study involving 18,000 men who burned 4,000 calories or more by weekly exercising reduced their risk of prostate cancer by up to over 85% when compared to men who used less than 1,000 calories by exercising per week. PHYTOZYME BASE PROSTATE FORMULA is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus Phytozyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE PROSTATE FORMULA Take two tablets in the morning, more can be taken if desired. Suggested Use: Two or more tablets per day. Product No: 1944 Package Size: 60 tablets $19.25 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-62IA012-000121-B028-65http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/meye.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222101 text/html 8555HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:21:14 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:22:17 GMTContent-length: 8371Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with eyebright herb for healthy eyes Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... EYE FORMULA: Eyebright Herb and Other Nutrients for the Eyes Each Tablet Supplies: Herbs Associated Factors Amino Acid Eyebright 150mg Rutin 40mg Glutathione 20mg Bilberry Extract 100mg Hesperidin 20mg Beta-Carotene 500 iu Contains Alfalfaa 40mg, Kelp 20mg and Dulce 20mg as natural plant sources of numerous trace elements synergistic with calcium and magnesium. HERBS Herbs have been used since creation to provide for our health and well being, for entire civilizations for that matter. The Bible tells us that we were given herbs for healing and cites many examples of their usage. Main stream modern technology is now finally beginning to focus on herbs and natural plant therapies. This is usually referred to in the literature today as phytotherapy. We probably never will understand many of the secrets regarding how many natural extracts and concentrates work, but that is no reason to not take advantage of their benefits now. To our knowledge, Life Plus is the only company that manufactures and distributes the unique kinds of herbal based products we do by combining high quality herbs from all over the world with other synergistic nutrients known to work toward the same specific nutritional goals. These other synergistic nutrients include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, bioflavonoids, phytonutrients, anti-oxidants and concentrated tissue nutrients in select products. By combining modern technology with classical herbal knowledge, the Life Plus herbal based products are second to none anywhere in the world. NUTRITION FOR THE EYES Life Plus EYE FORMULA is formulated to nutritionally support the tissues of the eyes and other tissues. Every year millions of people lose their sight to conditions such as macular degeneration, glaucoma, cataracts and retinal hemorrhages. Few people stop to think how our eyes are bombarded each day by air pollution, chemicals, drugs, certain cosmetics, fumes from solvents and cigarette smoke. Thus, it is imperative that we support our eyes nutritionally, if we want to use them for a whole lifetime. NIGHT BLINDNESS AND VITAMIN A One of the most common vision problems people have today is night blindness. Vitamin A is actually a cure for this condition. EYE FORMULA contains 500 international units of Vitamin A in its natural precursor form, Beta-Carotene. Ideally, more should be taken for this specific application, but only 500 international units are included in EYE FORMULA to not over supplement for individuals who are obtaining it from other supplements. However, the representative amount in EYE FORMULA ensures that it is present and available to the eyes when the other nutrients in this great product are present to provide its synergistic effect. CIRCULATION AND EYES Most eye problems associated with degeneration are related to circulation impairment in some way. The decrease in blood supply is responsible for a lack of both oxygen and needed nutrients reaching our tissues. In addition, end products of metabolism can build up and result in toxemia. This situation can be especially damaging to the eyes as oxygen levels are very critical to their delicate tissues. It has been shown, for instance, that decreased levels of Glutathione in the ocular tissues are associated with the existence of cataracts. The Eyebright herb in Life Plus EYE FORMULA is a very important ingredient and has been used as a valuable nutritional supplement for years, especially in Europe. It has not only been taken whole, but made into tinctures, fluid extracts and even poultices that were applied topically. Bioflavonoids are compounds that occur in nature with Vitamin C. The Rutin and Hesperidin contained in Life Plus EYE FORMULA are known to help maintain the integrity of the thousands of tiny blood vessels, called capillaries, in the eye. These two specific bioflavonoids are known to be especially beneficial for the eyes. Macular degeneration is a condition of the eyes that is characterized by a gradual decreased ability to see. Eyebright herb and Vitamin A combined with improved circulation can be very helpful. Eyebright herb and the natural tri-peptide, Glutathione, is a unique synergistic nutritional supportive combination for the eyes. Glutathione is a special natural substance that is present in all normal cells, especially ocular tissue that contain sulfur. It is a great anti-oxidant and detoxifier and is thought to be helpful in the prevention of cataracts. Concentrated tissue nutrients from bovine ophthalmic and brain tissues are also included for their overall synergistic effects in the nutritional support for the healthy metabolic processes of eye tissue. PHYTOZYME BASE EYE FORMULA is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE EYE FORMULA It is usually recommended that you take one or two tablets three times a day as a natural nutritional supplement for the eyes. For optimum results, take Life Plus EYE FORMULA with SOMAZYME, PROANTHENOLS and additional vitamin A and C (usually from CARDIO CHELEX ). Suggested Use: One or two tablets three times a day as a natural supplement for the eyes. Product No: 5018 Package Size: 90 tablets $11.00 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-63IA012-000121-B028-75http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mpan.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222108 text/html 8101HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:21:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:44:54 GMTContent-length: 7917Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with herbs for your pancreas Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PANCREAS FORMULA: Herbs , Enzymes & Other Nutrients for the Pancreas Each Tablet Supplies: Herbs Minerals Goldenseal 40mg Zinc (as chelate) 15mg Chickweed 40mg Copper (as chelate) 250mcg Dandelion 40mg Chromium (as aspartate) 300mcg Vanadyl Sulfate 25mcg Enzymes Vitamins Pancreatin 175mg Bete-Carotene 1,000 iu Pancrelipase 30mg UNIQUE FORMULA Life Plus PANCREAS FORMULA is specifically formulated to nutritionally support the pancreas in a unique way. PANCREAS FORMULA contains herbs, enzymes, vitamins, minerals and concentrated tissue nutrients for their synergistic nutritional effect in support of proper pancreas function. THE PANCREAS & DIGESTION The pancreas is one of the most important organs in our bodies. We can't live without it. It performs many functions that are important and are interrelated with the activities of many other organs of the endocrine system. In general, the pancreas has two major functions (1) enzyme production for digestion, and (2) insulin production for the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism. In order to digest the food we eat, the pancreas produces numerous enzymes. They include various proteolytic enzymes such as trypsin, chymotrypsin and others that break down proteins. It also secretes lipases, which break down fats and amylases which break down complex carbohydrates in the form of starches and other large carbohydrate molecules. It used to be thought that all of these digestive enzymes were used up or excreted. We know now that many of them are reabsorbed into the bloodstream, where they are carried throughout the body for other purposes, such as the digestion of blood clots and foreign fats and proteins in the blood. For instance, trypsin and chymotrypsin keep the proteolytic activity in the blood to a healthy level and maintain a proper balance in the breaking down of fibrin in blood clots and other areas in the circulatory system. THE PANCREAS & INSULIN The special cells in the pancreas, called the Islets of Langerhans, produce insulin and secrete it into the blood stream. Insulin is the primary regulator of carbohydrate metabolism in the body. When we eat simple carbohydrates (sugars) they are absorbed directly into the blood stream relatively quickly. When we eat complex carbohydrates (starches and others), it is digested (broken down) into its component smaller units and eventually into glucose which is then absorbed into the bloodstream. The pancreas senses the level of glucose in the blood and produces insulin accordingly. Insulin then helps the glucose enter the cells, where it is used for energy production. If too much insulin is produced, not enough glucose remains in the blood and if too little is produced, too much glucose remains in the blood and not enough enters the cells. If the pancreas is overworked and does not receive the nutrients it needs to maintain its own healthy metabolic processes, it can become exhausted and not produce enough insulin. The result can be diabetes. If, on the other hand, too much insulin is produced, the blood sugar level will be too low. This condition is called hypoglycemia. Therefore, maintaining the proper balance is important. WHAT PANCREAS FORMULA DOES PANCREAS FORMULA provides nutrients that the pancreas needs to function properly. It contains Zinc, which is needed in the manufacture of insulin and copper to help maintain proper zinc levels. It contains Chromium, which is essential to the action of insulin at the cell level. Since the pancreas is made of epithelial tissue, it needs vitamin A to remain healthy. Because the (duodenum) and liver work so closely with the pancreas, concentrated tissue nutrients from them and from bovine pancreas are included as well. In addition, two highly active enzyme concentrates from pancreas, pancreatin and (pancrelipase) are important ingredients in Life Plus PANCREAS FORMULA. They supplement with enzymes which makes it possible for the pancreas gland to rest from the demand placed on it. The three valuable synergistic herbs, Dandelion, Goldenseal and Chickweed are also included for their synergistic effects. PHYTOZYME BASE Life Plus PANCREAS FORMULA is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE PANCREAS FORMULA Take one or two tablets three times per day. It is a good idea for those with sugar metabolism difficulties to take before or between meals as nutritional support for the pancreas. It can be taken at mealtime for the digestive value of the enzymes in PANCREAS FORMULA. The Life Plus products SOMAZYME, SUPPORT TABS and PROANTHENOLS are great synergistic products to take with PANCREAS FORMULA. Suggested Use: One or two tablets three times a day. Product No: 4024 Package Size: 90 tablets $13.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-64IA012-000121-B028-84http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mepa.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222122 text/html 7254HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:21:38 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:22:07 GMTContent-length: 7070Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with omega-3 fatty acids to control cholesterol Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... EPA PLUS: Fish Oil Concentrate Omega-3 Polyunsaturates Each Tablet Supplies: Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA) 180 mg Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) 120 mg Formulated from high quality fish oils that are concentrated from the flesh of deep sea, cold water fish and is contained in a natural preservative-free gelatin capsule for convenient use. EPA PLUS According to studies published in the well respected British scientific journal, Lancet, the incidence of heart disease related to atherosclerosis, including coronary artery disease, in Greenlandic Eskimos is extremely low. From 1963 to 1967 only three cases of these diseases were reported in the entire Eskimo population of Greenland. Moreover, not a single established case of diabetes is known to have been reported in the population of the Greenlandic Uhanak district. Since diabetes and heart disease affected literally millions of Americans in the 1980's and 1990's, the lack of heart disease in Eskimos and other societies has attracted the serious attention of many scientists around the world. The food of the Greenlandic Eskimos consists largely of meat from whales, seals, sea birds and fish (usually halibut and salmon). Needless to say, their food is extremely rich in protein and fat and low in carbohydrates, but it is extremely high in the Omega-3 Polyunsaturates EPA and DHA as contained in Life Plus EPA PLUS. EPA Doctors have been saying for years that large amounts of fat in the diet can lead to heart disease and other disorders. Why, therefore, can a group of people who consume such large amounts of protein and fat have such low incidence of atherosclerotic heart disease? Until recently, scientists have been baffled by this important question. The new link in their chain of understanding now centers around a marine lipid concentrate, containing Eicosapentaenoic Acid (EPA). EPA is a direct source of an important substance called prostaglandin F3. Prostaglandin E3 is directly responsible for making blood platelets (cells which form a "plug" wherever an injury occurs) less sticky, thus leading to an easier flow of blood throughout out- bodies. This natural antithrombotic "anti-clotting" effect of` EPA has been well researched. This means that EPA is intimately involved in bodily processes that inhibit blood clots (obstructions to circulation), particularly in the small capillaries of the heart. When a small blood vessel is injured, platelets adhere to each other around the edges of the injury, forming a clot. This is a natural protective mechanism that prevents us from literally bleeding to death. However, when platelets in the blood become too sticky, they can clump abnormally fast and too frequently. This rapid and extensive platelet clumping can actually inhibit circulation and be a major contributor to heart and circulatory disease. DHA Of almost equal importance, but not as widely researched, is Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA). It comprises a significant amount of the tissue, which makes up our brains as well as a large part of the retina of the eye. The average American diet is very low in fresh fish and derivatives of sea food that contain EPA and DHA. On the other hand, it is high in refined carbohydrates and saturated fats. This kind of diet can lead to a serious deficiency in the raw materials necessary for proper platelet function in our blood stream. Recent dietary studies suggest that marine lipid complexes that contain EPA and DHA can have a very significant effect on lowering unwanted "blood fats." They may prove to be extremely useful natural substances powerful enough to normalize the high cholesterol and triglyceride levels that are so extensive in our modern American population. Supplementing with EPA PLUS is a rational approach to naturally increasing the amount of Eicosapentaenoic Acid and Docosahexaenoic Acid in our daily diets. This product represents a significant advantage over other marine oils, which can supply a potentially toxic amount of Vitamins A and D, while supplying lower amounts of EPA and DHA factors. HOW TO TAKE EPA PLUS It is recommended to take one or two capsules with the two major meals each day. Many individuals also take EPA PLUS with the third meal as well. It is wise to limit the amount of saturated fat in your diet and increase the amount of high quality cold water fish. Suggested Use: One to two capsule two or three times per day with meals. Product No: 4033 Package Size: 90 Capsules $11.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-65IA012-000121-B028-94http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mprog.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222135 text/html 10197HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:21:50 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:45:47 GMTContent-length: 10012Content-type: text/html Advantage! natural progesterone plus pregnenolone for women! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... PROGESTERONE PLUS: High quality natural Progesternone, plus Pregnenolone and standardized Wild Yam Extract. Each Applicator Contains (3 Fl. Oz.): Progesterone (Pharmaceutical Grade) 15mg Pregnenolone 350mg Wild Yam (16% Standardized Extractincluding Natural Progesterone) 1,000mg Formulated in the Life Plus Proprietary Derma-Trans Delivery System Of Emulsified Penetrating Agents, Emollients and Skin Softening Agents, Including Purified Wafer, Potassium Sorbate, Citricidal (Grapefruit Seed Extract), Isopropyl Alcohol, Tween 80 and Rainforest Oils from Copaiba, Brazil Nut and Andiroba. PROGESTERONE OVERLOOKED Thousands of women in the western world are now using natural progesterone, generally in the form of a non-prescription product that is applied to the skin. They consistently not only claim less "female" symptoms, but experience increased vitality, better skin and a renewed emotional balance. Natural progesterone has unfortunately been almost totally overlooked by medical science while the erroneous focus has been placed heavily (almost completely) on estrogen. It is important in this modem day for us to have a much better understanding of progesterone, the important natural hormone that it is. PRECURSOR It has been little realized that progesterone, like DHEA, has been referred to as the "mother of hormones." Progesterone is an important precursor in the biosynthesis of the adrenal corticosteroids, which protect us against stress, and of all the sex hormones, including both testosterone and estrogen. This means that progesterone can be turned into one of many different hormones in the body as they are needed to maintain various metabolic functions in almost all of our tissues. Unfortunately, most all the emphasis has been put on the importance of estrogen. However, it must be emphasized again that both estrogen and testosterone are made from progesterone. Without adequate progesterone, both testosterone and estrogen would not be sufficiently available to the body. ESTROGEN DOMINANCE About 600,000 hysterectomies are performed every year in the USA alone. According to Dr. Stanley West, noted fertility specialist and chief of reproductive endocrinology at St. Vincent's Hospital in New York and author of The Hysterectomy Hoax, about 90 percent of all hysterectomies are unnecessary. Dr. John Lee, long time medical practitioner and researcher of progesterone, has discovered a consistent theme running through women's complaints associated with PMS and menopause. That is, they experience estrogen dominance or put another way, they have too much estrogen in relationship to the amount of progesterone in their bodies. HRT These women, contrary to their actual needs, are given synthetic estrogen drugs. In other words, when their estrogen levels are already too high when compared with progesterone levels, they are given more estrogen. It has become mainstream in modern medical practice to prescribe estrogen for menopausal and related symptoms. This is referred to as hormone replacement therapy (HRT) by doctors. The delicate estrogen/progesterone balance is greatly upset by too much estrogen, so progesterone deficiency is exaggerated all the more. Doctors have been able to balance the estrogen-dominance effect through with progesterone. NATURAL PROGESTERONE Between 40 and 60 percent of all western women experience premenstnral syndrome(PMS). Natural progesterone is made from wild yams or soybeans, whose active ingredients are an exact molecular match of the body's own progesterone. It is interesting to note that in countries in Asia and South America, where women eat quantities of either wild yams or soybeans, the term "hot flash" doesn't even exist in their languages. They also rarely experience most of the female problems plaguing western women. One researcher, Jerilyn Prior, chief endocrinologist at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, reported in The New England Journal of Medicine, has demonstrated that osteoporosis occurs in athletes to the degree that they become progesterone deficient. She became convinced that loss of bone density (osteoporosis) could be the result of progesterone deficiency. This was later confirmed by a three year study including sixty-three post-menopausal women. Natural progesterone supplementation is not known to have any side effects and no toxic levels have been found to date. When adequate levels of progesterone are present in the body, libido is increased, the skin stays hydrated and oxygenated, facial hair growth and hair thinning is prevented, less depression occurs, fat burning is encouraged and blood clotting remains normal. There appears to be less breast and uterine cancer among women with higher levels of progesterone as well as less menopausal and PMS problems, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness. SYNTHETIC ESTROGEN & PROGESTINS A New England Journal of Medicine article in 1995 involving 121,700 women revealed that women who used synthetic estrogens and progestins to offset the symptoms of menopause also increased their chance of developing breast cancer by up to 40 percent by taking them for more than five years. Current knowledge is evolving that these synthetic products are not good. Not only are synthetic estrogens responsible for increasing the probability of breast and uterine cancer, but also of increased storage of body fat, fluid retention, depression, headaches, impaired blood sugar control, reduced oxygen in cells, gallbladder problems, decreased sex drive, increased probability of fibroids and bone loss. The attempt to offset the negative effects of synthetic estrogen with synthetic progestins, only complicates the problems all the more. It is important to know that the group of drugs that are referred to as progestins are not progesterone. They are compounds that have altered molecules of progesterone that can be patented by companies for profit. Synthetic progestins are not exact replicas of progesterone and can cause numerous side effects, such as headache, depression, fluid retention, increased risk of birth defects (they are included in birth control pills), liver dysfunction, breast tenderness, acne, insomnia, swelling, weight changes and PMS-like symptoms. They are not progesterone! HOW TO USE PROGESTERONE PLUS For external use only. Keep out of reach of children. Roll an eight inch strip(approximately 0.5 ml) onto skin once or twice a day or as desired. Do not use during the 7 days of menses. Allow to dry before wearing clothes. Discontinue use if rash or irritation develops. Do not use on broken skin, mucous membranes or around the eyes. Each container holds 60 applications of eight inch strips. Suggested Use: For external use only. Keep out of reach of children. Roll an eight inch strip(approximately 0.5 ml) onto skin once or twice a day or as desired. Do not use during the seven days of menses. Allow to dry before wearing clothes. Discontinue use if rash or irritation develops. Do not use on broken skin, mucous membranes or around the eyes. Each container holds 60 applications of eight inch strips. Product No: 0213 Package Size: 3 Fluid Ounces $29.75 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-66IA012-000121-B028-102http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mmagicf.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222148 text/html 6295HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:22:01 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:42:32 GMTContent-length: 6111Content-type: text/html Take Advantage with synergistic herbs for women Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... INNER MAGIC F: Herbs for Womn Each Tablet Supplies: Damiana 150mg Cayenne 20mg Cumin 150mg Dong Quai 15mg Norwegian Kelp 150mg Saq Palmetto 13mg Myrrh 100mg Squaw Vine 12mg Sarsaparilla 50mg Cramp Bark 10mg Buchu Leaves 25mg False Unicorn 10mg HERBALS Herbs have been used since creation to provide for our health and well being, for entire civilizations for that matter. The Bible tells us that we were given herbs for healing and cites many examples of their usage. Main stream modern technology is now finally beginning to focus on herbs and natural plant therapies. This is usually referred to in the literature today as phytotherapy. We probably will never understand many of the secrets regarding how many natural extracts and concentrates work, but that is no reason to not take advantage of their benefits. To our knowledge, Life Plus is the only company that manufactures and distributes the unique kinds of herbal based products we do by combining high quality herbs from all over the world with other synergistic nutrients known to work toward the same specific nutritional goals. These other synergistic nutrients include vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, bioflavonoids, phytonutrients, anti-oxidants and concentrated tissue nutrients in select products. By combining modern technology with classical herbal knowledge, the Life Plus herbal based products are second to none anywhere in the world. Women, more so than men, are troubled with dynamic changes of the hormone levels in their bodies from day to day and almost moment to moment. Actually, the female endocrine system is always in a state of change, beginning with the first day of each month's cycle and continuing through the last, then the cycle starts all over gain. The herbs in INNER MAGIC F are known for their value in helping to balance the female hormonal system nutritionally. FEMALE IMBALANCES Symptoms of female imbalances are certainly wide and varied. It is staggering to think that more than 70% of women over the age of 35 have had some kind of hysterectomy. Hysterectomy usually results in many sudden hormone changes. When the ovaries are removed, a woman is in instant menopause, a condition wherein the ovaries stop producing estrogen. When this occurs, the adrenals normally take up the slack. However, with most menopausal women, their adrenals have been under so much stress that the adrenals are exhausted. The Life Plus INNER MAGIC F formula, as its name suggests, is formulated for special nutritional support for women. INNER MAGIC F contains nutrients from twelve different herbs including Damiana, Cumin, Norwegian Kelp, Myrrh, Sarsaparilla, Buchu Leaves, Cayenne, Dong Quai, Saw Palmetto, Squaw Vine, Cramp Bark and False Unicorn. PHYTOZYME BASE INNER MAGIC F is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you have the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE INNER MAGIC F Most women find that INNER MAGIC F is valuable throughout the whole month, not just during that special time each month. The recommended dosage is two tablets twice a day, morning and evening. When special needs arise, more can be taken. Suggested Use: Two tablets two times a day preferably before meals. Product No: 0116 Package Size: 120 tablets $11.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-67IA012-000121-B028-114http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mmagicm.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222155 text/html 7134HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:22:11 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:43:07 GMTContent-length: 6950Content-type: text/html Take ADVANTAGE with synergistic herbs for men Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... INNER MAGIC M: Herbs for Men Each Tablet Supplies: Norwegian Kelp 150mg Saw Palmetto Extract 12.5mg Siberian Ginseng 100mg Yohimbe PE 30mg Myrrh 100mg Juniper Berries 25mg Fennel 75mg Gravel Root 20mg Parsley 60mg Cayenne 20mg Sarsaparilla (Smilax) 50mg Chlorophyll 10mg ESPECIALLY FOR MEN INNER MAGIC M is the male counterpart to INNER MAGIC E It is the most popular product of its kind on the market. While it is common knowledge that women are troubled with hormone imbalances, the same is true with men. We live in a world full of stress. Most men's work days are loaded with stressful situations. They are usually required to travel more, eat on the run, start early and stop late. Good nutrition often takes a back seat. These factors set them up for trouble. The male gonadal system is designed to help men handle these kinds of situations. INNER MAGIC M is the ideal way to supplement with herbs known to be nutritionally supportive of the male endocrine system. WHAT INNER MAGIC M DOES INNER MAGIC M contains a unique blend of special herbs to nutritionally support the proper metabolic activities of the primary glands of the male endocrine system: the adrenals, the pituitary and the testicles. Supporting the pituitary seems to help fight stress. The testicles produce testosterone, which is the hormone primarily responsible for the maintenance of the physical male sex characteristics. Testosterone works in men like estrogen works in women. If the production of testosterone decreases, sex drive is diminished and infertility can even result. It is also an important hormone in the conversion of fat to muscle tissue and seems to be associated with the more aggressive nature of most men. Low levels of testosterone in middle aged men have been shown to be at least partially responsible for lack of libido and general malaise. IMBALANCES Symptoms of male hormone imbalance are many and quite often overlooked. They include decreased sperm production, diminished sexual desire, impotency, nervousness, anxiety, mood changes, headache and loss of lean muscle mass. The male prostate gland is also important to fertility. It manufactures most of the fluids, buffers and enzymes in semen. By age 50, men have a 20% risk of developing an enlarged, or inflamed prostate and by the age of 60 the chances are better than 50%. The prostate gland lies around the part of the urethra where it is attached to the bladder. When male hormone levels decrease with age, minute tissue changes occur similar to some of the changes in women during menopause. The prostate usually enlarges and becomes more firm. It pushes against the bladder and restricts the urethra. Men with this problem usually have to urinate frequently and then only with difficulty. Because of restricted flow, the urine also becomes concentrated in the bladder, and irritation and infection can result. The Life Plus INNER MAGIC M formula, as its name suggests, is formulated for special nutritional support for men. Its unique formulation contains twelve special herbs chosen for their special synergistic nutritional effects. They include Norwegian Kelp, Siberian Ginseng, Myrrh, Fennel, Parsley, Sarsaparilla (Smilax). Saw Palmetto Extract, Yohimbe PE, Juniper Berries, Gravel Root, Cayenne and Chlorophyll. PHYTOZYME BASE INNER MAGIC M is formulated in the proprietary Life Plus PhytoZyme base, which contains a unique blend of over thirty natural concentrates of numerous valuable phytonutrients from plants. When you take Life Plus products, you receive the added benefit of receiving the numerous health supporting phytochemicals and other micronutrients contained in them. HOW TO TAKE INNER MAGIC M Most men find that INNER MAGIC M is a valuable specific male herbal supplement, no matter what their age. It is not just for later years. The usual recommended dosage is two tablets twice per day, morning and evening. When special needs arise, more can be taken. It is the ideal product for men to add to their TVM-49 daily multiple supplement regime to tailor it specifically as part of a male supplement program. Suggested Use: Two tablets two times a day preferably before meals. Product No: 0122 Package Size: 120 tablets $12.50 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit the Advantage! home page for more exciting Life Plus products! Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-68IA012-000121-B028-122http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mtest.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222203 text/html 14010HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:22:19 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:51:55 GMTContent-length: 13825Content-type: text/html Advantage Testimonials - Vitamins, Minerals, MelatoninDHEA, Skin Care Advantage Vitamin and Health Source Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... Testimonials from Our Customers Visit our Advantage Health & Vitamin Source for more exciting and healthful products! See how other people solved these health problems! Acne Arthritis Sinus and Headaches Attention Deficit Disorder Lack of Energy Sleep Problems Illness and Sickness Indigestion and Heartburn Infections Kidney Dialysis PMS MS Weight Loss ACNE After suffering for 19 years with acne, I stumbled upon the cure:Acidophilus (SALIVAREX) (among other friendly bacteria), but I wanted you to know that there is definitely a connection between acne and a deficiency of friendly bacteria.I intend to spread this information as far and wide as I can. Moderndermatologists are not using this info for their patients. This mustchange. All the best, Mark Y. ARTHRITIS I have had arthritis in my knees for about 8 years. It got so bad I had to take an early retirement on a medical disability. The doctor had me on the prescription Predizone (of course it has some nasty side effects). I have been taking the PROANTHENOLS OPC-85 for about 7 months now. I have more energy than I have had at anytime during the last three years. I used to have to take a nap once a day, I know longer need this as I have much more energy. I am able to walk much better now with virtually no pain. PROANTHENOLS OPC-85 has been a God send. James E. I am feeling a lot better myself since taking PROANTHENOLS OPC-85 . My arthritic leg has been feeling much better with less and less pain killer needed to function.I hope that I can share this wonderful product with others. I have been talking about our personal health results. John McC. I am 80 years old and have been frustrated and in pain for years now. Myarthritic fingers hurt terribly and were all deformed. I couldn't reallyeven close my hand. After using WONDER GEL, just a couple of days, they have already started to improve. Now they don'thurt any more and I can make a fist once again. You can bet i will never bewithout it! T.R.M. Pleasenat Plains, AR SLEEP PROBLEMS For many years, I have had problems sleeping. I would fall asleep andsleep throughout the night, but wake up feeling exhusted! It did not matterhow long I slept, I would never have much energy during the day, and neededfrequent naps. I then began taking Somniset, and almost immediately began to notice that I woke up feeling refreshed! It waslike being a kid again! I do not even get tired during the day anymore. Somniset works! Ed D. I had been taking a highly addictive sleeping medication called Xanaxfor over a year. I first started out on Xanax with only 2mg, however,by the time I was introduced to Life Plus I was taking 15 to 30mg ofXanax every night, and by 2:00 in the morning I'd be awake and done sleepingfor the night. When I got my Somniset, I started out with one, thentwo or more. I found that what worked best for me was three tablets 45minutes before I go to bed. I sleep all through the night, and wake in themorning refreshed and just raring to go. Somnisethas changed my life! Betty N., Washington ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER My son is thirteen years old and suffering from Attention Deficit Disorder.He had been on ritalin for seven years when we started him on Proanthenols Bio-Complex. He is now off Ritalin after one week of the Proanthenols Bio-Complex, andis doing tremendous. He had sever mood swings, and he no longer has them. I recommend this productto everyone I see! Russ L., South Dakota ENERGY Micro-Mins are marvelous! My energy level has increased. I have a heightened sense of well being. I'm sleeping. My appetite's reduced. It's amazing what the body does when it's given good nutrition. Thanks, Life Plus! Les C. I thought I would share with you some of my results on the Oxy-Gen Caps. I run for exercise, generally 30 to 50 miles per week. The third morning on Life Plus products, I had taken my Oxy-Gen Caps early before I started running. By the time I had passed the third or fourth mile, I thought I was on rocket fuel! I could not believe the improved energy and endurance that I had. But one thing in particular impressed me: I felt I had a clarity and a clearness of thought that I hadn't had for a long time. I have now been on Life Plus products for seven weeks, taking Proanthenols, Micro-Mins, TVM-49, ProtxII and others, but the Oxy-Gen Caps have really impressed me. Thanks for developing a superior product line.Stu R. I have been taking Micro-Mins for about three weeks now. I've noticed an increase in energy as well as an overall feeling of well being. I've lost five pounds (happily) because I keep busy and don't crave sweets! My family has commented again and again on how I am more upbeat , energetic and positive throughout the day. Micro-Mins are just absolutely marvelous! Judy T. ILLNESS/SICKNESS At Christmas my brothers and sisters, and their families had met at my parents. The next day and for several days thereafter one by one virtually everyone in my family had gotten sick, started vomiting and had various symptons of some virus. With a couple of exceptions: my mother, wife and myself. We had one thing in common, we had all been taking COMBAT from Life Plus. I continued to take it all winter and did not get one single cold. This is one great product. I now take it everyday. Jim S. INDIGESTION/HEARTBURN I personally know several people who have had bad stomach (indigestion) problems who the doctor had on an expensive prescription ($80.00 a bottle).Within one week of taking SUSTENASE they stopped taking their prescription.I had been seeing a doctor for severe stomach problems and indigestion,the doctor had been giving me this expensive prescription medicine. The medicine wasn't working very well as I was in severe discomfort. The doctor said there wasn't anything more he could do for me. Then I was introduced to SUSTENASE, this product has been a virtual miracle for me, as I no longer suffer from indigestion or heartburn. Now when I see ads on TV for indigestion and stomach remedies I laugh but I also get mad, as I feel these companies are conning the American public. These products advertised only mask the real problem which is improper digestion, and their remedy is to give you a product which prevents the stomach from producing what it is supposed to - stomach acid, which is needed for proper digestion. This is criminal, I believe every adult should take this product, it is phenomenol. Robert M. A woman in our church had been seeing a Doctor and getting prescriptions for her stomach problems. She took SUSTENASE for 1 week and has thrown her prescription medicine in the garbage. This is one excited woman. She commented "I ate Mexican food for the first time in three years". This is an excellent product for heartburn and indigestion. Antacids only relieve the symptoms - this product actually helps you to digest your food better. Mary T./P> INFECTIONS I`m a waitress and someone up here gave me a bottle of Colloidal Silver after I was told by my doctor that I had a serious viral infection. I used the product and went back to my doctor. He couldn`t believe it. I`m living proof. I know it helped save my life. Valerie G., North Dakota. We have had instant success with Colloidal Silver and immune compromised patients. A few examples are: Pink eye (topical) totally resolved in less than six hours; Re-current sinus infections (oral ingestion) resolved in eight days; Acute cuticle infections-(topical)- twenty four hours. Another major area in which we have improved our clinical results is in the area of bowel detoxification and dysbiosis.The Colloidal Silver has provided excellent removal of abnormal intestinal bacteria; also it has proved to be a great adjunct to our Candida albicans, Epstein Barr Virus and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome protocols. Dr. Evan M., Kansas. KIDNEY DIALYSIS In May of 1994 I started on Kidney Dialysis and had a real bad time of it.My sponsor introduced the Pycnogenols PROANTHENOLS OPC-85 to me and I spoke with my Doctor about it and he said I should not take it. I later saw a pharmicist discussing it on TV and I asked him about it, and he said it would help. I started taking it in January of 1995 and it put me "back in the saddle again"! Glenn D. MS My husband has had MS for 15 years and since taking the PROANTHENOLS OPC-85 the vice-like cramps he gets in his legs have been greatly diminished. He no longer gets headaches. He sleeps a lot sounder now because he doesn't have the leg jerks that kept waking him up. He also has more energy now. Donna S. PMS My wife has fallen in love with the PROANTHENOLS OPC-85 because she threw out all the pms stuff ( emprims, asprin, motrin, etc.). This amazing nutrient has made a new woman of her, and I am feeling a lot better myself since taking it. My arthritic leg has been feeling much better with less and less pain killer needed to function.I hope that I can share this wonderful product with others. I have been talking about our personal healthy results and have hung little flyersall over town. I also obtained some materials from Life Plus for distribution. John M. WEIGHT LOSS Hi, my name is Kathy . My husband and I have been using Shape Plus for about a month and a half now. It has really worked great for both of us. It helps curb our appetite and we don't get nervous or jumpy. My husband has lost 7 lbs and I have lost 5 lbs. Friends have begun to ask want we have been doing and we tell them we have been taking Shape Plus. It is a great product. Kathy and Larry K. SINUS and HEAD ACHES I can't take pills because I am pregnant, so WONDER GEL was fantastic for me because when I aplied it to my foreheadand down my neck, it got rid of my sinus headache and stiff neck. What arelief! I'll never be without it! C.L., Pangburn, NC Boy, if you have a headache, WONDER GEL sure getsrid of it. Now I can see why they call it WONDER GEL. C.B. Southside, AR Do you have a Life Plus story you'd like to share with others? Contact us at Advantage We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor. Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage!, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-69IA012-000121-B028-134http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/morder.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222218 text/html 12717HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:22:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:44:22 GMTContent-length: 12532Content-type: text/html Ordering from Advantage! Life Plus Distributors How to Order Choose Your Advantage NOW! The most important thing is our health... We've made ordering all of our quality products easy. You can either order by phone or on-line. It's that simple! Special Sales Event!! Buy 6 of any product and receive 1 FREE! Visit our home page for more exciting and healthful products and our monthly specials! Each month we feature a product as Buy 4 Get 1 FREE! Your satisfaction is always guaranteed with our 30 day money back guarantee! On-Line Ordering Show me how to order online now! To Order By Phone Call the following telephone number 1-800-572-8446 toll free within the US and Canada International customers should call US and then 1-501-698-2311 Tell the operator you would like to sign up as a member Give the operator the name and PIN ID# of the person who referred you.(Cristina Desimone - PIN ID #391144) The operator will give you your own Personal ID Number allowing you to purchase wholesale from Life Plus Tell the operator what you would like to order The operator will ask you for method of payment (Visa, MasterCard, etc.) Life Plus Price List 18.0023.7518.7511.0028.7552.5022.5023.5022.0026.5016.5026.0011.0025.0035.0041.507.0015.509.7536.0011.0039.0032.7525.7511.5011.0019.7542.506.0015.7516.507.0010.0011.5012.5012.7512.0012.0030.0013.7526.507.0027.0013.7512.5015.5024.5091.5045.5029.7515.0013.0019.2517.0046.5015.7518.0036.7522.0022.0040.5019.0019.0036.0017.7535.5025.0025.0011.0018.0051.0018.0017.0019.0019.5099.00129.00119.0059.0097.0018.5028.0029.5033.5029.007.00 Item Number Product Description Quantity/Weight Price (inUS $) 1931 Alko-Mar 60 Capsules 1952 Berry'd Treasure 33.5 fl oz 1010 CalMag Plus 180 Tablets 0113 Candy Cal 120 Tablets 4035 Cardio-Chelex 150 Tablets 4034 Cardio-Chelex 300 Tablets 1101 CataGesic 60 Tablets 1100 Catimune 60 Tablets 1102 Cat's Claw Forte Drops 2.0 fl oz. 1945 Colloidal Silver 4.0 fl oz 0188 Colodyne 10.7 oz Canister 0191 Colodyne 25.0 oz Canister 1902 Combat 60 Tablets 1925 Combat 180 Tablets 0212 Co-Q-10 Plus Roll On 3 fl oz 1012 Co-Q-10 Plus 60 Tablets 2617 Corrected Salt 6 oz 2618 Corrected Salt 26 oz 5014 DiuPlex 60 Tablets 2619 Ecology No. 1 180 Tablets 2620 Ecology No. 2 60 Tablets 2621 Ecology No. 3 4.5 oz 0211 Endocryn DHEA Roll On 3 fl oz 0210 Endocryn DHEA Tablets 90 tablets 4033 EPA Plus 90 Capsules 5018 Eye Formula 90 Tablets 1011 Food For Thought 60 Tablets 0150 Forever Young Tab 60 Tablets 0140 Hydro Mag 50 gm Packets 1117 Jatoba Tea 30 Tea Bags 1109 Jungle Ade 8 oz 0134 Inner Act 60 Tablets 5013 Inner Act 120 Tablets 0116 Inner Magic F 120 Tablets 0122 Inner Magic M 120 Tablets 0131 Life-N-Power 120 Lozenges 1942 Liver Plus Iron 60 Tablets 5016 Lung Formula 90 Tablets 1116 Lyprinol Capsules 50 Capsules 4029 Magnesium Plus 90 Tablets 2200 Micro-Mins 64 Capsules 3608 Nutri Totes 100 Totes 2201 Oxy-Gen Caps 64 Capsules 4024 Pancreas Formula 90 Tablets 5015 Paratox 90 Tablets 1949 Proanthenols OPC-85 20mg 60 Tablets 0197 Proanthenols OPC-85 50mg 60 Tablets 1946 Proanthenols OPC-85 50mg 240 Tablets 1950 Proanthenols OPC-85 HP 100mg 60 Tablets 0213 Progesterone Plus Roll On 3 fl oz 2615 Pro-Max 16 oz 2616 Pro-Max100 12.3 oz 1944 Prostate Formula 60 Tablets 1013 Protx II 60 Tablets 1014 Protx II 180 Tablets 1108 Rich 'N Green 100 Tablets 0170 Salivarex 30 Capsules 0173 Salivarex 90 Capsules 0103 Shape Plus 180 Tablets 0176 Somazyme 90 Tablets 0179 Somazyme 200 Tablets 0200 Somniset 90 Tablets 1920 Support Tabs 90 Tablets 1948 Support Tabs 180 Tablets 0182 Sustenase 90 Tablets 0185 Sustenase 210 Tablets 1104 Touchfire Hers Drops 2 fl oz 1103 Touchfire His Drops 2 fl oz 5017 Tranquilon 90 Tablets 1008 TVM-49 120 Tablets 1009 TVM-49 360 Tablets 4020 Vita-C-1000 150 Tablets 4017 Vita-E-Plus 90 Tablets 1914 Vita-Saurus 240 Tablets 1951 Wonder Gel 4 oz 2622 Ecology Pak 50 oz. 3607 FY Skin Care System 32 oz. 2625 maQ-Pak 54 oz. 1015 Synergy Pak 35 oz. 3609 Weight Mgmt Pak 68 oz. 3603 Emollient Cleanser 4 oz. 3611 Eye Gel 2 oz. 3604 Facial Perfecting Gel 1 oz. 3605 Day/Night Renewal Complex 2 oz. 3606 Body Perfecting Lotion 6.7 oz. 3610 Body Sponge 2 oz. Note: These are current prices and are subject to change without notice. Actual cost of shipping will be added to all orders and a $1.00 processing fee. Sales tax will be added to Arkansas residents and any other States that require mail order companies to remit sales tax by law. UPS SHIPPING CHARGE (Continental U.S. Only) Weight Amount 1 lb. (16 oz) $5.00 2 lbs. (32 oz.) $5.85 3 lbs. (48 oz.) $6.35 4 lbs. (64 oz.) $6.70 5 lbs. (80 oz.) $7.25 If you have any questions, please contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage Health and Vitamin Store is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor. Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-70IA012-000121-B028-144http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mbusn.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222228 text/html 9553HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:22:44 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:19:10 GMTContent-length: 9369Content-type: text/html Terrific home business opportunity in health industry Business Opportunity You can now make money in a home business opportunity from Life Plus just by referring all natural nutritional supplements that can improve both your health and your pocketbook. Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... Visit our home page for a complete listing of our healthful products! Diversifying your income makes more sense now than at any other time in history. But how are you going to do it? Part time jobs just don't pay enough and provide no opportunity for financial freedom. Advantage! is an independent distributor of Life Plus products and you can be too! With Life Plus, a company that has been in business for over fifty years manufacturing "doctor quality" leading edge nutritional supplements, you can finally enjoy financial freedom. All you do is make referrals and purchase at least $40 of Life Plus products or literature each month if you wish to collect royalties on the referrals. There is: No required inventory to buy No product to ship No money to collect. It can all be done with toll free numbers, credit cards and friendly service. It's called networking. Before you know it, the referrals begin building! We invite you to join us, tell friends about us and improve both your health and financial status at the same time. Here are some of the Life Plus benefits to you: COMPANY In business since 1936 Manufactures its own products American owned and operated Distributor friendly Debt free Pioneered many new concepts MARKET Increasing interest in wellness Many people use nutritional supplements A multi-billion dollar market and growing Steady repeat business Great opportunity for supplemental income Realistic wholesale pricing PRODUCTS Natural and health oriented Consumable and used daily Safe and effective Affordable Satisfaction guarantee policy High quality Unique synergistic formulas As natural as possible COMPENSATION PLAN Low $40 minimum to collect royalties Fair to all No group volume required Easily explained to others so your efforts can be duplicated 5% to 10% royalities on first six levels MAQ members receive an additional 20% bonus on their first level Infinity Bonus up to 6% beyond sixth level Bonus paid on literature Royalties and bonuses are "net" so there's no need to pay downline Bonuses paid 5th business day each month SIMPLICITY No sign up or hidden fees Easy telephone registration Easy to sponsor Company support 24 hour toll-free ordering (within U.S.A.) No inventory required Only actual shipping charges No extra charge for credit cards Automatic funds transfer available No charge for monthly reports No inventory requirements Easy program to explain to others IT'S EASY TO JOIN! It's easy to sign up as a Life Plus distributor. You can do it either by phone or online: BY PHONE: Call Life Plus at 1-800-572-8446 toll-free within the US and Canada or call the US and then 1-501-698-2311. Tell the friendly operator that you would like to become a new distributor and that your sponsor's name and PIN # is Ed Desimone PIN #279224. You will receive your own PIN # at that time. You do not have to purchase any product at this time. ONLINE: Go to our online order formand place an order for Life Plus products. In the message area, note that you are a new distributor and would like to get our FREE Starter Kit. You will receive confirmation of your order and your new PIN #. Although you do not have to place an order for products when you sign up as a distributor by phone, we recommend that you place your first $40 qualifying order at this time so that you can begin receiving bonuses immediately and so that you will receive your FREE New Member Welcome Pack from Life Plus. Here are some recommendations on what to order your first time: A GOOD ORDER: Products only. Place a sample order of the products that we feel would most help you. PROD# DISCRIPTION PRICE 0197 PROANTHENOLS 50mg - World's most potent Antioxident! $24 1008 TVM-49 - Multiple vitamin source! $17 ORDER NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 279224, Ed Desimone A BETTER ORDER: Products and product information. Get the information you need to tell othersabout Life Plus Products. PROD# DISCRIPTION PRICE 0197 SYNERGY PAK - Experience a more complete nutritonal program! (4 products & audio tape) $59 8000 COMPLETE SET OF DETAILED PRODUCT INFORMATION SHEETS $15 8001 PRODUCT OVERVIEW BOOKLETS (25 COUNT) $15 6012 VIDEO - COMPANY PRESENTATION - Excellent tool to introduce Life Plus to others! $6 ORDER NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 279224, Ed Desimone THE FAST START ORDER: Products, product information and business building information. Get a fast start in your business! PROD# DISCRIPTION PRICE 0197 maQ-Pak - ADVANCED SUPPLEMENTAL PROGRAM - Experience a complete nutritional program! (6 products) $119 8000 COMPLETE SET OF DETAILED PRODUCT INFORMATION SHEETS $15 8001 PRODUCT OVERVIEW BOOKLETS (25 COUNT) $15 8903 STEP ONE TRAINING GUIDE - Concise information on building your business! $4 8902 BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT PAK - 1 Video, 2 Audio tapes, Workbook. Build your downline FAST * $40 6012 VIDEO - COMPANY PRESENTATION - Excellent tool to introduce Life Plus to others! $6 * Note - Video and tapes by Bob Crisp, the man who built a $100 million/year MLMbusiness. Learn from a master! ORDER NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 279224, Ed Desimone Tell a few friends about Life Plus. Then have fun and enjoy the healthier and more successful lifestyle that your new Life Plus business can provide for you!! Because your friends will tell their friends who will tell their friends and so on and so on...... Good luck with your new business and remember that we are always here to help you be successful, because frankly, if you're successful, we're successful! We look forward to working with you and let us know as soon as you get your PIN # so that we can send you our FREE Starter Kit and help make you more money today! Find out how just by making simple Referrals, you can earn serious income! If you have any questions, please contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-71IA012-000121-B028-153http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/wonder.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222238 text/html 6602HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:22:52 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:58:11 GMTContent-length: 6418Content-type: text/html Advantage fast acting pain relief gel for headaches, backaches, arthritis & bursitis Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... . . WONDER GEL: Fast Acting, Pain Relieving Gel Each Application Supplies: Purified Water Menthol Peppermint Oil Cold Processes Aloe Vera Gel Triethanolamine Propylparaben Colloidal Gold Eucalyptus Oil Methylparaben Carbomer 940 Camphor EDTA Methyl Salicylate Carmine Formulated in a proprietary base of Rainforest Herbal Extracts of Copaiba Oil and Jaborandi. WONDER GEL is a fast acting, pain relieving, deep penetrating gel that is applied topically for the relief of aches and pains of stiff, swollen joints. It is great for the relief of pain caused by overworked muscles and inflammatory conditions such as arthritis or bursitis. It combines the restorative properties of Aloe Vera, Colloidal Gold, Methyl Salicylate, plus two fantastic herbal concentrates of Jaborandi and Copaiba--two amazing rainforest botanicals used by Amazonian people for thousands of years to minimize muscle and joint pain and fight inflammation. People are usually amazed at how fast it works and how effective it is. Amazingly, it is also great for headaches, sinus discomfort and back pain as well. WONDER GEL is used for almost anything you can imagine. It can be used by all ages and virtually every medicine cabinet in every home should have a jar of this pleasant, non-greasy, non-staining topical pain relieving gel. An important part of the Life Plus RAINFORCE special line of effective products, WONDER GEL is an ideal product to demonstrate reliable and fast effectiveness of the RAINFORCE product line. HEALING THE BODY AND THE LAND The people of the rainforest have used plants found deep in the jungle for centuries to enhance vitality and overall health. This ancient wisdom is now available through WONDER GEL and other unique Life Plus RAINFORCE products. They bring you the benefits of highly effective natural herbal and plant extracts, harvested ecologically to preserve the natural resources of the rainforest and its people. Financial contributions are made supporting improved economics and education of the indigenous people. Specific formulas are blended with other synergistic natural ingredients using current "state of the art" Life Plus technology, which results in fantastic, reliable results. UNLOCKING THE SECRETS OF THE RAINFOREST In addition to supporting athletic performance and quick recovery, the herbal ingredients in CATAGESIC have been used successfully by the indigenous tribes against symptoms of arthritis and rheumatism for centuries, In addition to the plants used for their analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties, the added benefits of other synergistic ingredients in WONDER GEL help provide the arthritis and bursitis sufferer with many beneficial effects. Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the rainforest, WONDER GEL, a leading Life Plus RAINFORCE product, provides ancient rainforest tribal secrets of topical pain relief, reduced inflammation and a general overall improvement in general health when applied as needed. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST All of the rainforest botanicals contained in WONDER GEL have been ecologically harvested by indigenous tribes to protect natural resources of the rainforest and its people. Education and a new income source from harvesting sustainable natural resources like the Copaiba Oil and Jaborandi herbal extract contained in WONDER GEL and other herbs contained in other Life Plus RAINFORCE products help provide an alternative to destroying our valuable rainforests. HOW TO USE WONDER GEL The ways to use WONDER GEL are as varied as the thousands of people using it, Simply apply it to the areas in need as you desire. When acute pain exists, usually applying it three or four times a day is best. Most people notice relief right away. Reduce the frequency of use as you can, It is totally non- toxic, non- greasy and pleasant to use. In addition to joint and muscle pain from conditions such as arthritis, don't forget to use it for other discomforts too like headaches, sinus discomfort, tiredness, etc. Avoid use around eyes, open wounds and mucous membranes. Product No: 1951 Package Size: 4 oz. $19.50 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Distributor, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-72IA012-000121-B028-165http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/catg.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222246 text/html 8976HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:23:01 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:16:18 GMTContent-length: 8792Content-type: text/html Advantage cat's claw (una de gato) improves athletic performance Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CATEGESIC: Cat's Claw (uña de gato), Synergistic Energy and Anti-Inflammatory Rainforest Herbs for Athletic Performance and Recovery Formula Each Tablet Supplies: Cat's Claw (Uncaria tomentosa) 4% Standardized Extract 200 mg Chuchuhuasi (Maytenus krukovit) 100 mg Suma (Pfaffia paniculata) 5% Standardized Extract 100 mg 350 mg of a unique proprietary blend of other synergistic rainforest herbs including Sarsaparilla (Smilax papyracea), Yerba Mate (Llex paraguayiensis), Muira Puama (Pfychopetalum olacoides), Tayuya (Cayaponia fayuya) and Iporuru (Alchornea castaneifolia). Formulated in a proprietary PhytoZyme base of special herbs, synergistic phytonutrient co-factors and plant enzymes for bioavailability. POWER OF CAT'S CLAW Cat's Claw, also referred to as "uña de gato", is the new North American leader in important medicinal plants and comes from the South American Peruvian Rainforest. Six oxindole alkaloids have been isolated in the inner bark of the plant and have been proven to provide a general boost to the immune system. Other alkaloids and phytochemicals (glycosides) present in Cat's Claw have been isolated and tested and are shown to provide pronounced natural anti-inflammatory benefits. As a true adaptogen with almost unlimited therapeutic applications, Cat's Claw has been called by experts as a "World Cluss Herb: a "Miracle Herb" and a "Sacred Herb of the Rainforest." Health care providers are now using it successfully with their arthritic patients for its anti-inflammatory and immune-stimulating properties. The alkaloid content of the Cat's Claw plant varies depending on quality. It ranges from 0.1% to 1.0% total alkaloids. Most Cat's Claw products contain as little as only 1 to 5 mg of alkaloids, which are actually bound to tannins. In Cats Claw bark, the alkaloids and tannins actually form a complex, which is not bioavailable without an acid to break it apart. The alkaloids contained in Life Plus CATAGESIC have been standardized, utilizing a proprietary process to not only contain 4% oxindole alkaloids but also break apart the alkaloid-tannin complex. Very importantly, this makes the alkaloids 100% bioavailable. Consequently, a full 8 mg of pure bioavailable oxindole alkaloids is contained in each CATAGESIC tablet. This is up to eight times more than other Cats Claw capsules sold today! SYNERGISTIC DYNAMIC RAINFOREST HERBS The principle rainforest herbs used for their synergistic effects during athletic training and recovery include Chuchuhuasi, Cat's Claw and Muira Puama because of their natural anti-arthritic, anti-rheumatic and anti-inflammatory properties. Chuchuhuasi may well become the next highly important rainforest plant to follow Cat's Claw in the newest rainforest discoveries. A major pharmaceutical company is developing newly discovered phytochemicals found in Chuchuhuasi bark, which are highly anti-inflammatory. The indigenous name of this huge tree translates to "trembling bark", which describes the indigenous tribes century long use of the Chuchuhuasi for arthritis and rheumatism and which led modern day researchers to discover its properties. Suma is another powerful herb, which is by far the most well-researched. Studies dating back to 1968 reveal that Suma enhanced muscle building without producing the negative hormonal side effects steroids are noted for. By 1976, Suma was labeled the "Russian Secret" when supplementation with Suma by the Russian Olympic team gave them the competitive edge in the 1976 Olympic games. CATAGESIC contains a new proprietary standardized extract of Suma, which provides 5% Ecdysterones and Saponins. These are active ingredients found in Suma, which are thought to provide its benefits. Yerba Mate and Muira Puama are strong tonics and nervous system fortifiers; Maca and Yerba MatC are dynamic energy tonics used throughout the rainforest to increase stamina and endurance. Sarsaparilla is used to support circulation, clear toxins and stimulate metabolism, while Iporuru nutritionally supports muscles and joints as well as provides natural analgesic. Cat's Claw and Sarsaparilla are both known for their oxygenating properties and Tayuya helps the body remove accumulating lactic acid in muscle tissue. Tayuya also has well-known analgesic properties while Suma and Maca have a natural nutritional muscle building effect. UNLOCKING THE SECRETS OF THE RAINFOREST In addition to supporting athletic performance and recovery, many of the plants in CATAGESIC have been used successfully by the indigenous tribes against symptoms of arthritis and rheumatism for centuries. In addition to the plants being used for their analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties, the added benefits of increased stamina and energy, plus overall muscle toning and growth, could provide the arthritis sufferer with many beneficial effects. Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the rainforest. CATAGESIC, one of the great Life Plus RAINFORCE products, provides the ancient rainforest tribal secrets of improved energy, stamina, endurance and muscle growth as well as the secrets of the rainforest in the prevention of arthritis. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST All botanicals contained in CATAGESIC have been ecologically harvested by indigenous tribes to protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Education and a new income source from harvesting sustainable natural resources, like the herbs contained in CATAGESIC and all Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying our valuable rainforests. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to help the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE CATAGESIC Take one tablet twice a day between meals. Drink plenty of water to assist the body's natural processes. During times of special need, two to three tablets, two to three times per day as needed. Product No: 1101 Package Size: 60 Tablets $22.50 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-73IA012-000121-B028-174http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/catm.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222256 text/html 8988HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:23:09 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:16:29 GMTContent-length: 8804Content-type: text/html Advantage immune supporting cat's claw (una de gato) Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CATIMUNE: Cat's Claw (uña de gato) Plus Other Synergistic Immune Supporting Rainforest Herbs Each Tablet Supplies: Cat's Claw (Uncaria tomentosa) 4% Standardized Extract 200 mg Pau d'Arco (Tabebuia heptaphylla) 3% Standardized Extract 100 mg Suma (Pfaffia paniculata) 5% Standardized Extract 100 mg Proprietary RAINFORCE Herbal Blend 300 mg from Maca (Lepidium meyeni), Sarsaparilla (Smilax papyracea), Chanca Piedra (Phyllanthus niuri) and Caraueja (Baccharis genistelloides). Formulated in a proprietary PhytoZyme base of special herbs, synergistic phytonutrient co-factors and plant enzymes for bioavailability. THE POWER OF CAT'S CLAW Cat's Claw, also referred to as "uña de gato" and "Sacred Herb of the Rainforest," is the new leader in naturally occurring immune-supportive agents. All Cat's Claw utilized in Life Plus products is of the highest quality and is harvested in the Peruvian Rainforest in a sustainable ecological friendly manner. Six oxindole alkaloids have been isolated from the inner bark of this wonderful plant and have been proven to provide a general boost to the immune system. These oxindole alkaloids also have a profound effect on the ability of white blood cells to engulf and digest harmful microorganisms and foreign matter. This natural process is called phagocytosis. Other alkaloids and phytochemicals present in Cat's Claw have been shown to provide natural support against many viri. When included in the diet, they naturally support normal blood pressure and help prevent inflammation as well as act as anti-mutagenic agents. The Cat's Claw in CATIMUNE is the highest quality available worldwide and is standardized to an alkaloid content of 4% utilizing a new proprietary process. This provides a full 8 milligrams of pure oxindole alkaloids per tablet - over 2 to 8 times more than standard Cat's Claw capsules sold today! Why settle for standard Cat's Claw capsules when you can get more from CATIMUNE, plus the added benefits and actions of the other synergistic Rainforest botanicals in this powerful immune formula. In addition to the standardized Cat's Claw extract, two more powerful standardized extracts are included, Pau d'Arco and Suma. These high quality standardized extracts guarantee the potency of the extracts and provide the highest amount of researched and documented beneficial phytochemicals available to provide an extremely potent and highly beneficial formula. FIVE-STEPS T0 BETTER IMMUNE FUNCTION The CATIMUNE formula is based on ancient and traditional methods employed by the indigenous tribes of the Rainforest. This, combined with the technology and science of today, guarantees potent standardized extracts. Using highly potent standardized extracts like Cat's Claw containing 4% oxindole alkaloids and Suma containing 5% ecdysterones, plus saponins to increase our natural defense mechanisms is just the first, but an important step. The second step is to provide herbs and herbal extracts with natural anti-viral, anti-bacterial and anti-parasitic actions that kill viri and bacteria directly. Cat's Claw and Pau d'Arco have been traditionally used for this purpose. Modern science has shown them to be highly effective, which validates their indigenous use. Pau d'Arco's anti-viral properties have been attributed to a set of phytochemicals called naphtoquinones and CATIMUNE provides a guaranteed potency of 3% of them in each tablet. These important components in standardized extract form guarantees the potency and benefits of the herbal ingredients in CATIMUNE. The lymphatic system, much like a second circulatory system, is responsible for moving infection fighting killer cells from the blood stream into all other body cells There is no pump to control lymphatic fluid flow like the heart does in the blood circulatory system. Lymphatic flow depends on the contraction of muscles close to the walls of the lymphatic vessels when we move. In other words, the lymphatic vessels are "massaged," which causes the lymphatic fluid (lymph) to flow. Carqueja and Sarsaparilla, two herbs indigenous to the rainforest, are included in CATIMUNE to support this important third step. The immune system's lymphocyte killer cells and the resulting debris from their work is contained in the bloodstream. The fourth step provided by several herbs in CATIMUNE, is to nutritionally support the circulatory system to help them find and attack invading bacteria. Then, it is important to flush the resulting debris and toxins from the bloodstream. Carqueja is well-known in tribal medicine for its circulation and blood fortifying abilities. Sarsaparilla and Pau d'Arco have also been used for centuries as blood detoxifiers. The final step is to detoxify both the liver and kidneys to cleanse them completely. Chanca Piedra, also called "stone-breaker", is world renown for its liver, kidney and gall bladder detoxifying benefits and is included in CATIMUNE for this benefit. HEALTH FROM THE RAINFOREST Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the rainforest. CATIMUNE, one of the great Life Plus RAINFORCE products, provides ancient Rainforest tribal secrets to improved immune function using an ancient 5-step formula and specific guaranteed potency botanicals, which have been used for centuries for their wealth of benefits in supporting immune function. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST All botanicals contained in CATIMUNE have been ecologically harvested by indigenous tribes to protect natural resources of the rainforest and its people. Education and a new income source from harvesting sustainable natural resources, like the herbs contained in the Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying our valuable rainforests. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE CATIMUNE Take one tablet twice daily on an empty stomach. Drink plenty of water to assist absorption. During times of special need or when exposed to bacterial or viral infections, take from two to three tablets, two or three times a day. Product No: 1100 Package Size: 60 Tablets $23.50 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-74IA012-000121-B028-182http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/catf.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222304 text/html 10643HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:23:19 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:15:08 GMTContent-length: 10458Content-type: text/html Advantage concentrated cat's claw (una de gato)  Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... CATS CLAW FORTE DROPS: Concentrated Cat's Claw (Uña de gato) Drops Each Dropperful (30 drops) Supplies: 10 mg of 100% Bioavailable Oxindole Alkaloids from 100% Pure Cat's Claw (Uncaria tomentosa) Inner Bark Specially Formulated In Wildcrafted Honey and Organic Apple Vinegar These specially concentrated drops utilize new and proprietary methods of extracting, concentrating and maximizing the biovailability of the active natural phytochemicalsfound in the uña de gato rainforest plant's inner bark with pure, organic ingredients. No alcohol, glycerin or glycols are used. The final preparation contains no artificial ingredients, additives, preservatives or stabilizers. THE POWER OF CAT'S CLAW Cat's Claw, also referred to as "uña de gato" and "Sacred Herb of the Rainforest," is the new leader in naturally occurring anti-inflammatories and immune-supportive agents. All Cat's Claw utilized in Life Plus products is of the highest quality and is harvested in the Peruvian Rainforest in a sustainable ecological friendly manner. Six oxindole alkaloids have been isolated from the inner bark of this wonderful plant. These oxindole alkaloids have been proven to provide a general boost to the immune system as well as have a profound effect on the ability of white blood cells to engulf and digest harmful microorganisms and foreign matter. This natural process is called phagocytosis. Other alkaloids and phytochemicals present in Cat's Claw have been shown to provide natural support against many viri. When included in the diet, they naturally insure normal blood pressure and help prevent inflammation, plus act as anti-mutagenic agents. Life Plus CATS CLAW FORTE Drops contain the highest quality uña de gato available worldwide and is standardized. As a true daptogen with almost unlimited therapeutic applications, Cat's Claw has been called by experts as a "World Class Herb," a "Miracle Herb" and a "Sacred Herb of the Rainforest." Health care providers are now using it successfully with their patients in the prevention of many conditions such as arthritis, cancer, AIDS, Crohn's Disease, viral infections, respiratory infections, allergies, herpes, prostrate problems, lupus, Epstein Parr, rheumatism, chronic fatigue syndrome, PMS, diabetes and a variety of stomach and bowel disorders. MAXIMIZED BIOAVAILABLITY Dr. Klaus Keplinger's group in Austria are, by far, the most knowledgeable in the subject of Cat's Claw. They have researched Cat's Claw and its extraction methods for over fifteen years. The following is quoted from an English translation from some of Keplinger's published information to Doctors and Pharmacists. Quoted from an English translation of "Radix Uncaria Tomentosae: Informative Literature by Klaus Keplinger" by the title of "Der Krallendorn Tee": "The active substances in the Cat's Claw Tea are alkaloids, which occur in the plant and its watery extract as a complex bound to tannins. In this form, only little of them can be activated. The complexes get split by the acidic milieu of the stomach; the alkaloids get transformed into their hydrochloride form and, in this way, get well absorbed." It is well known that plants containing both alkaloids and tannins form complexes that Keplinger refers to which eliminate their bioavailability. Therefore, any health promoting benefits of these phytochemicals are not realized because they are not absorbed. Many herbalists will not combine different plants with active constituents of both alkaloidal and/or tannic forms in a herbal formula for this reason. Many Cat's Claw extracts are dark red to dark reddish-brown and consumers incorrectly believe that "the darker the color, the more concentrated the extract." This is not true! A darker Cat's Claw extract means more tannin is present and beneficial alkaloids are locked up with tannins, which have formed a non-bioavailable and poorly absorbed complex. When a concentrated liquid herbal extract is taken by mouth, the active ingredients are absorbed in the mouth, throat and upper stomach and very little reaches the lower stomach and the stomach acid. Consumers believe that sublingual absorption of these extracts will expedite the active constituents to become absorbed more quickly into the bloodstream. However, with these other high tannin extracts this is not correct. The sublingual absorption of Cat's Claw alkaloid-tannin complexes greatly reduces bioavailability and the benefits and desired results that the alkaloids can provide. CATS CLAW FORTE Drops are very different than all other liquid extracts. In addition to developing and utilizing a proprietary extraction method, it utilizes organic apple vinegar in place of water or alcohol. This natural acid releases the alkaloids from the tannins and very little tannin is extracted. This makes the extracted alkaloids 100% bioavailable, which can be evidenced in the light golden color of Life Plus CATS CLAW FORTE Drops. For this reason also, the assayed alkaloid content of CATS CLAW FORTE Drops is 4-6 times higher than other available water/glycerin or alcohol extracts, which for the most part aren't bioavailable, and provides 10 milligrams of pure bioavailable oxindole alkaloids per 30 drops. Using vinegar in the process not only releases the alkaloids from the tannins, it actually extracts more alkaloids. NEW PROCESS - SYNERGISTIC EFFECT The immune system is equally involved in many other protective processes in the body. These include its response to allergy producing substances, controlling the rate and aspects of aging, protection from free radicals and protection against degenerative diseases such as arthritis, cancer, arteriosclerosis and others. Probably the most well understood and studied is allergies and cancer. Nutritionally supporting the immune system with natural substances like alkoxyglycerols has much more value than just helping the body fight off infections. HEALTH FROM THE RAINFOREST Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the rainforest tribes. CATS CLAW FORTE Drops, of the great Life Plus RAINFORCE products, reveals the ancient secrets to improved immune function, preventing inflammation and supporting energy. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST The herbal extracts in CATS CLAW FORTE Drops have been ecologically harvested using indigenous tribes to protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Only the alkaloid-rich inner bark is utilized. The alkaloids and phytochemicals in the inner bark are almost identical to those found in the root of Cat's Claw and harvesting this way preserves the plant and provides for the future of the rainforest. Life Plus does not endorse harvesting Cat's Claw root and endangering our future supply of this important plant. Providing education and a new income source derived from harvesting sustainable natural resources, including plants found in Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying this valuable resource. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW T0 USE CATS CLAW FORTE DROPS Take one dropperful (30 drops) once or twice a day. During times of special need, dosages can be increased to two dropperfuls two to three times per day. Each dropperful contains approximately 30 drops. Each 2 ounce bottle of CATS CLAW FORTE Drops contains approximately 60 dropperfuls. For maximum absorption and bioavailibility, do not dilute in water or juice. Product No: 1102 Package Size: 2 Fluid oz. $22.00 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-75IA012-000121-B028-191http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/thers.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222311 text/html 8863HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:23:27 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:57:44 GMTContent-length: 8679Content-type: text/html Enhance her sexual desire with rainforest herbs! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... TOUCHFIRE HERS: Drops for Women Enhancing Sexual Desire Each Dropperful (30 drops) Contains: Liquid Herbal Extracts Of: Chuchuhuasi (Maytenus krukovit) Catuaba (Juniperis brasiliensis) Damiana (Turnera aphrodisiaca) Suma (Phaffia paniculata) Maca (Lepidium meyenii) Sarsaparilla (Smilax papyracea) Abuta (Cissampelos pareira) This special concentrated liquid extract utilizes new and proprietary methods of extracting, concentrating and preserving the active phytochemicals and plant sterols found in these rainforest botanicals. TOUCHflRE HERS Drops contains alcohol, which is vital to this process. EXCLUSIVELY FOR WOMEN From the dawn of our existence, man has continued on many quests--the quest for fire, magic potions and others. No quest has been so consistent throughout recorded history as our search for ways to stimulate sexual desire and to intensify sexual satisfaction. TOUCHFIRE HERS Drops was developed exclusively for women and contains a synergistic blend of herbal extracts from the Amazon Rainforest. These plants have been used for centuries by the indigenous people of the rainforest. Stimulating female sexual desire is much more complex than stimulating male sex drive because a woman's focus and mental state plays a much larger role. The ability to relax, unwind and shut out the stress of the day in order to focus more fully on the sexual experience is just as important as increasing desire. For this reason, several RAINFORCE botanicals are included in the TOUCHFIRE HERS Drops, which have a documented history of use in enhancing mental acuity and focus, reducing stress, increasing focus, and acting as a general tonic and relaxant to provide these types of benefits. Hormonal imbalances, cycles and fluctuations can cause nervousness, stress, irritability, mood swings and even depression in many women. Balancing these many hormones is a key factor in supporting a woman's natural sexual drive. Botanicals well known for their hormonal balancing ability specifically for women play another key role in this formula so that women and their partners are not at the mercy of these cyclical patterns or problems. With these two important areas addressed, rainforest herbs used by the indigenous tribes to increase sexual desire, enhance skin sensations and act as sexual stimulants are contained in TOUCHFIRE HERS to provide synergistic and overall effectiveness. LONG HISTORY OF DYNAMIC EFFECTS Chuchuhuasi and Catuaba are the best known and most famous sexual stimulants of many tribes throughout the Peruvian Rainforest. Their sexual stimulating and tonic effects are legendary in this regard. Maca is cultivated high in the Andes Mountains in Peru where it has been utilized for centuries to increase sexual desire and fertility, increase stamina and endurance and promote mental clarity. Damiana with its ancient reputation as a sexual stimulant also acts as an antidepressant and tonic to both the central nervous and hormonal systems. Suma, called "Brazilian Ginseng" has been used for centuries to combat fatigue and balance female hormones in cases of frigidity and impotency. Sarsaparilla has a worldwide reputation and history dating back to the 1600's as a reliable, sexual stimulant. In addition, Abuta is known throughout Amazonia as a "midwives herb," employed specifically for women as a uterine tonic and relaxant as well as to increase sexual desire. HEALTH FROM THE RAINFOREST The rainforest plants in TOUCHFIRE HERS Drops contain vital phytochemicals and phytosterols, which nutritionally support the entire female sexual system, hormonal system, as well as the nervous system. The indigenous people of the Amazon and rainforest regions have used these specific botanicals for centuries, not only as female tonics and sexual enhancers, but as tribal medicine to fight reduced fertility and hormonal imbalances, including menopause. Some have even been used in marriage and fertility ceremonies for decades. Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the rainforests of the world. TOUCHFIRE HERS, one of the great Life Plus RAINFORCE products, provides the ancient rainforest tribal secrets supporting the health of women by helping to increase their sexual desire as well as helping to naturally and nutritionally balance hormone levels. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST All botanicals in TOUCHFIRE HERS have been ecologically harvested by indigenous tribes to protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Education and a new income source derived from harvesting a sustainable natural resource like the herbs found in TOUCHFIRE HERS and all Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying our valuable rainforests. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE TOUCHFIRE HERS TOUCHFIRE HERS Drops is furnished with a dropper. One dropperful contains approximately 30 drops. For best results, place 30 to 40 drops in two to three ounces of water or juice and take on an empty stomach. Used as an occasional aid to increase female sexual desire, take 30 to 40 drops one or two hours before intimate activity. Most women take TOUCHFIRE HERS Drops on more of a routine basis. If you have special needs due to stress or lack of sex drive, take 30-40 drops twice a day for a minimum of 30 days for maximum benefit. Many women continue with this twice-a-day dosage on an ongoing basis. However, you may try taking TOUCHFIRE HERS once a day after the initial month. Each woman must adjust according to her needs. TOUCHFIRE HERS contains alcohol, which must be used for extracting and preserving the active phytochemicals found in the rainforest herbs contained in TOUCHFIRE HERS. If you are sensitive to alcohol, place the recommended dosage in 2 to 3 ounces of hot or near-boiling water and let cool to lukewarm before taking; the alcohol will quickly evaporate. Product No: 1104 Package Size: 2 Fluid Oz. $25.00 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-76IA012-000121-B028-204http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/this.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222332 text/html 9344HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:23:34 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:57:55 GMTContent-length: 9160Content-type: text/html Enhance his sexual desire with rainforest herbs! Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... TOUCHFIRE HIS: Drops for Men to Enhance Sexual Desire Each Dropperful (30 drops) Contains: Liquid Herbal Extracts Of: Muira puama (Potency Wood) Ptychopetalum olacoides Catuaba Juniperis brasiliensis Damiana Turnera aphrodisiaca Sarsaparilla Smilax papyracea Nettle Root Urtica dioica EXCLUSIVELY FOR MEN TOUCHFIRE HIS Drops was developed exclusively for men and contains five powerful, high-potency herbal extracts from the Amazon Rainforest that have been used for centuries to increase male sexual desire as male tonics and to support male testosterone levels. The key ingredient of this dynamic new formula is a highly concentrated extract of an indigenous rainforest plant called Muira puama (also known as Potency Wood). Recent clinical research has shown an herbal extract of Muira puama to be highly effective in over 62% of 362 men studied in increasing libido and in successfully treating organic and psychogenic-related impotency. Compared to a clinically established effectiveness rate of only 34% for the only available prescription drug for impotency and lack of sexual desire, these are significant new findings. The other natural botanical extracts in TOUCHFIRE HIS work synergistically with Muira puama to naturally calm nervous tension and stress, nutritionally support male hormone levels, act as tonics to the prostrate and more importantly they increase sexual desire for men through increased bioavailable testosterone. AGING AND IMPOTENCY Men are capable of retaining their sexual virility well past their 80's. Although impotency is thought to affect over 25% of men over the age of 50, many times it is only temporary and can be reversed with the proper nutritional support. Today, an estimated 10 to 20 million men suffer from erectile dysfunction or some type of organic impotency, and organic causes of impotency account for approximately 90% of all cases in men over 50. This number is expected to increase dramatically as the median age of the population increases. In a 1986 clinical study, it was documented that actual testosterone production doesn't generally decrease as men age, but the amount of free circulating testosterone does diminish as more gets bound to the albumin and becomes unavailable for the body's use. These changes appear to begin by middle age and happen during a natural chemical process called ''sex-hormone-binding-globulin" or ''SHBG''. Other researchers believe that the increase in SHBG is a major contributing factor in prostate disorders, impotency and a decline in sex drive. New European research reported in 1995 reveals that an extract of Nettle Root can interfere with this SHBG binding process by almost l0-fold. LONG HISTORY OF DYNAMIC EFFECTS Muira puama has long been valued by the Peruvian and Brazilian Indians to increase sexual desire in men, and as a tonic for the nervous system. This has been documented in books written as early as 1930. This long history and substantial documentation has led current researchers like Dr. Waynberg to clinically evaluate it's effectiveness as a sexual stimulant and a possible treatment for impotency. Catuaba, the most famous of all Brazilian sexual enhancing plants, has been so highly regarded as a male libido enhancer and sexual stimulant that the Tupi Indians have praised it's wonders in many songs for generations. Damiana has such an ancient reputation that it was even carried over to its botanical name, Turnera aphrodisiaca. After centuries of use, renown herbalists like David Hoffman, now believe that its alkaloids could have a testosterone-like action. Sarsaparilla has a worldwide reputation and history of use dating back to the 1600's as an aphrodisiac and male tonic. It contains at least 9 documented plant steroids, several of which are only found in Sarsaparilla. Nettle Root has been shown to increase free floating testosterone levels, and increased testosterone is a well documented natural libido enhancer. HEALTH FROM THE RAINFOREST The rainforest plants in the TOUCHFIRE HIS Drops contain vital phytochemicals and phytosterols, which nutritionally support the entire male sexual hormonal system as well as the nervous system. The indigenous people of the Amazon and rainforest regions have used these specific botanicals for centuries, not only as male tonics and sexual enhancers, but also as tribal medicine to fight reduced fertility and male hormonal imbalances, especially lowered testosterone levels. Some have even been used in marriage and fertility ceremonies for decades. Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the rainforests of the world. TOUCHFIRE HIS, one of the great Life Plus RAINFORCE products, provides the ancient rainforest tribal secrets supporting the health of men by helping to increase their sexual desire as well as helping to naturally and nutritionally balance hormone levels. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST All botanicals in TOUCHFIRE HIS have been ecologically harvested by indigenous tribes to protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Education and a new income source derived from harvesting a sustainable natural resource like the herbs found in TOUCHFIRE HIS and all Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying our valuable rainforests. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE TOUCHFIRE HIS TOUCHFIRE HIS Drops is furnished with a dropper. One dropperful contains approximately 30 drops. For best results, place 30 to 40 drops in two to three ounces of water or juice and take on an empty stomach. Used as an occasional aid to increase male sexual desire, take 30 to 40 drops one or two hours before intimate activity. Most men take TOUCHFIRE HIS Drops on a more routine basis. If you have special needs due to stress or lack of sex drive, take 30-40 drops twice a day for a minimum of 30 days for maximum benefit. Many men continue with this twice-a-day dosage on an ongoing basis. However, you may try taking TOUCHFIRE HIS once a day after the initial month. Each man must adjust according to his needs. TOUCHFIRE HIS contains alcohol, which must be used for extracting and preserving the active phytochemicals found in the rainforest herbs contained in TOUCHFIRE HIS. If you are sensitive to alcohol, place the recommended dosage in 2 to 3 ounces of hot or near-boiling water and let cool to lukewarm before taking; the alcohol will quickly evaporate. Product No: 1103 Package Size: 2 Fl. Oz. $25.00 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-77IA012-000121-B028-213http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/index.html 207.137.75.68 19970216222341 text/html 14461HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:23:57 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:16:51 GMTContent-length: 14276Content-type: text/html Advantage Vitamin and Health Source - vitamins , minerals, melatonin, dheaDHEA, skin care Advantage Vitamin and Health Source Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... In the fast paced world in which we live, it is vital that we take everyADVANTAGE when it concerns our health! VITAMINS, MINERALS, ANTIOXIDANTS, MELATONIN, SKIN CARE, STRESS & WEIGHT MANAGEMENT, DHEA Here at Advantage, we make it easy for you to shop for nutritional supplements! JustCLICK on the high-lighted name of the product, and you will see a completedescription and information on ordering. What can be more simple? New page lists products by disease or problem! TOP SELLING PRODUCTS Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA - The Greatest Nutritional Breakthrough of our Times! Proanthenols Bio-Complex Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger. Stops Degenerative Diseases in Their Tracks! Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution - Acts Like an Antibiotic - WITHOUT Side Effects! Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients. Get RESTFUL Sleep! Micro-Mins Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals in Convenient Capsule Form Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's! Natural Relief for Sufferers of Arthritisand Joint Pain! Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 VITAMINS TVM-49 Iron Free Multiple Vitamins & Minerals Vita-C-1000 Timed-Release Buffered Vitamin C with Bioflavonoids Vita-E-Plus Natural Water Soluble Vitamin E Vita Saurus Children's Chewable Vitamins & Minerals Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne MINERALS Micro-Mins Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals in Convenient Capsule Form CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium ANTIOXIDANTS Proanthenols Bio-Complex Potent Antioxidant & Free Radical Scavenger Protx II Antioxidant Protector Nutrients Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Somazyme Active Enzymes for the Whole Body Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne WEIGHT MANAGEMENT Shape Plus Herbal Appetite Suppresant Pro-Max The Worlds Best Protein & Complex Carbohydrate Powder Pro-Max 100 100% Pure Vegetable Protein Powder Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA DiuPlex Natural Herbal Diuretic Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus RAINFOREST BASED PRODUCTS We have found the secret ADVANTAGE of a healthier world living in the rainforest!Try our new RAINFORCE line of products, and reap thebenefits of the rainforest while preserving it for future generations! NATURAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY Lyprinol Marine Lipid Complex Rich in ETA's. Natural Relief for Sufferers of Arthritisand Joint Pain! ANTI-AGING Endocryn DHEA Real DHEA - The Greatest Nutritional Breakthrough of our Times! Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Forever Young Emollient Cleanser Removes Surface Material Forever Young Facial Perfecting Gel Recontours Your Facial Skin Forever Young Day/Night Renewal Complex Continuous Protection & Restoration for Your Face Forever Young Body Perfecting Lotion Moisturizes, Protects & Restructures Your Body Forever Young Body Sponge Massages Your Body As You Bathe Forever Young Skin Care System FY Emollient Cleanser, FY Facial Perfecting Gel, FY Day/Night Renewal Complex, FY Body Perfecting Lotion & Body Sponge NATURAL ANTIBIOTIC Colloidal Silver All Natural Anti-Microbial Solution MELATONIN Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients COLON ECOLOGY, FIBER & HERBAL LAXATIVE Ecology No. 1 Colon Ecology Ecology No. 2 Colon Ecology Ecology No. 3 Colon Ecology Colodyne Soluble Fiber & Bulk Supplement Inner ActHerbal Laxative Sustenase Two Phase Digestive Enzyme Salivarex L-Salivarius & Other Beneficial Micro-Flora Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne STRESS MANAGEMENT Tranquilon Natural Herbal Relaxing Aid Support Tabs Stress Formula "Par Excellence" CalMag Plus Calcium & Magnesium (1:1 Ratio) Candy Cal Great Tasting Chewable, Calcium Complex Hydro-Mag Multiple Source Magnesium Magnesium Plus Multiple Source Magnesium Tablets Somniset Melatonin & Synergistic Nutrients maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne MENTAL ALERTNESS & ENERGY BOOSTERS Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain Life-N-Power High Energy Complex Lozenge Co-Q-10 Plus Hi Potency Co-Enzyme Q-10 Liver Plus Iron Iron & Folic Acid & Co-Factors Oxy-Gen Caps Stabilized Anaerocidal Atomic Oxygen HEALTHY SALT Corrected Salt Pleasant Tasting Balanced Condiment IMMUNE SUPPORTING NUTRIENTS Alko-Mar Immune Supporting Alkoxyglycerols Combat Immune Supporting Nutrients Cardio-Chelex Chelating Preventive Nutrients Paratox Amino Acids & Herbal Detoxifiers maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne HEALTHY BODY ORGANS Prostate Formula Herbs & Other Nutrients for Prostate Eye Formula Eyebright Herb & Other Nutrients Pancreas Formula Herbs & Enzymes for the Pancreas Lung Formula Herbal Nutrients for the Lungs Food For Thought Special Nutrients for the Brain EPA PLUS Omega-3 Concentrate FOR WOMEN ONLY Progesterone Plus- Natural progesterone plus pregnenolone which increases female libido, improves skin, prevents hair thinning and encourages fat burning. Inner Magic F Synergistic Herbs for Women Forever Young Tablets Beauty From Within Forever Young Emollient Cleanser Removes Surface Material Forever Young Facial Perfecting Gel Recontours Your Facial Skin Forever Young Day/Night Renewal Complex Continuous Protection & Restoration for Your Face Forever Young Body Perfecting Lotion Moisturizes, Protects & Restructures Your Body Forever Young Body Sponge Massages Your Body As You Bathe Forever Young Skin Care System FY Emollient Cleanser, FY Facial Perfecting Gel, FY Day/Night Renewal Complex, FY Body Perfecting Lotion & Body Sponge FOR MEN ONLY Inner Magic M Synergistic Herbs for Men Prostate Formula Herbs & Other Nutrients for Prostate MEGA PAKS Synergy Pak Foundational Nutrition Program: TVM-49, Protx II, Sustenase & Colodyne maQ-Pak Advanced Nutritional Program: Cardio-Chelex, Support Tabs, Micro-Mins, Proanthenols, Sustenase & Colodyne Ecology Pak Ecology #1, Ecology #2, Ecology #3 & Colodyne Forever Young Skin Care System FY Emollient Cleanser, FY Facial Perfecting Gel, FY Day/Night Renewal Complex, FY Body Perfecting Lotion & Body Sponge Weight Management Pak Effective, Easy Weight Loss Program: PRO-MAX, Colodyne, Endogen, Support Tabs & Shape Plus Read These Exciting Testimonials From our Valued Customers! Order Now and Choose Your Advantage! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Learn how you too can become a Life Plus distributor and help others to living a healthier and longer life! Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-78IA012-000121-B028-226http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/rgreen.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222355 text/html 10071HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:24:06 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:56:44 GMTContent-length: 9887Content-type: text/html advantage super green algae: chlorella, spirulina & hydra green Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... RICH'N GREEN: Super Green Algae Plus Special Rainforest Phyto-Concentrates Two Tablets Contain: Cold Processed Concentrated Phytonutrients 1070 mg from: Super Green Algae 120 mg Chinese Chlorella, Spirulina and Hydra Green Sprouts 100 mg Barley Grass Juice and Wheat Grass Juice Rainforest Vegetables 510 mg Broccoli, Cauliflower, Beets, Kale, Green Peas, Carrots, Spinach and Green Pepper Herbs 180 mg Parsley, Cassia, Garlic, Lemon Grass, Mustard Seed, Celery Seeds and Cayenne Mushroom Extract 80 mg Maitake and Reishi Mushrooms and Soy Lecithin Plant Enzyme Complex 80 mg Formulated in the proprietary PhytoZyme base of special herbs synergistic phytonutrient co-factors and plant enzymes for bioavailability. EMERGING AWARENESS As society develops new awareness of the importance of natural foods we understand why we should eat them. In the fast-paced lives we live, it is difficult to consume the recommended seven cups of fruits and vegetables every day. It is even difficult or impractical for many people to obtain them. As our scientific community learns more about our foods, they are also learning what they contain. It is an almost everyday occurrence in national news about some researcher finding a new substance in broccoli, cauliflower, carrots or whatever. The news expounds these new "finds" are linked to cancer, birth defects, asthma, arthritis, etc. These substances have been in our foods all along but we are just beginning to learn about them. One thing is for sure, our bodies, and the trillions of cells that make it up, were designed to have them to metabolize properly, stay healthy and live a productive life. Without reasonable amounts of them, our cells and organs simply could not function properly. When this happens, we see signs of deficiencies such as chronic infections, improper healing of wounds, lack of energy, unbalanced blood chemistry, nervousness and anxiety, lack of mental acuity and all kinds of degenerative diseases. "PHYTO" Our digestive system is efficient in digesting and absorbing nutrients from fruits and vegetables. It is now understood that we obtain the basic three food groups from vegetables, that is fats, proteins and carbohydrates. We need them for tissue repair, growth and development and the production of hormones, enzymes and other substances. We also get energy in the form of calories from them. A whole new area has come into view the last few years--what the scientific community calls "phytochemicals." In the nutrition industry, we call them "phytonutrients." Actually, both terms are correct. They are chemicals and also nutrients. "Phyto" is the term used in botany, herbal science and in the scientific and natural health communities to label any substance coming from a plant. The term actually comes from the Greek word phyton, meaning "a plant." So then, phytonutrients are nutritional substances that come from plants. SPECIFIC PHYTONUTRIENTS Numerous phytonutrients have been identified and isolated. Yet common sense tells us that there are many more. A partial listing of some of them includes allyl sulfides in garlic, onions, leeks, chives and shallots; capsaicin in chili peppers; genistein in soy beans; polyphenol catechins in green and black teas; camosol in rosemary; lignans in flaxseed; glycerrhizin in licorice root; limonenes in citrus fruits; sulforaphane in broccoli, cauliflower, brussels sprouts, turnips and kale; lycopene in tomatoes, red grapefruit, watermelon and apricots; alpha-carotene in carrots and seaweed; beta-carotene in carrots, squash, apricots, peaches, red, yellow and dark green vegetables; lutein/zeaxanthin in yellow squash, spinach, collards, mustard and turnip greens; polyphenols (bioflavonoids) in red grapes and wine, artichokes, strawberries and blueberries, anthocanins in cranberries and currents; gingerol in gingeroot; phytic acid in rye, wheat, rice, lima beans, sesame seeds, peanuts and soybeans; phenethyl isothiocyanates in horseradish, mustard, cabbage and turnips; saponins in kidney beans, chickpeas and lentils; onoterpenes in basil, carrots, parsley, mint, cabbage, citrus and caraway seeds; indoles in brussels sprouts, cabbage, kale and dark green leafy vegetables. SUPER GREEN ALGAE These "super foods" are simply power houses of phytonutrients and high quality, easily utilized nutrients. They are cultured in controlled environments to insure they are free of chemicals and are one of the most highly concentrated sources of nutrition available. RICH 'N GREEN contains three of the most important ones, Chlorella, Spirulina and Hydra Green. They have special value because of their large amount of chlorophyll, which is a great detoxifier in the body. They are high in RNA (ribonucleic acids), which are used in the body to produce DNA. These super algae are also rich in carotenes and lypoic acid. MAITAKE & REISHI MUSHROOMS A number of mushrooms have been used by eastern civilizations for centuries. Maitake and Reishi are two of the most valuable because of their ability in supporting the immune system. They are also known as good protectors of the liver. BARLEY & WHEAT GRASS Grains such as barley and wheat all produce a grass. When it is in the early "sprout" stage it is loaded with incredible amounts of nutritional value. They are particularly rich in plant enzymes, beta-carotene, Vitamins A, C and K, chlorophyll, RNA, DNA, antioxidants and amino acids. They are simply a gold mine of phytonutrients fitting for a healthy diet. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST The food concentrates from the Amazon Rainforests in RICH 'N GREEN tablets have been ecologically harvested using indigenous tribes to help protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Providing education and a new income source derived from harvesting sustainable natural resources like the phytonutrients in RICH 'N GREEN tablets and other Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying this valuable resource. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE RICH 'N GREEN There is no iron-clad method how to take RICH 'N GREEN tablets. Two RICH 'N GREEN tablets supply the equivalent amount of vitamins, minerals, plant enzymes and other phytonutrients as one full cup of fresh vegetables. The U. S. Government recommends seven one-cup servings of fruits and vegetables per day. Adjust to your needs. If it is difficult for you to obtain and prepare your daily vegetables, these tablets are very convenient. The foods in RICH 'N GREEN tablets have not been cooked and are in the most valuable "raw" state. So, you also obtain the greatest benefit from their phytonutrients. Product No: 1108 Package Size: 100 Tablets $15.75 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-79IA012-000121-B028-238http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/berry.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222409 text/html 6149HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:24:20 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:14:46 GMTContent-length: 5965Content-type: text/html Advantage colloidal minerals in liquid form Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... BERRY'D TREASURE: Plant Derived Colloidal Minerals in Convenient Liquid Form Each Tablespoon Supplies 600 mg of: Calcium Boron Gadolinium Lithium Praseodymium Terbium Chlorine Bromine Gallium Lutetium Rhenium Thallium Magnesium Cadmium Germanium Manganese Rhodium Thorium Phosphorus Carbon Gold Mercury Rubidium Thulium Potassium Cerium Hafnium Molybdenum Ruthenium Tin Sodium Cesium Holmium Neodymium Samarium Titanium Sulfur Chromium Hydrogen Nickel Scandium Tungsten Antimony Cobalt Indium Niobium Selenium Vanadium Arsenic Copper Iodine Nitrogen Silicon Ytterbium Aluminum Dysrosium Iridium Osmium Silver Yttrium Barium Erbium Iron Oxygen Strontium Zinc Beryllium Europium Lanthanum Palladium Tantalum Zirconium Bismuth Fluorine Lead Platinum Tellurium We now know that trace minerals are just as important to our overall health as vitamins. Life Plus has bottled 77 colloidal minerals in a pleasant berry flavored liquid. BERRY'D TREASURE provides the benefits of plant derived colloidal minerals. The value of minerals in the support of good health is becoming more realized by thousands of individuals. Everything on the earth, even the earth itself,is built on a foundation of minerals. They are a part of the structure of our connective and supportive tissues and are components of our hormones and enzymes, which are responsible for our biochemical life. TRACE MINERALS Trace minerals are only required in small amounts, sometimes smaller than theeye can see. But this small quantity should not mean they are any less important.A deficiency in any of them can be just as serious as any major mineraldeficiency. Nowhere is there a more powerful or effective means of obtainingthem than by taking Life Plus BERRY'D TREASURE. Each tablespoon contains 600 mg of 77 plant derived colloidal minerals. Theyhave been concentrated by a proprietary process, using only cool, contaminant-free water to maintain high bioavailability and colloidalnature. HEALING THE BODY AND THE LAND The people of the rainforest have used plants found deep in the jungle for centuries to enhance vitality and overall health. This ancient wisdom is now available through BERRY'D TREASURE and other unique Life Plus RAINFORCE products. They bring you the benefits of highly effective natural herbal and plant extracts, harvested ecologically to preserve the natural resources of the rainforest and its people. Financial contributions are made supporting improved economics and education of the indigenous people. Specific formulas are blended with other synergistic natural ingredients using current "state of the art" Life Plus technology, which results in fantastic, reliable results. The plant derived colloidal minerals are in a base of the valuable Rainforest herbs, Suma, Uncaria Tomentosa (Cat's Claw) and Chuchuhuasi and natural flavoring from grape skins, cherry and berry extracts plus fructose and other natural herbal flavoring aids. Suggested Use: Two to four tablespoons once or twice a day, preferably with food. Product No: 1952 Package Size: 33.5 oz $23.75 U.S. + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Distributor, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-80IA012-000121-B028-254http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/jungle.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222417 text/html 9586HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:24:33 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:17:23 GMTContent-length: 9402Content-type: text/html Advantage super concentrated phytonutrient amazon fruit drink Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... JUNGLE ADE: Super Concentrated Phytonutrient Amazon Fruit Drink Each Serving Supplies: Concentrated phytonutrients from good tasting, specially selected Amazon Rainforest Fruits: Camu-Camu (Rumberry) Passion Fruit (Maracuja) Cashew Fruit (Cajueiro)Guava (Goiaba) Cupuacu These unique and highly nutritious rainforest fruits were selected, not only because of their good taste, but for their content of health-supporting phytonutrients. JUNGLE ADE includes their, natural fiber, vitamins, minerals and food enzymes. A small amount of fructose has been added for natural sweetness. EXOTIC BLEND JUNGLE ADE is an exotic blend of tropical fruits that grow in the pristine Amazon Rainforest -- rich in vitamins, minerals and all kinds of phytonutrients that can be found nowhere on earth other than in this diverse incredible ecosystem. These exotic fruits, Camu-Camu, Passion Fruit, Guava, Cashew Fruit and Cupuacu are full of important nutrients as nature intended and contain many synergistic phytonutrients never before seen. TOTALLY ORGANIC As North American agricultural methods, which utilize synthetic fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides, continue to destroy the balance of our soils and disturb the natural balance of nature, the fruits and vegetables growing in the totally natural environment of the Amazon basin in South America become more and more important. The fruits used in the JUNGLE ADE formula are 100% totally organic and free of chemical contaminants. NEVER BEFORE RAINFORCE JUNGLE ADE includes several new and delicious fruits, never before offered in North America or Europe, which have been harvested in the Amazon Jungle by indigenous tribes and local communities. These exotic fruits have been juiced and then dried by a new and proprietary process, which preserves their valuable phytonutrients, preserving everything that nature intended in a convenient dry granular form that is easily mixed with water in your home to make a delicious and nutritious beverage. CAMU-CAMU One of the rainforest's newest discoveries is a delicious fruit by the name Camu-Camu. It is included in Life Plus JUNGLE ADE for its high nutritive value and pleasant taste. This small lemon-sized fruit is presently the highest known source of natural Vitamin C on the planet and grows wild in the Amazon Rainforest. Camu-Camu, also known as Rumberry�, provides 3,000% of the Vitamin C, 300% of the Niacin, 200% of the Riboflavin and 150% of the Phosphorous than oranges. CASHEW FRUIT In addition to Camu-Camu, JUNGLE ADE contains Cashew Fruit, also known as Cajueiro, Cupuacu, Maracuja and Guava fruits. Unlike the well known cashew nuts that are so popular all over the world, Cajueiro is a highly nutritious fruit. It is very peculiar and really isn't a fruit at all. It is actually a swollen peduncle that grows behind the real fruit, which is the cashew nut. This large pulpy and juicy part of the plant is actually referred to as a pseudo-fruit with a fine sweet flavor and aroma. The cashew nut grows externally on one end of it in its own kidney shaped hard shell. Interesting Amazonian folklore include the cashew juice as an aid for flu and colds, a sexual stimulant, and other things. Cashew fruit contains five times the amount of Vitamin C as oranges, too. CUPUACU The Cupuacu fruit is in the chocolate family and looks much like the fruit of the chocolate tree. The Life Plus RAINFORCE makes Cupuacu fruit available for the first time in North America and Europe. Rich in phytonutrients with a delicious exotic taste, Cupuacu has been a primary food source in the rainforest, both for the indigenous people and animals alike. It is about the size of a cantaloupe and is highly prized for its creamy, exotic tasting pulp throughout the Amazon basin. it is used throughout Peru and Brazil to make fresh juice, ice cream, jam and tarts. PASSION FRUIT An important constituent of JUNGLE ADE is Passion Fruit. A certain species known as Maracuja, is the type that grows in the Amazon Rainforest and is the one included in JUNGLE ADE. Maracuja juice has been used a wonderful source of power packed phytonutrients as well as a good tasting fruit. GUAVA Guava, also known as Goiaba, is enjoyed as a sweet treat by indigenous people throughout the rainforest. It has traditionally been recommended as a natural fruit for diabetics and for those needing to maintain consistent blood sugar levels. It tastes great and contains a high concentration of health-supporting plant enzymes. HELPING THE RAINFOREST All of the natural fruits contained in JUNGLE ADE have been ecologically harvested using indigenous tribes to help protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Providing education and a new income source derived from harvesting a sustainable natural resource like all five of the delicious fruits found in JUNGLE ADE and herbs in other Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying our valuable rainforest resource. For instance, world renown ethnobotanist, Mark Plotkin states that " a forest stand of Camu-Camu is worth twice the amount to be gained from cutting down the forest and replacing it with cattle." He believes the rational nurturing and harvesting of medicinal herbs and the nutritious fruits contained in JUNGLE ADE holds real economic promise for local Amazon communities. The Life Plus RAINFORCE is proud to be the first to make this important new resource available to North America and Europe and is dedicated to be the leader in helping to create an economical alternative to destroying the rainforest. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE JUNGLE ADE Stir, shake or blend one or more teaspoonfuls of JUNGLE ADE concentrate, according to taste, per each eight ounce glass of clear, contaminant-free drinking water to make a super-tasting, phytonutrient-rich, health beverage. It can be mixed one glass at a time or by the quart or half gallon. Store in refrigerator after mixing. JUNGLE ADE can be used just as a nutritious, enjoyable beverage or can be used to swallow supplement tablets for the synergistic phytonutrients it contains. JUNGLE ADE is great to use in mixing with powdered protein drinks like PROMAX and for preparing COLODYNE. For milk lovers, a fruit creme can be easily made by mixing JUNGLE ADE about 50/50 with milk. Think of JUNGLE ADE as a replacement for carbonated soft drinks and sugary childrens' drinks as well. Product No: 1109 Package Size: 8 Oz. $16.50 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-81IA012-000121-B028-266http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/jatt.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222428 text/html 7808HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:24:41 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:17:12 GMTContent-length: 7624Content-type: text/html Advantage jatoba tea from the rainforest for high energy Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... JATOBA TEA: High Energy & Health Tea from the Amazon Rainforest Each Tea Bag Contains: Jatoba Bark Tea has been selected for its quality of natural phytochemicals and taste. The bark is harvested in an ecologically-supportive sustainable manner in order to preserve this valuable tree for future generations. UNIQUE TREASURE JATOBA TEA is definitely one of the most unique treasures of both of the Brazilian and Peruvian Rainforest. JATOBA TEA is well known to the people of the Amazon and has been used there for centuries as a staple herbal component of many of the indigenous people. It has been used extensively for hundreds of years by the lumberjacks in the Brazil forests as an energizer to help them feel strong and vigorous. They can be seen day after day, heading off to work, carrying their "jug" of JATOBA TEA. They work hard and need lots of energy to keep going in the hot and humid climate of the rainforest. GOOD TASTING JATOBA TEA is truly good tasting and can be used as an herbal beverage by the whole family, or it can be used at special times for special purposes as part of an overall health-supporting program. It can be drank alone, just by adding hot water, or honey can be added if desired. Some individuals in South America believe the benefits of JATOBA TEA are enhanced when honey is added. However, it is always of value to add a little lemon juice to the tea. The acidity from the lemon juice helps to free the active alkaloid substances from the tannins so that they are much more easily absorbed into the body to provide their benefits. It is not necessary to add so much lemon that the tea becomes too tart, only a little is adequate. OTHER INDIGENOUS USES Besides being used for weakness, energy and stamina, JATOBA TEA has been used as a tonic for the respiratory and urinary systems by the indigenous people of the Amazon Basin for centuries. Like Pau d' Arco, Jatoboa is known for its ability to fight fungus and yeast-like candida albicans. Jatoba is also included in Life Plus PROSTATE FORMULA. This great tasting tea is packaged in 30 convenient, easy-to-use tea bags per box. Just drink it hot or cold as you would any tea. SYNERGISTIC WITH OTHER PRODUCTS JATOBA TEA is extremely beneficial by itself or is also very useful as an addition to the diet as a synergistic beverage for those needing more energy, experiencing discomfort of the respiratory or urinary systems and in support of all weight loss programs. It is especially synergistic when taken together with Life Plus PROSTATE FORMULA. Also it can be a very worthwhile addition to those taking Life Plus LUNG FORMULA for its synergistic effects. Some people notice an increase in frequency of urination and include it along with DIUPLEX when desired. UNLOCKING THE SECRETS OF THE RAINFOREST In addition to the bark of the Jatoba tree being used for energy and stamina, it has been used for numerous other health benefits for centuries. Many secrets and untold treasures await discovery with the medicinal plants used by the indigenous people of the Amazon Rainforests. Life Plus and Life Plus Members are committed to doing everything within their power to ensure the preservation of our life-giving rainforests. PRESERVING THE RAINFOREST Life Plus JATOBA TEA is a natural botanical product. It is made from the bark of the Jatoba tree known scientifically as Hymenaea courbaril. The bark is ecologically harvested using indigenous tribes to help protect natural resources of the rainforest and it's people. Providing education and a new income source derived from harvesting a sustainable natural resource like Jatoba found in Life Plus JATOBA TEA and other Life Plus RAINFORCE products, helps provide an alternative to destroying this valuable resource. Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! HOW TO USE JATOBA TEA Steep one JATOBA TEA bag in one full cup (8 oz) of boiling water for at least five minutes. The longer it steeps, the more nutrients the tea will contain. Add some lemonjuice to aid the bioavailability of important phytonutrients. Add honey to taste if desired. Drink as a delicious hot or iced beverage, two or more times per day or as desired for energy, to support the urinary or respiratory systems, or for its natural anti-fungal action. JATOBA TEA can be made up by the quart or half-gallon and stored in the refrigerator if desired. The inclusion of a small amount of lemon juice is best because the natural acidity in the lemon juice helps to free the active alkaloids in the tea from the tannins contained in it. Tnis causes the alkaloids to be more easily assimilated by the body and therefore more utilized as well. Do not add more lemon juice than what is necessary as the taste can become too tart--a little is all you need. Product No: 1117 Package Size: 30 Tea Bags $15.75 US + Shipping CALL NOW! Use our toll free number: 1-800-572-8446 Pin number: 391144, Cristina Desimone Order Now! We've made ordering all of our quality Life Plus products simple! And of course, your satisfaction is always guaranteed with Life Plus' 30 day money back guarantee! How to Order Online Order Form Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at ADVANTAGE! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-82IA012-000121-B029-21http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/maq.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222500 text/html 4691HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:25:14 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:18:55 GMTContent-length: 4507Content-type: text/html  Advantage Home Business Opportunity: MAQ Plan Business Opportunity You can now make money in a home business opportunity from Life Plus just by referring all natural nutritional supplements that can improve both your health and your pocketbook. Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... Visit our home page for more exciting and healthful products! Life Plus is an excellent home business opportunity. In order to receive bonus checks from Life Plus, all you do is make referrals and purchase a minimum of $40 of Life Plus products or literature each month. That's it! There is no required inventory to buy, no product to ship, and no money to collect. It can all be done with toll free numbers, credit cards and friendly service. It's called networking. Before you know it, the referrals begin building! Now Life Plus has made it even easier and more financially rewarding for you to refer these wonderful products to others! It's called the Monthly Automatic Qualifying (MAQ) Dividend Program. Here's how it works: The MAQ (pronounced mack) Program is designed to make certain that you don't miss your bonus check because you forgot to place your $40 minimum qualifying order that month and that you don't run out of the products that you take on a regular basis! There are two plans to choose from: Plan A or Plan B. Plan A will automatically ship you the products you select each month. Plan B is a backup plan that says Life Plus will ship you your pre-determined product only if you have not qualified by placing your $40 minimum order by midnight the 25th of each month. Now here's the really exciting part! Life Plus will pay you an additional 20% on the initial purchase of your referrals! This means if you sign up as a MAQ member, you will receive 25% of the initial purchase of every single person you sponsor up to a $200 bonus per referral! This is an incredible deal! You get the benefits of being healthy, helping those you know to be healthy and make money doing it! It's easy to become a MAQ member. Just call Life Plus at 1-800-572-8446 toll-free within the US or Canada or call the US and 1-501-698-2311 and ask for a MAQ application form. Our international distributors can request an application form from us via e-mail and we will mail you one so that you can save the cost of the long-distance phone call! Become a MAQ member today and see your income soar! Tell a few friends about Life Plus. Then have fun and enjoy the healthier and more successful lifestyle that your new Life Plus business can provide for you!! Because your friends will tell their friends who will tell their friends and so on and so on...... Good luck with your new business and remember that we are always here to help you be successful, because frankly, if you're successful, we're successful! Life Plus has pledged to give back from 5-10% of their profit to the peoples of the Rainforest by donating to organizations such as ACEER, Amazon Center for Environment, Education and Research, which works towards educating the children of the Amazon which will serve to preserve the Rainforest for generations to come! Visit our home page for more exciting Rain Forest products from Life Plus! Contact us at Advantage! We'd love to hear from you! Wouldn't you like to be an independent Life Plus distributor and have your own home business? We'll show you how! Site designed by Ed Desimone, An Independent Life Plus Representative, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-83IA012-000121-B029-40http://vitality.simplenet.com:80/mopp.htm 207.137.75.68 19970216222511 text/html 4543HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Sunday, 16-Feb-97 22:25:26 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 04-Feb-97 22:44:05 GMTContent-length: 4359Content-type: text/html Making refferals work for you! Business Opportunity You can now make money in a home business opportunity from Life Plus just by referring all natural nutritional supplements that can improve both your health and your pocketbook. Choose Your Advantage! The most important thing is our health... Visit our home page for a complete listing of our healthful products! How simple referrals can make even your wildest dreams come true Have you ever gone to a movie or a restaurant and told others how great it was? That is called a "referral." Have you ever referred anyone to a product, a store, or a company you like? Sure you have. Life Plus expanded this simple referral concept by creating an income opportunity for you. As a Life Plus member, you can make referrals from your home by phone and mail. You don't have to stock products. You don't pay fees to register or to receive royalty checks each month. You purchase great products at true wholesale for your own use direct from the manufacturer. When you refer new members to Life Plus yourself, they become first level to you and start new legs. Members that they refer become second level to you. This can continue through an infinite number of levels. You earn a five percent Royalty on the purchases of those members in your first two levels and ten percent on levels three, four, five and six. In addition, you can earn up to a six percent Infinity Bonus on the purchases of those members in your additional levels. If you refer just one person each month, who in turn refers just one person each month, your downline will grow like this: Month # Downline Month # Downline 1 2 7 128 2 4 8 256 3 8 9 512 4 16 10 1024 5 32 11 2048 6 64 12 4096! Call Life Plus and introduce your referral to one of our friendly representatives. They will register them and process their order immediately. Then, each month when you purchase at least a minimum of only $40 worth of qualifying products for your own use, you will receive your Royalties. Our system incorporates the principle of the multiplication of efforts of others. The first U.S. billionaire, J. Paul Getty said, "I'd rather have 1% of the efforts of others than 100% of what I can do." In fact, if you refer two people each month and help them do the same for nine months, you could have more income than earning monthly interest on a millionaire's nestegg in the bank. Your efforts combined with the resources at Life Plus can create income beyond your dreams. For more information on becoming a Life Plus Distributor, go to our Business Opportunity Page. If you have any questions, please contact us at ed_desimone@centuryinter.net We'd love to hear from you! Advantage! is an independent Life Plus distributor. Site designed by Ed Desimone, Advantage! Distributors, Copyright © 1996. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WT01-B12-84IA018-000194-B036-7http://www.kemper.com:80/ 198.152.185.42 19970106160105 text/html 2410HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:57:07 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 27-Dec-96 15:56:42 GMTContent-length: 2228Content-type: text/html Welcome to Kemper.com We recognize the multiple ways in which you may be accessing and browsing the World Wide Web. To make Kemper.com accessible to the broadest number of users, we offer two sites. * Our Enhanced sitepresents Kemper.com with full graphics and interactivity. This site is optimized for viewing with Netscape Navigator 2.0 or browsers with Netscape Navigator 2.0 capabilities. Click here to download the most recent version of Netscape Navigator. * The Lite siteprovides all of the enhanced Kemper.com content -- but with smaller and fewer graphics. If you are accessing the Web via a commercial service (America Online, for example) using Netscape Navigator, you might prefer the faster performance of the lite site. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011830-C WT01-B12-85IA018-000194-B036-44http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/menu.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160125 text/html 3783HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:57:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 16:30:12 GMTContent-length: 3601Content-type: text/html Kemper.com Main Menu If you know what you're looking for, our search engine can take you there. We review the many gifts of 1996. Page through our Photo Album of happy retirees and their favorite web sites. We have a page waiting for you! Please remember: An Enhanced Kemper.com site is available. To view it, we recommend using a direct connection to the World Wide Web and Netscape Navigator 2.0 (or a browser with Netscape Navigator 2.0 capabilities). 1009970-B For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from your financialrepresentative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048) or request a prospectus now. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or sendmoney. Remember that there is no assurance that the objective of anymutual fund will be achieved, and mutual fund returns and net assetvalues fluctuate. Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, whichmay be more or less than their original cost. Money market funds seek tomaintain a net asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be noassurance that they will. Mutual fund shares are not insured orguaranteed by the U.S. government. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B12-86IA018-000194-B036-54http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/search.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160133 text/html 1856HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:57:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:45:59 GMTContent-length: 1672Content-type: text/html Search Kemper.com Search keyword(s): Note: Remember to also search for your keywords in the Kemper Fundsprospectuses. To search these documents, which are accessible in AdobeAcrobat file format, download the prospectus and click on the binoculars icon. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009980 WT01-B12-87IA018-000194-B036-69http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/aboutkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160140 text/html 4015HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:57:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:44:00 GMTContent-length: 3831Content-type: text/html About Kemper Kemper Funds Group is a unit of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI isthe investment advisor to the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 36open-end funds with more than 70 portfolios - including international and global funds, capitalgrowth funds, capital growth and income funds, target equity funds,tax-free income funds, and income funds - and seven closed-end funds. Kemper Funds has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and approximately $45 billion in assets. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organizationheadquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life andnon-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45countries. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. About Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Introducing Kemper Funds Kemper Firsts Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009990-B WT01-B12-88IA018-000194-B036-80http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/curious.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160148 text/html 3565HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:57:51 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 21:33:32 GMTContent-length: 3383Content-type: text/html For The Curious Investor Where is my money? Why is it there? How is it doing? These are thequestions that every investor needs to ask. But it's a broader curiositythat leads an individual investor to want to know more about whathappens when investment dollars are put to work. There are few subjects that are as engrossing as investing can be. Forthose who like to measure change and plot performance progress, theinvestment world offers plenty of analytical tools. Yet others developan interest in investing as a means to an end. These curious investorsapply what they know about investing as they pursue lifetime goals:financing a child's education, acquiring a vacation home or providingfor a carefree retirement. Whatever the source of your curiosity, we hope to pique it in Snapshots,quick glimpses of the state of the U.S. economy and financial markets,and The Longer View, a series of articles on general investing topics. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010040 WT01-B12-89IA018-000194-B036-93http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/kemperfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160156 text/html 3878HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:57:59 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 23:01:31 GMTContent-length: 3696Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds In your lifetime, you will have several, varying financial goals. Tohelp in your pursuit of these goals, Kemper Funds includes a mix of fundsdesigned for an array of investment objectives. Our risk/return spectrumpresents the range, from higher risk/return potential to lowerrisk/return potential. For Kemper Funds' comparative total returns foreach of the last 10 years, as well as the current year to date, you'llwant to view our comparative total return tables, organized by eachclass of shares. And, for the latest in Kemper Funds, be sure to checkout our new fund introductions. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. Risk/Return Spectrum Kemper Funds Class A Comparative Total Returns Kemper Funds Class B Comparative Total Returns Kemper Funds Class C Comparative Total Returns Performance And Yield Notes © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010210-A WT01-B12-90IA018-000194-B036-109http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/shareholders.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160208 text/html 3436HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:58:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:55:37 GMTContent-length: 3252Content-type: text/html Just For Kemper Funds Shareholders You found us! One of the reasons that we're happy to be on the WorldWide Web is that it expands on the possibilities for communicating withKemper Funds' shareholders. In News, you'll find information about new funds and fund performance. Think of Making the Most of Your Investment as your online source about Kemper Funds'shareholder services. Printable Forms lets you take action to initiateone or more of your many shareholder account services. Please take a look around the site and check back often. We'll berolling out additional information and introducing some features thataren't possible in print communications. You are the people that we mosthope to please - so let us know what you think! Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010280-A WT01-B12-91IA018-000194-B036-121http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/learn/learn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160215 text/html 3057HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:58:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:55:07 GMTContent-length: 2873Content-type: text/html To Learn More Welcome to Kemper Funds, where we believe "A stranger is just a friendwe haven't met yet." If you'd like to learn more about Kemper Funds, we encourage you to lookaround our site. Specifically, be sure to visit About Kemper Funds,Kemper Funds and You and Your FinancialRepresentative. For completeinformation about any Kemper Fund, including management fees andexpenses, request a prospectus now. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010230 WT01-B12-92IA018-000194-B036-133http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/financialrep/financialrep.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160224 text/html 3843HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:58:26 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 15:38:59 GMTContent-length: 3661Content-type: text/html Are You A Financial Representative? Kemper Funds believes that working with financial representatives is aninvestor's best approach for achieving his or her goals in today'scomplex and global investment markets. Kemper Funds are offered bymany financial representatives, including broker/dealers, financialplanners, insurance agents and bank investment counselors. This part of Kemper.com is restricted because communications created forregistered financial representatives do not include the same disclosuresrequired ofcommunications for the general public or fund shareholders. A registeredrepresentative is someone who has completed extensive coursework in investmentcompany products. Much of the information presented in this area isavailable, with additional disclosure, elsewhere on the site. Other material wascreated for Kemper Funds' sales force and not relevant to the generalpublic. Your first name: Your last name: Your firm's name: Your Kemper rep #: Your e-mail address: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Please enter your Kemper.com password The password to this section can be found on the back page of Kemper's fund performance publication, Capital Ideas. Ifyou don't have ready access to the publication, please call Kemper Sales Support (1-800-621-5027) to request the password. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010250 WT01-B12-93IA018-000194-B036-146http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/sitemap.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160236 text/html 5350HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:58:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Dec-96 15:40:34 GMTContent-length: 5166Content-type: text/html Kemper.com Site Map About Kemper.com Best Of Kemper.com New To Kemper.com Friends And Neighbors Kemper Funds In The News Kemper News Employment Opportunities Snapshots The Economy The Global Economy The Markets Our Outlook The Longer View Understanding Mutual Funds Short-Term Investing Planning Your Child's Future Your Retirement For The Curious Business Investor Risk/Return Spectrum Kemper Funds Profiles Kemper Closed-End Funds You And Your Financial Representative News Making The Most Of Your Investment Printable Forms Tour Site May We Introduce You? (Access is restricted to financial representatives) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010010 WT01-B12-94IA018-000194-B036-167http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/holiday.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160245 text/html 2538HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:58:47 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:05 GMTContent-length: 2356Content-type: text/html  Holiday Greetings! Dear Kemper.com Visitor, 1996 was a year of several significant accomplishments for Kemper Funds and we have great expectations for 1997. We look forward to doing business with you in the new year! Sincerely, James L. Greenwalt Executive Vice President Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1025910 WT01-B12-95IA018-000194-B036-181http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/photoalbum/photoalbum.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160252 text/html 2507HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:58:55 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 18:54:49 GMTContent-length: 2325Content-type: text/html Kemper Photo Album Click on the photo album to page through our pictures of happy retirees -- and links to their favorite Web sites. It's easy to add your smiling face (or that of a loved one), just mail a color print or slide and a list of favorite Web sites, along with the retiree's name, address, telephone number and e-mail address, to: On-line Photo Album Kemper Distributors, Inc. Shareholder Marketing -- 33rd Floor 222 South Riverside Plaza Chicago, IL 60606-5808 We'll be in touch! (All submissions and the rights to use them will become the property of Kemper Distributors, Inc.) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1024270 WT01-B12-96IA018-000194-B036-190http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/prospectus.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160259 text/html 3325HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:02 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:45:56 GMTContent-length: 3141Content-type: text/html Prospectuses And Important Information For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Any overviews herein are intended to be general in nature and for currentinterest. While helpful, these overviews are no substitute forprofessional tax, financial or legal advice. Investors should seeksuch professional advice for their particular situation. NeitherKemper Distributors, Inc. nor any of its affiliates or representativesis providing tax, financial or legal advice. You can request a prospectus one of four ways: Request a Kemper Funds prospectus from your financial representative. Request a Kemper Funds prospectus by calling Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048). Request a Kemper Funds prospectus by e-mail. Download a Kemper Funds prospectus now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010900 WT01-B12-97IA018-000194-B036-201http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/learn/contact_learn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160305 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 30-Sep-96 22:49:30 GMTContent-length: 3578Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Are you a shareholder? Are you a reporter? If so, please click on the appropriate link to go to the shareholder contact or media contact page that is specially customized for your needs. If you are a member of the general public, please use the information below to contact Kemper. By E-mail: Given ongoing security concerns, please do not refer to any personal information(Social Security numbers or investment account balances) in correspondenceyou send to us by e-mail. Your first name:  Your last name:  Street address    or P.O. Box:            City:           State:             ZIP:          E-mail: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Your inquiry: By Telephone Or By Mail © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011470 WT01-B12-98IA018-000194-B036-212http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempercom.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160313 text/html 2726HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 22:29:24 GMTContent-length: 2544Content-type: text/html About Kemper.com Kemper.com is the World Wide Web site for Kemper Funds, one of the largest mutual fund complexes in the United States. This site was established as an extension of the services we provide to ourshareholders and to the financial representatives who offer KemperFunds to the investing public. As we gather information about whatvisitors would like to see at Kemper.com, we expect to be continuallyenhancing the site. All comments and suggestions are welcome, and shouldbe sent via e-mail to info@kemper.com.Thanks for your interest! New To Kemper.com Best of Kemper.com Tour Our Site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010000 WT01-B12-99IA018-000194-B036-228http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/friends.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160321 text/html 3725HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:23 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:50:47 GMTContent-length: 3541Content-type: text/html Friends And Neighbors Kemper Funds originated in Chicago in 1948, when five entrepreneurs formed a mutual fund to capitalize on a technological breakthrough called television. Much - the company's name, ownership and scope of its funds' investments - has changed since then. While Kemper headquarters today remain in Chicago, the company's reach extends far and wide. We share our success with the many friends, neighbors and partners we invite you to meet on the following pages. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. Friends Meet Team Kemper Funds Neighbors Are you heading to Chicago? Let Kemper show you around. Click here to e-mail your request for a free map of downtown Chicago, produced by The LaSalle Street Council. Kemper.com is a work in progress, produced by Boller Coates & Neu, Chicago, andAdjacency, Inc., Madison, Wis. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014220-B WT01-B12-100IA018-000194-B036-239http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/innews.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160329 text/html 5306HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:30 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 18-Oct-96 14:09:21 GMTContent-length: 5124Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds In The News Where you might have read about Kemper Funds or Kemper Funds investmentexperts recently And The Contrarian column in Forbes is written by David Dreman, a pioneer of the philosophy of contrarian investing and portfolio managerof Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund. "Back On Track," Barron's, October 14, 1996 An interview with President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer Stephen B. Timbers outlines Kemper's "ambitious growth plans and generally solid performance." "Zurich Kemper Adds Products, Expands Staff," Pensions & Investments, September 20, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments Inc.'s efforts to build on its sales and marketing structure are described. "Zurich-Kemper's Blue Chip Fund Makes Comeback," Dow Jones News Service, September 11, 1996 The strategy of Kemper Blue Chip Fund Portfolio Manager Tracy McCormick Chester is profiled. "Sowing Seeds At Kemper Growth," Business Week, September 30, 1996 The efforts of Portfolio Manager Patrick S. Adams to revive Kemper Growth Fund are described. Kemper International Fund Portfolio Manager Dennis Ferrois recognized by Barron's (July 22, 1996) for excellence in fund management. "The road ahead," Financial Planning, June 1996 Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund Portfolio Manager David Dreman isincluded as one of four managers who share their management philosophies, investment strategies and market outlooks. "New Swiss owner funding Kemper in return to banks," American Banker, June 13, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. is profiled as placing a renewed emphasis on reclaimingits position as a dominant seller of mutual funds through banks. "Nintendo capitalism: Zapping the markets," The New York Times, May 28, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. is profiled as an example of how traders use sophisticated economic models and powerful computers to make quick decisions. "The Outliers," Barron's, May 20, 1996 Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund are cited as funds that refuse to run with the herd. "Oldest muni fund rides rates and risks into third decade," The Bond Buyer, April 22, 1996 Kemper Municipal Bond Fund Portfolio Manager Christopher Mier is profiled. "Two players dominate DC market," Pensions & Investments, April 1, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. ranks third among defined contribution service providers, based on total number of plan sponsors. "It's all in the families," Barron's, February 5, 1996 A 1995 performance survey of mutual fund families. Barron's notedKemper's strength in its bond funds and overseas stock funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009870-E WT01-B12-101IA018-000194-B036-255http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/kempernews.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160336 text/html 5035HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:53:05 GMTContent-length: 4851Content-type: text/html  Kemper News We welcome your interest in Kemper Funds. On this page you'll find alisting of our most recent and/or requested press releases. Foradditional information about the company, go to About Kemper Funds.Our Outlook will give you an economic overview whileindividual Kemper Funds data can be accessed via Kemper Funds Profiles. New To Kemper.com provides a guide to our recent additions and enhancements. Kemper Funds Group Joins Schwab's Institutional OneSource (October 31, 1996) Kemper Funds Survey Finds Two Out Of Three "Empty Nesters"Gain $5,000+ Annual Boost When Kids Fly The Coop; Despite Concerns About The Future, Few Diverting Most Of"Parental Bonus" To Retirement Savings (August 23, 1996) Kemper Money Funds Build A South Pacific Hide-Away On The World Wide Web (August 19, 1996) Charles R. Manzoni, Jr. Joins Zurich Kemper As General Counsel (June 6, 1996) Patrick Adams Named Portfolio Manager Of Kemper Funds Flagship Growth EquityFund (June 3, 1996) Kemper Funds Marks 20th Anniversary Of Nation's First Retail Municipal Bond Fund (April 23, 1996) Zurich Kemper Investments Launches New Retirement Plans Unit (April 2, 1996) Zurich Kemper Investments Announces Definitive Agreement To Sell Invest Financial Corporation To First American Corporation (March 28, 1996) Kemper Funds Announces New Chief Investment Officer For Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (March 21, 1996) Kemper Funds Forms New Distribution Unit For Fee-Based Advisors And Mutual Fund Wrap Programs (March 20, 1996) Zurich Insurance Group Completes Acquisition Of Kemper Corporation (January 4, 1996) Kemper Rolls Out Executive Plus - A Retirement Plan Solution For Key Executives (November 28, 1995) Kemper Financial Completes Acquisition Of Dreman Value Management Assets; Names President And CEO Of Acquired Operations (August 24, 1995) Changing Definition Of Retirement: Majority Of Americans Expect To Work During Retirement, According To Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor (June 15, 1995) "20 Somethings" No Slackers When It Comes To Retirement Planning, According To Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor (June 15, 1995) Five Things Investors Should Know Before Choosing A Money Market Fund (May 31, 1995) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010030 WT01-B12-102IA018-000194-B036-265http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/opportunities.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160343 text/html 3044HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:46 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:48:00 GMTContent-length: 2860Content-type: text/html Employment Opportunities In this constantly changing world, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI)offers its employees and prospective candidates a pleasantly challengingwork environment with opportunities for career enhancement and where newideas are always welcome. We have a broad spectrum of job opportunitiesavailable throughout the organization and excellent career developmentplanning for current employees. ZKI has maintained a competitive edgewithin the financial services industry. We credit this stance to ourmost valuable asset -- our employees. Discover the opportunities within Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. byexploring the rest of this Employment Opportunities section. Kemper As An Employer Opportunities Application For Employment (Kemper.com has been optimized to be viewed using Netscape Navigator 2.0.Accessing this application using a Netscape 1.x browser may cause your software to freeze. Click here to download a copy of Netscape Navigator 2.0.) Link To JobWeb WT01-B12-103IA018-000194-B036-283http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/intheprime/intheprime.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160353 text/html 7218HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 15:59:55 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 23:25:00 GMTContent-length: 7036Content-type: text/html  In the Prime: Show Topics A new WETA series underwritten by Kemper Funds management According to the National Council on Aging, someone will turn 50 every 7.5 seconds from now until 2014. But what does it mean to be a mid-lifer? What are the options? The possibilities? The realities? Mid-life is a time of dramatic change. Today's mid-life generation is uniquely positioned to experience this time as no generation has before -- they are healthier than their parents were; they have more choices; and they will live longer. In the Prime explores being in the prime of life today. Part of a multimedia project from WETA, Washington, D.C., In the Prime is a 26-part, weekly, half-hour television series that can be seen on public television stations nationwide (check local listings). Hosted by veteran journalist Deborah Potter, In the Prime presents personal profiles, commentaries, and studio discussions with experts to address issues such as love, career, family, money, retirement, responsibility, mortality, and the many approaches to a physically and spiritually healthy life. The very idea of mid-life is an evolving one. Since 1900, the average life expectancy has grown more than it had in the previous 2,000 years, according to Dr. Robert Butler of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City. Not so very long ago, people could well expect to die by the age of 50. Today retirement age is creeping upward. Now instead of retiring at 65, some people are continuing to work; others have set a much earlier retirement goal and leave the work world at 50 or 55 to pursue a dream -- from sailing around the world to returning to school, to moving to a rural setting from a city. "Today the mentality of being 50 is more like being 40 was years ago," says Phylis Geller, executive producer of the series, and senior vice president of cultural programming and new media for WETA, Washington, D.C. "It's a whole new environment with so many exciting options. In the Prime is a sort of road map that will present all of the avenues for today's mid-lifers." In the Prime introduces viewers to some of the people who have chosen to see the second half of their lives in terms of freedom and opportunity, rather than resignation and regret. Together with guests as varied as comedian Tom Smothers, Sydney Biddle Barrows (the "Mayflower Madam"), poet Judith Viorst, financial adviser John McIntyre, The New Yorker writer Brendan Gill, restaurateur Nora Pouillon, feminist author Letty Cottin Pogrebin, spiritual philosopher Deepak Chopra, and many others, Potter reviews the life choices associated with being over 45. "What people are pursuing at mid-life is different from what they pursued in their youth. They often begin to look inward and sense that it's time to shift their focus to more fundamental things," says senior producer Phil O'Connor. The series reviews how people assess themselves as they approach mid-life; how they evaluate where they are in terms of their early expectations and how they see their future; how they approach romantic relationships, both old and new; and how they look at nonretirement, divorce, creativity, and work. In the Prime looks at the possibilities for mid-lifers in the current climate of corporate America, at the capacity to learn after a certain age, and at facing serious illness and the alternative treatments to traditional Western medicine, and explores what it means to be a true adult. Host Deborah Potter has more than 20 years of experience in broadcast journalism. She served as the Washington correspondent for CNN from 1991 to 1994, and was with CBS News for 13 years as White House, State Department, and congressional correspondent. The television series is part of a multimedia project that includes print, online, and video components. In the Prime is a production of WETA, Washington, D.C., with funding provided by Kemper Funds. Executive producer is Phylis Geller; Phil O'Connor is senior producer. Associate producers are Anna Chen and Janice Holland. WETA, Washington, D.C., is the third largest producer of programs for public television, including the award-winning series The Civil War, Baseball, In Performance at the White House, and The Kennedy Center Presents. Other cultural programming series debuting this fall include The West and National Geographic's Inside the White House. Sharon Percy Rockefeller is president and CEO of WETA. In the Prime weekly show topics Where and when you can find In the Prime in your area Videotapes Available At A Discount WETA's In the Prime Web site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022610-A WT01-B12-104IA018-000194-B036-296http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/aboutzki.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160400 text/html 4948HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:02 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:47:13 GMTContent-length: 4764Content-type: text/html About Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Kemper Funds originated in 1948, when five entrepreneurs formed a mutual fund to capitalize on a technologicalbreakthrough called television. They started Television Shares Management Corporation, and introduced their firstmutual fund, the Television Fund - which focused on the success and technological advances related to the televisionindustry. Over the years, that fund evolved to what is now known as Kemper TechnologyFund. In 1963, Television Shares Management Corporation was repositioned for broader appeal, taking on the new corporatename Supervised Investors Services, Inc. ("SIS"). Through the 1960s, the company introduced three more mutual funds-- Balanced Income Fund (now known as Kemper Total Return Fund) which invested in bothstocks and bonds, Supervised Investors Growth Fund (now Kemper Growth Fund) and Summit Fund(now Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund). In 1970, Kemper Corporation acquired all the outstanding stock of SIS, and successfully combined the predominantlyfixed-income expertise of Kemper with the solid equity management of SIS. Through the 1970s, the company diversifiedits product line, adding Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund, aninvestment-grade bond fund, and Kemper Money Market Fund, one of the nation's firstmoney market funds. SIS became Kemper Financial Services, Inc. in 1976. That same year, Kemper pioneered a fully managed tax-exemptincome fund, Kemper Municipal Bond Fund -- the nation's first municipal bond fund. Kemper was also one of the first in the industry to offer government securities portfolios. More recently, Kemperintroduced its Retirement Fund Series, which combines zero-coupon bonds and equitysecurities, and Kemper Value+Growth Fund, which combines both value and growth stocksin the same portfolio using the expertise of two separate and distinct investment managers. In January 1996, Kemper Financial Services became part of the Zurich family and, in March 1996, took the name ZurichKemper Investments, Inc. ("ZKI"). As investment manager of the Kemper Funds, ZKI is one of the nation's largest assetmanagers. The Kemper Funds family is comprised of more than 70 portfolios including growth- and value-style equityfunds, international funds, U.S. government and corporate bond funds, municipal bond funds, money market funds andclosed-end funds. Together, this adds up to over $45 billion in assets and more than 3 million shareholder accounts. You may download a Kemper Funds prospectus now, request one from your financialrepresentative or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. The prospectuses contain more completeinformation including management fees and expenses. Please read them carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015660 WT01-B12-105IA018-000194-B036-311http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/introkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160411 text/html 11185HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:47:44 GMTContent-length: 11000Content-type: text/html Introducing Kemper Funds Kemper Funds strive to provide high-quality asset management based on teamwork,a clearly defined investment style and thorough research. Below, you'll findsome general information about the types of funds managed by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. and our investmentphilosophy. Kemper Money Funds feature a conservative approach to money management,emphasizing stability of principal, competitive long-term returns and easyliquidity. And Kemper Money Funds can be used for a variety of purposes -- anemergency fund, rainy day savings, short-term investment goals, or a temporary"parking place" for your money while you decide where to invest. With more than$5 billion in assets under management and a track record spanning more than 20years, Kemper Money Funds offer investors the confidence that comes withexperience. Kemper Money Funds offer a choice of threeportfolios: Kemper Money Market Fund invests primarilyin short-term, high-quality obligations of major banks and corporations. Kemper Government Money Fund adds an extradegree of safety by investing only in U.S. Treasury securities and otherobligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies andrelated repurchase agreements. Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund offers currentincome that is exempt from federal income taxes* by investing in short-term,high-quality municipal securities. A Kemper Money Funds investment also offers a variety of access features,including checkwriting and the MoneyPLUS cash management feature. Consult theprospectus for details, including fees for theMoneyPLUS feature, or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. We believe few fund companies can match Kemper's time-tested experience,research capabilities and presence in today's sophisticated bond market. Kemperhas spent over 20 years managing income mutual funds. That's longer than 94% ofall mutual fund companies. ** In the high yield arena alone, Kemper manages over $3.5 billion. And with over$8 billion in U.S. government funds assets, Kemper is a prominent presence inthe government securities marketplace. In managing the Income Funds, we emphasize credit andsector analysis, seeking to balance a competitive current yield withopportunities for total return. Subject to the particular policies of aportfolio, our management team employs flexibility to shift among corporate,treasury and mortgage-backed securities as opportunities and market conditionswarrant and as applicable portfolio policies and restrictions permit. Recognizing the need for investments that offer tax-free income*, Kemper createdAmerica's first tax-free mutual fund, Kemper MunicipalBond Fund, back in 1976. Today, Kemper manages over $5.0 billion oftax-free mutual fund assets. In managing its tax-free investments, Kemper emphasizes quality. Each of theportfolios holds at least 90% of assets in investment-grade bonds. Of the more than 500 companies that offer mutual funds, more than 80% don't havea single equity fund that's over 25 years old, according to Lipper AnalyticalServices, Inc. (as of 12/31/95). Kemper has three -- and each has providedinvestors with outstanding long-term performance. Kemper Capital Growth Funds also offer style diversification,from two separate and distinctly specialized investment managers: growth-stylemanagement from Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., and value-style management fromDreman Value Advisors, Inc.*** Of course, there is no guarantee that aparticular management style will be successful. On the growth side, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. emphasizes "growth at theright price." Using a disciplined team approach, Kemper analysts usefundamental research to identify quality growth companies whose stocks areselling at reasonable prices and whose earnings are growing faster than themarket average. Characteristics of these companies include strong management,industry leadership, a high return on equity, a low dividend/high reinvestmentrate and recession resistance. Stocks must pass an intensive screening processbased on relative price/earnings ratios, relative profitability, present valuesand momentum characteristics. In evaluating value stocks, Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. focuses on companiesthat are out of favor with investors because the market underestimates theirvalue or overlooks their potential. Stocks become undervalued as a result ofoverreaction by investors to unfavorable news about a company, industry or thestock market in general. Or, they can become undervalued as a result of amarket decline, poor economic conditions, tax-loss selling or actual oranticipated unfavorable developments affecting the company. Because the companyis out of favor, its stock trades at a price/earning ratio (P/E) that is lowerthan its potential might suggest. P/Es of value stocks are generally lower thanthe overall market and lower than growth stock P/Es. Few investors have 100 percent of their funds in stocks or 100 percent in thebond market. Deciding how much to invest in each -- an ongoing process calledasset allocation -- could be the most important investment decision you'll make. An important consideration is how soon will you need your invested dollars. Afinancial representative can help you answer that question, as well as otherconsiderations such as your specific investment objectives and risk tolerance. When you have, Kemper Horizon Fund can help by providing three diversifiedportfolios of equity and fixed income securities designed for investors withdifferent investment horizons. Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio emphasizes growth ofcapital with income generation as a secondary objective. Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio seeks a balance of growthand income with moderate risk. And Kemper Horizon 5Portfolio seeks income while your capital is being preserved, with growth ofcapital as a secondary objective. For more information, download a prospectus now. Kemper's London-based management team has a worldwide network of investmentcontacts that provides greater access to foreign markets. This allows for abetter understanding of each market, and a closer examination of growth rates,market niches, balance sheets, and even local issues. Our global researchefforts for Kemper International and Global Fundscover hundreds of foreign companies, as well as contact with banks, investmenthouses and economists worldwide. Returns and net asset values fluctuate. Shares are not insured or guaranteedand are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or less thanoriginal cost. Kemper Money Market Fund seeks to maintain a net asset value of$1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that it will. Money Fund sharesare not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higher ratedsecurities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and Kemper High YieldFund). For portfolios that invest internationally (principally KemperInternational Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund and Kemper Diversified IncomeFund) there are special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity that mayadversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fully discussed inthe funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity andKemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Funds) presents greater risk of loss thaninvestment in large companies. Concentration in certain market sectors(Kemper-Dreman High Return) presents special risk considerations. * Except as otherwise described in the prospectus, income from tax-free fundsmay be subject to state and local taxes and, for some investors, the alternativeminimum tax. ** Source: Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. 12/31/95 *** Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. ("DVA") is Kemper's value-style equity manager. DVA's philosophy was founded by David Dreman, a pioneer of "contrarian" (out offavor) style investing. Dreman is a columnist for Forbes magazine andthe author of several investment books. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015670 WT01-B12-106IA018-000194-B036-328http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kemper_firsts.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160420 text/html 3304HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:22 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:47:50 GMTContent-length: 3120Content-type: text/html Kemper Firsts Kemper has been an industry leader in developing innovative mutual fund concepts: Kemper Money Market Fund was one of the nation's first money marketfunds. (1974) Kemper Municipal Bond Fund was the nation's first municipal bond mutual fund. (1976) Kemper Investment Portfolios was one of the first 12-b1 fund families,enabling investors to invest 100 percent of their money upfront and paythe cost of distribution over time. (1984). KemFlex was one of the first sophisticated retirement plan recordkeepingsystems to be introduced by a mutual fund distributor, therebysimplifying plan administration and reducing plan cost. (1988) Kemper addressed the long-term goals - and security concerns - of manyinvestors with the introduction of the Kemper Retirement Fund series,which guarantees the return of original investments at a set date ifheld until maturity and dividends are reinvested. (Investors who redeemprior to maturity or do not reinvest dividends do not benefit from theguarantee.) (1990) With PREFERRED K, Kemper created an integrated turnkey approach forimplementing cost-effective 401(k) programs. (1991) Kemper introduced a worldwide fund with the guaranteed return of theoriginal investment at maturity - Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund. (Investorswho redeem prior to maturity or do not reinvest dividends do not benefitfrom the guarantee). (1994) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016220 WT01-B12-107IA018-000194-B037-4http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/logowear/logowear.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160428 text/html 5825HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:29 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 21:20:10 GMTContent-length: 5642Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog By popular demand, Kemper Funds logo wear is now available. For more information or to place an order, call . Ask for the Kemper Order Desk at (847) 490-3636 (8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Mon-Fri CST). You can also print an Adobe Acrobat version of our order form (55k) and fax it to (847) 490-8199 or mail it to: CLUB COLORS Attn: Kemper Orders 455 E. State Parkway #101 Schaumburg, IL 60173 (If you have not previously installed Adobe Acrobat Reader, the software required to view the form, you can download a free copy now.) A. Totes Umbrella (#KM1870) $10.95 Manual open, executive umbrella has case, wood handle and Kemper Funds logo tastefully imprinted on single panel. B. Coffee Mug (#KM1813) $ 4.59 Start your day with this ceramic 11 oz. mug featuring a metallic gold logo imprint. Each individually boxed. C. Travel Mug (#KM1812) $ 2.99 Deluxe 15 oz. durable plastic mug goes anywhere you do. With easy-sip lid and imprinted Kemper Funds logo. D. Stuffed Teddy Bear (#KM1850) $ 7.25 Plush stuffed animal sports an imprinted Kemper Funds logo shirt. Bear stands approximately 8 inches tall. E. Two Tone Twill Cap (#KM1502-00) $ 8.95 Pro style and durable construction are the highlights of embroidered headwear. With adjustable strap. F. Mock T-Shirt (#KM1009-00) $14.95 Simple style highlights this quality 100% cotton mock T-shirt with the richly embroidered logo. M-XXL. G. Twill/Ultra Suede Cap (#KM1504-29) $10.95 Natural twill is uniquely accented by hunter green ultra suede bill and embroidered patch. Leather strap. H. Lined Windshirt (#KM1308-29) $29.95 Fully-lined nylon taslon shell provides protection against the elements. Generous cut. Embroidered logo. S-XXL. Add $2 for XXL on all apparel items. I. Striped Collar Polo Shirt (#KM1003-00) $29.95 Enjoy the look and feel of fine resort wear with this 100% cotton jersey polo featuring embroidered logo. S-XXL. J. Herringbone Polo Shirt (#KM1012-99) $29.95 The textured appeal of herringbone fabric adds a subtle richness to this popular style. Embroidered logo. S-XXL. K. Solid Polo Shirt (#KM1001-00) $24.95 This super soft and extra heavyweight sport shirt is the best cotton basic you'll find anywhere. Embroidered. S-XXL. L. Logo Golf Balls (#KM1832) $28.90 Titleist DT2 golf balls by the dozen. Kemper Funds logo. M. Player's Jacket (#KM1310-59) $49.95 Comfortable cotton poplin jacket has all the essentials - snap close storm flap, slant pockets and full cotton lining. Embroidered. S-XXL. N. Pique Rugby Shirt (#KM1021-29) $34.95 An updated look in rugby shirts: the striping is tone on tone and the quality is top of the line. Twill neck taping and placket. S-XXL. Embroidered logo. O. Belding Golf Bag (#KE1710-GB) $179.95 Specially made Belding Bushwacker golf bag is constructed of light-weight, high tech fabric richly embroidered with the Kemper Funds logo. Features multiple carrycompartments. 8.5" © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022440 WT01-B12-108IA018-000194-B037-17http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/snapshots.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160435 text/html 2827HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 16-Sep-96 14:46:01 GMTContent-length: 2645Content-type: text/html Snapshots Supplied with a steady stream of government reports, corporate earningsreleases, analysts' forecasts and miscellaneous other data,market-watchers are never at a loss for information. Their challenge: Tounderstand what's in each snapshot - as well as in the surroundingenvironment that an individual market report may not have captured. Here's where you'll find current market news, including our outlook and economic interpretations by John Silvia, chief economist for Kemper Funds' management. Because of the changing nature of this information, you'llwant to check back here often. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010150-A WT01-B12-109IA018-000194-B037-27http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/longerview.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160443 text/html 2686HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:33 GMTContent-length: 2502Content-type: text/html The Longer View Of course, markets rise and fall. But individualinvestors can't afford to be erratic. As significant and as interestingas financial market news may be, it's essential for investors tomaintain a certain perspective. Taking a longer view, considering basicinvestment principles and tactics, can help a curious investor be a calminvestor. Think of The Longer View as your gateway to general investment andeducational information. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010050 WT01-B12-110IA018-000194-B037-36http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/business/business.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160450 text/html 2903HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:00:52 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 18:15:09 GMTContent-length: 2719Content-type: text/html  For The Curious Business Investor As one of the largest mutual fund complexes in the United States,Kemper Funds services many types of investors -- some investingfor personal goals and others investing for their businesses. For The Curious Business Investor includes a selection of articleswritten about current issues that may impact small business owners,qualified plan sponsors and general corporate investors. Mostof the articles are excerpted from Corporate Investor,a newsletter mailed each quarter to Kemper's corporate accountshareholders. To establish a corporate account, fill out a KemperFunds Account Application now and mail it in today. Small Businesses To Benefit From Pension Law Changes Help Protect Your Company's Retirement Plan From Claims The DOL Pushes For Better Investment Education Links To Small Business Sites © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025520 WT01-B12-111IA018-000194-B037-49http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/contact_shareholders.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160458 text/html 3145HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:19 GMTContent-length: 2961Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper By E-mail: Given ongoing security concerns, please do not refer to any personal information(Social Security numbers, fund account numbers or account balances) in correspondenceyou send to us by e-mail. Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Your inquiry: By Telephone Or By Mail © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011460 WT01-B12-112IA018-000194-B037-63http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/spectrum.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160507 text/html 5703HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:09 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:52:19 GMTContent-length: 5521Content-type: text/html Risk/Return Spectrum This list is for comparativepurposes only and is intended todescribe general characteristics only.It is not intended to represent past orfuture performance for any fund. Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Kemper Technology Fund Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Europe Fund Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund Kemper International Fund Kemper Growth Fund Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund Kemper Blue Chip Fund Kemper Value+Growth Fund Kemper Total Return Fund Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund Kemper Retirement Fund Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio Kemper High Yield Fund Kemper Diversified Income Fund Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio Kemper Global Income Fund Kemper Municipal Bond/State Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund Kemper Money Market Fund/Cash Reserves Fund Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund Kemper Government Money Fund For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from your financialrepresentative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048) or request one now.Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Money market funds seek to maintain a net asset value of $1.00 per share, but there is no assurance that they will. Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014860 WT01-B12-113IA018-000194-B037-77http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/funds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160516 text/html 3308HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:17 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:33:06 GMTContent-length: 3126Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Kemper Funds can be organized in seven general categories. Forinformation on an individual fund, you can access the fund's profileaccording to its fund type. Alternately, you can access a fund's profileby clicking on its name on the risk/return spectrum. An interactivefeature available at the bottom of every fund profile enables you tocompare individual Kemper Fund's performance to one of seven broadmarket indices. Kemper Funds New Funds International And Global Funds Capital Growth Funds Capital Growth And Income Funds Asset Allocation Funds Target Equity Funds Tax-Free Income Funds Income Funds Money Market Funds Risk/Return Spectrum Performance And Yield Notes To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, please contact your financial representative, call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011500 WT01-B12-114IA018-000194-B037-89http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/closedendfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160525 text/html 4043HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:26 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:44 GMTContent-length: 3861Content-type: text/html Kemper Closed-End Funds Kemper manages seven closed-end funds designed to meet varying financial goals. Six funds invest in the fixed-income or municipal markets while one fund invests primarily in Spanish equities. A closed-end fund differs from an "open-end" fund (commonly referred to as a "mutual fund") in several important ways: A closed-end fund is usually capitalized through a one-time public offering. New shares may be created only in certain circumstances -- to satisfy dividend reinvestment plan requirements with respect to income and capital gains distributions and occasionally rights offerings, for example. By contrast, an open-end fund continuously issues new shares. Once issued, the shares of a closed-end fund are not redeemable by the fund and are exchangeable only in the open market, generally by a listing on a recognized stock exchange. Shares of Kemper's closed-end funds are traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the Chicago Stock Exchange (CSE). Shares of an open-end fund, by contrast, are redeemable by the fund at any time. Because the supply of shares of a closed-end fund is finite, the market price of a closed-end fund share is based upon the forces of supply and demand. Shares may trade at either above or below their net asset value (NAV) based on their perceived value in the marketplace. This price differential is referred to as a premium or discount to NAV. Again, by contrast, an open-end fund stands ready at all times to redeem its shares at their current NAV. Because all trading of a closed-end fund's shares takes place in the open market, the portfolio manager of a closed-end fund does not need to worry about maintaining cash balances to fund share redemptions. This tends to give the manager more latitude to fully invest the portfolio and to consider a broader range of portfolio securities. Kemper Closed-End Funds Comparative Total Returns Kemper Closed-End Funds October 1996 News © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016500-B WT01-B12-115IA018-000194-B037-101http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/youandrep.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160532 text/html 2621HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:35 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 05-Jun-96 21:12:49 GMTContent-length: 2436Content-type: text/html You And Your Financial Representative Prospectuses And Important Information At Kemper Funds, we believe that establishing a relationship witha professional financial representative is the best way to takeadvantage of today's investment alternatives. Mutual funds are excellentbuilding blocks for your portfolio, with their built-in diversification,professional management and convenience. And, with over 6,000 fundsavailable today, we believe the best way to choose among them is withthe guidance and advice of a professional financial advisor. A Who's Who of Financial Representatives Here's how a professional financial representative can... Provide a custom-tailored plan to help you achieve your financial goals. Boost your investment confidence. Be results-oriented. Establish a relationship based on mutual respect and trust. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010220-A WT01-B12-116IA018-000194-B037-112http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/comp_total_returns_a.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160541 text/html 19418HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:42 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:43:47 GMTContent-length: 19235Content-type: text/html Class A Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 9/30/96 (Unadjusted for sales charge)                                                  YTD    1986    1987    1988    1989    1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995   10-yr. Cum.International And Global Funds  Kemper Europe Fund                           + 5.26%    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -  Kemper Global Income Fund                    + 2.01     -       -       -       -    +22.66% +11.13% - 1.90% +10.23% - 1.47% +19.88%   -  Kemper International Fund                    +10.28 +44.17% +6.46%  +17.25% +18.57% - 7.50  + 9.13  - 4.79  +35.65  - 4.00  +12.96  +143.18%Capital Growth Funds  Kemper Growth Fund                           +14.96 +13.41  + 5.73  +10.82  +30.75  + 3.86  +66.85  - 1.56  + 1.63  - 5.91  +31.87  +298.50   Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund           +22.08    -       -       -       -       -       -       -    + 2.54  + 0.15  +43.29    -  Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund              + 8.10*    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -  Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund      +16.83 +14.75  + 0.24  + 7.76  +26.13  - 5.22  +69.01  + 0.12  +16.79  - 3.31  +31.17  +302.64  Kemper Technology Fund                       +15.44 +14.42  + 6.86  + 3.10  +24.81  + 0.44  +44.35  - 1.19  +11.69  +11.35  +42.77  +328.48  Kemper Value+Growth Fund                     +16.22    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -Capital Growth And Income Funds  Kemper Blue Chip Fund                        +20.09    -       -    - 6.64  +27.26  + 2.41  +44.43  - 1.20  + 3.82  - 5.16  +31.72     -  Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund                + 5.95    -       -       -    +18.29  - 6.08  +26.53  +11.32  + 9.07  - 0.03  +44.57     -  Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund               +17.61    -       -       -    +18.45  - 8.63  +47.57  +19.80  + 9.22  - 0.99  +46.86     -Asset Allocation Funds  Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio                 + 9.68    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -  Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio                 + 7.42    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -  Kemper Horizon  5 Portfolio                  + 5.90    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -  Kemper Total Return Fund                     +10.45 +17.62  - 2.37  + 8.76  +19.83  + 4.11  +40.16  + 2.49  +11.59  - 9.18  +25.80  +177.40Target Equity Funds  Kemper Retirement Fund - Series I  (Closed to investors)#                       +10.21    -       -       -       -    +12.57* +43.36  + 1.91  +11.37  - 6.26  +23.75    -  Kemper Retirement Fund - Series II  (Closed to investors)#                       + 7.06   -       -       -       -    + 6.89* +41.86  + 3.06  +12.50  - 6.79   +23.55     -  Kemper Retirement Fund - Series III  (Closed to investors)#                       + 7.14    -       -       -       -       -       -    +11.68* +13.61  - 7.26  +26.17   -  Kemper Retirement Fund - Series IV  (Closed to investors)#                       + 5.21    -       -       -       -       -       -       -    +10.35* - 8.18  +27.52    -  Kemper Retirement Fund - Series V  (Closed to investors)#                       + 5.26    -       -       -       -       -       -       -    -0.22*  - 7.46  +29.00    -  Kemper Retirement Fund - Series VI#          + 3.03    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -      -       -  Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund                    (Closed to investors)#                       + 1.43    -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -    + 0.67* +21.68   -Tax-Free Income Funds  Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund      + 0.98   -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -    + 1.33*  +14.08    -  Kemper Municipal Bond Fund                   + 0.58 +19.08  + 3.09  + 8.65  +11.30  + 6.66  +12.78  + 8.71  +13.20  - 5.51  +18.33  +115.76  Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund       + 0.46 +18.38  + 4.19  + 7.52  +11.48  + 6.70  +11.42  + 8.25  +12.59  - 5.47  +19.48  +114.21  Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund          + 0.23    -       -       -       -       -    +10.03* + 9.11  +13.50  - 3.91  +18.40    -  Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund         + 0.02   -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     +12.42*    -  Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund       - 0.44   -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     +12.07*    -  Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund         + 0.26 +12.60  - 1.05  + 7.74  +12.01  + 5.93  +13.39  + 9.43  +12.97  - 4.95  +17.98  +108.09  Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund             + 0.44   -       -       -       -       -       -       -    +10.06* - 3.67   +18.37     -  Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund     + 0.13  -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -      +13.14*    -  Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund            + 1.32    -       -       -       -       -       -    + 9.88  +14.13  - 2.61  +18.46    -Income Funds  Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund  + 3.08   -       -    + 4.82  +11.64  + 7.19  +13.46  + 6.06  + 4.91  - 0.44    +8.51     -  Kemper Diversified Income Fund               + 5.09 + 2.76  - 8.05  +19.61  + 7.96  -12.60  +51.69  +17.80  +20.88  - 3.83  +19.67  +175.08  Kemper High Yield Fund                       + 9.62 +18.26  + 9.02  +14.41  - 1.14  -12.98  +46.84  +17.08  +20.29  - 1.72  +17.46  +194.61  Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund  - 1.22 +14.57  + 3.10  +10.43  + 8.55  + 6.48  +17.91  + 7.85  +11.71  - 3.38  +21.35  +121.69  Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund    + 1.34   -       -       -       -       -       -    + 6.32* + 5.50  - 0.96   +11.26     -  Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund       + 0.13 +16.24  + 2.68  + 6.35  +14.00  + 9.68  +17.25  + 4.61  + 6.31  - 3.06  +18.37  +111.77  Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund                    + 0.04    -       -       -       -       -       -    + 5.83* + 5.64  - 3.44  +18.07     - Compare your fund's performance against the broad market indices. Consumer Price Index                          + 2.70% + 1.13% + 4.41% + 4.42% + 4.65% + 6.11% + 3.06% + 2.90% +2.80%  + 2.70% +2.50%  + 42.90% Dow Jones Industrial Average                  +16.95  +27.25  + 5.55  +16.21  +32.24  - 0.54  +24.25  + 7.40  +17.00  + 5.02  +36.94  +358.43 FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe       +11.23  +45.27  + 7.80  +13.99  +28.52  - 1.81  +14.27  - 4.12  +28.79  + 2.62  +22.64  +234.56 Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond                + 0.61  +15.26  + 2.76  + 7.89  +14.53  + 8.96  +16.00  + 7.40  + 9.75  - 2.92  +18.47  +126.02 Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond     - 0.15  +15.32  + 2.20  + 7.03  +14.23  + 8.72  +15.32  + 7.23  +11.00  - 3.51  +19.24  +123.59 Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond                + 1.83  +19.31  + 1.51  +10.16  +10.79  + 7.29  +12.14  + 8.82  +12.28  - 5.17  +17.46  +113.71 Morgan Stanley Capital International EAFE     + 4.62  +69.94  +24.93  +28.59  +10.80  -23.20  +12.50  -11.85  +32.94  + 8.06  +11.55  +136.39 Russell 1000 Growth                           +16.11  +15.36  + 5.31  +11.27  +35.92  - 0.26  +41.16  + 5.00  + 2.90  + 2.66  +37.19  +316.32 Russell 2000 Growth                           +10.97  + 3.58  -10.48  +20.37  +20.17  -17.41  +51.19  + 7.77  +13.36  - 2.43  +31.04  +183.35 Standard & Poor's 500                         +13.49  +18.67  + 5.25  +16.56  +31.63  - 3.11  +30.40  + 7.61  +10.10  + 1.31  +37.53  +303.43 Salomon Brothers World Government Bond        + 1.21  +23.04  +18.41  + 4.37  + 4.33  +11.98  +15.81  + 5.53  +13.27  + 2.35  +19.04  +153.32 Wilshire Large Company Growth                 +19.27  +15.50  + 4.70  +15.20  +35.20  + 0.30  +46.60  + 5.90  + 0.54  + 2.96  +37.88  +357.30 *Total return figures since fund's inception: Kemper Florida Tax-FreeIncome; Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond; Kemper Michigan Tax-FreeIncome; Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income; Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income;Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income; Kemper Retirement Series I; SeriesII; Series III; Series IV; Series V; Series VI; KemperShort-Intermediate Government; Kemper U.S. Mortgage; Kemper Worldwide2004. The maximum initial sales charge is 5.75% for Kemper Blue ChipFund, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund, Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, Kemper International Fund, KemperGrowth Fund, Kemper Technology Fund, Kemper Small Capitalization EquityFund and Kemper Total Return Fund and Kemper Value+Growth Fund. Themaximum initial sales charge is 4.50% for Kemper Income Funds (3.5% forKemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund and KemperShort-Intermediate Government Fund) and 5.0% for Kemper Target EquityFunds. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditionsas described in the funds' prospectuses. #Multiple classes notavailable; fund performance shown. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014870 -B WT01-B12-117IA018-000194-B037-127http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/comp_total_returns_b.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160549 text/html 12857HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:52 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:43:53 GMTContent-length: 12674Content-type: text/html Class B Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 9/30/96 (Not adjusted for contingent deferred sales charge) Except for Kemper Cash Reserves, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian, Kemper-Dreman High Return, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value, Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond, Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income, Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income, Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income, Kemper Quantitative Equity, Kemper Short-Intermediate Government and Kemper U.S. Mortgage and Kemper Value+Growth, shares of this class were first available on 5/31/94. Total return figures are since the class's inception.                                                        YTD      1995 International And Global Funds   Kemper Europe Fund                                + 4.84%***       -   Kemper Global Income Fund                         + 1.43     +19.20%   Kemper International Fund                         + 9.49     +11.96Capital Growth Funds   Kemper Growth Fund                                +14.11     +30.50   Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund                +21.28        -   Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund                   + 7.37**      -   Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund           +15.82     +29.90   Kemper Technology Fund                            +14.55     +41.22   Kemper Value + Growth Fund                        +15.45        -Capital Growth And Income Funds   Kemper Blue Chip Fund                             +19.30     +30.78   Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund                     + 5.31        -   Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund                    +16.78        -Asset Allocation Funds   Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio                      + 8.84        -   Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio                      + 6.85        -   Kemper Horizon  5 Portfolio                       + 5.38        -   Kemper Total Return Fund                          + 9.80     +25.54Tax-Free Income Funds   Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund           + 0.47     +12.98   Kemper Municipal Bond Fund                        - 0.18     +17.45   Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund            - 0.18     +18.61   Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund               - 0.42     +17.42   Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund              - 0.53     +11.72*   Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund            - 1.00     +11.56*   Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund              - 0.38     +16.93   Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund                  - 0.19     +17.49   Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund          - 0.48     +12.34*   Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund                 + 0.76     +17.24Income Funds   Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund       + 2.39     +7.89%   Kemper Diversified Income Fund                    + 4.44     +18.57   Kemper High Yield Fund                            + 8.85     +16.35   Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund       - 1.82     +19.97   Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund         + 0.67     +10.37   Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund            - 0.51     +17.42   Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund                         - 0.46     +16.94 The contingent deferred sales charge scheduled for Class B shares purchased on or after 3/1/93 for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Sales charges are eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. *Since fund's inception 3/15/95. **Since fund's inception 2/15/96. ***Since fund's inception 5/1/96. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014890 -B WT01-B12-118IA018-000194-B037-138http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/comp_total_returns_c.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160556 text/html 12577HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:01:59 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 23:02:46 GMTContent-length: 12394Content-type: text/html Class C Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 9/30/96 (Not adjusted for contingent deferred sales charge) Except for Kemper-Dreman Contrarian, Kemper-Dreman HighReturn, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value, Kemper Horizon, KemperIntermediate Municipal Bond, Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income, Kemper NewJersey Tax-Free Income, Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income, Kemper Quantitative Equity and KemperValue+Growth, shares of this class were first available on 5/31/94.Total return figures are since the class's inception.                                                      YTD           1995International And Global Funds   Kemper Europe Fund                               + 4.84%          -      Kemper Global Income Fund                        + 1.54        +19.26%   Kemper International Fund                        + 9.49        +11.96Capital Growth Funds   Kemper Growth Fund                               +14.22        +30.74   Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund               +21.56           -   Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund                  + 7.47##         -   Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund          +15.84        +29.95   Kemper Technology Fund                           +14.63        +41.81   Kemper Value+Growth Fund                         +15.35           -Capital Growth And Income Funds   Kemper Blue Chip Fund                            +19.29        +31.02   Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund                    + 5.22           -   Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund                   +16.77           -Asset Allocation Funds   Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio                     + 8.95           -   Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio                     + 6.88           -   Kemper Horizon  5  Portfolio                     + 5.29           -   Kemper Total Return Fund                         + 9.77        +24.94Tax-Free Income Funds   Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund          + 0.38        +13.12   Kemper Municipal Bond Fund                       - 0.17        +17.47   Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund           - 0.33        +18.47   Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund              - 0.43        +17.56   Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund             - 0.54        +11.74#   Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund           - 0.77        +11.61#   Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund             - 0.37        +16.88   Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund                 - 0.20        +17.49   Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund         - 0.55        +12.45#   Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund                + 0.68        +17.37Income Funds   Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund      + 2.54        +7.79   Kemper Diversified Income Fund                   + 4.48        +18.68   Kemper High Yield Fund                           + 8.87        +16.39   Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund      - 1.79        +20.29   Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund        + 0.72        +10.46   Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund           - 0.59        +17.43   Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund                        - 0.57        +17.03 #Since fund's inception 3/15/95. ##Since fund's inception 2/15/96. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014880 -B WT01-B12-119IA018-000194-B037-154http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/performyield.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160613 text/html 6707HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:02:12 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 22:32:32 GMTContent-length: 6525Content-type: text/html Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Shares are not insured or guaranteed andare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Money fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments. Total returncalculations assume that you reinvested your dividends. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund,Kemper Diversified Income Fund and Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of the followingunmanaged indices: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P Actuaries World Index, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. Returns for Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper IntermediateMunicipal Bond Fund, Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper NewJersey Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund, KemperPennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund and Kemper-Dreman Funds include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses byKemper Financial Services, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund are no longer in effectand expenses are generally being reinstated for Kemper Ohio Tax-FreeIncome Fund and Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Performance of fund classes will differ.Please see prospectus for details. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014900 WT01-B12-120IA018-000194-B037-171http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/news.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160627 text/html 3952HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:02:29 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 03-Dec-96 20:05:03 GMTContent-length: 3769Content-type: text/html News Thanks in part to your support, we've been busy at Kemper Funds. Here'swhere you'll find the most recent developments. New To Kemper.com Kemper Funds Capital Gains Dividend Estimates For December Our Outlook Our economic outlook, by Stephen B. Timbers, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc.'s president, chief investment and executive officer. On The Horns Of A Dilemma A special report explaining growth and value investing. This article, which presents Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. as the only U.S. asset manager with separate organizations to manage growth and value portfolios, appeared as a special advertising supplement in the November 14, 1996, Wall Street Journal. New Fund: Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Funds Management Sponsors Public Television Series News About Your Transaction Confirmation Statements Hold Period Reduced Five Stars For Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund We're Improving Your Year-end Statement In the July 22, 1996, Barron's Kemper International Fund Portfolio Manager Dennis Ferro was recognized for excellence in fund management. Announcing Improved Flexibility For Processing Requests Meet the Newest Member of Our Equity Investment Team A New Name: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Watch For Our Ads! America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011440-F WT01-B12-121IA018-000194-B037-180http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/most.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160635 text/html 3030HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:02:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:28:31 GMTContent-length: 2848Content-type: text/html Making the Most of Your Investment Kemper Funds offers an array of services and features that are designedto help you achieve your financial goals as simply and conveniently aspossible. Direct Deposit Your Government Check Contacting Kemper From Abroad New Services On KemperACCESS Reduce Your Kemper Mailings Why Published Investment Returns May Not Match Your Experience Invest By Mail Slips Your Reinvestment Privilege About Your KemperACCESS PIN Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment Diversification Within The Kemper Funds Share Certificates Changes In Account Ownership Have You Changed Banks? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011450-B WT01-B12-122IA018-000194-B037-200http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/forms.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160645 text/html 4373HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:02:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:24 GMTContent-length: 4189Content-type: text/html Printable Forms For Kemper Funds' shareholders who believe that there's no time like thepresent, we offer a series of shareholder account service forms. Ifthere's an action that you'd like to take now, just click on theappropriate form, print it, complete and sign it and return it by mail to: Kemper Service Company P.O. Box 419415 Kansas City, MO 64141-6415 (This address also appears on each form.) Kemper Funds account application (445k) Systematic Withdrawals (231k) To receive regular cash withdrawals from your account. Checkwriting (for Kemper Money Funds only) (170k) You may write as many checks as you like for amounts of $500 or more upto the available balance in your account. Bank Direct Deposit (203k) For automatic investing directly from your financial institution. Dividend Payment (223k) To change dividend payment options on the Kemper account identified inthe Authorization Agreement. Expedited Wire Redemptions (143k) To request quick redemptions by phone from the Kemper account identifiedin the Authorization Agreement to your financial institution. EXPRESS-Transfer (196k) To request quick cash transfers by phone to and from the Kemper accountidentified in the Authorization Agreement. Systematic Exchanges (243k) To invest automatically, by periodic exchange, from the Kemper account identified in the Authorization Agreement into another existingKemper account(s). Payroll Direct Deposit (189k) For investing into your account directly from your employer's payroll. Government Direct Deposit (116k) To invest all or a portion of your government check directly into your mutual fund account. Statement Customization Request Form (170k) To customize your Kemper account statement mailings by consolidating additional accounts on one statement or by combining additional statements in one envelope. Download a free copy of Acrobat Reader © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010290-A WT01-B12-123IA018-000194-B037-210http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/learn/introduce.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160659 text/html 3509HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:03:01 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:54:36 GMTContent-length: 3325Content-type: text/html May We Introduce You? Kemper Funds believes that working with financial representatives is aninvestor's best approach for achieving his or her goals in today's complexand global investment markets. Would you like to work with a financial representative but don't know whoto call? We would be happy to introduce you to someone in your area. Just fill out the following information and we'll be in touch as soon as possible. Thank you for your interest in Kemper Funds. Here's hoping thatthis is the start of a productive relationship! Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: How would you prefer to be contacted? (Check one) By telephone - Your telephone number: By mail Comments? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010240 WT01-B12-124IA018-000194-B037-224http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/bestofkemper/bestofkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160707 text/html 4318HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:03:10 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 16:34:33 GMTContent-length: 4136Content-type: text/html Best of Kemper.com At the risk of seeming immodest, we hope you'll make a special effort to visit what we consider the best of Kemper.com. Holiday Greetings! We review the many gifts of 1996. What does a happy retiree look like? You'll see when you scroll through our photo album. Are you retired? We have a page just waiting for you! How does the stock market perform when the bond market is up -- and vice versa? To aid your understanding of how markets have performed, Kemper.com enables you to create and print your own graph comparing the long-term performance of 12 stock and bond market indices. And how do the Kemper Funds' perform against the leading market indices? You can create and print your own graphical comparison. It's in the daily news but what is the significance of the monthly announcement of the country's employment situation? This page provides a graphical look of how the markets react to the monthly unemployment report. For more information about one of several economic measures, click on the "gear." Are you ready to retire? Our interactive test will analyze your retirement readiness. While you're here, be sure to meet our Friends And Neighbors. You'll meet the professional golfers who wear the Kemper Funds name (an animated arrow will show you where), learn about In the Prime, the public television series sponsored by Kemper Funds Group -- you can even view our Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023880-A WT01-B12-125IA018-000194-B037-238http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/newtokemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160714 text/html 4628HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:03:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 16:34:24 GMTContent-length: 4446Content-type: text/html New To Kemper.com The following are highlights of what's been added to Kemper.com. Remember: if you find a page you'll want to visit often, just add it as a bookmark or favorite place to your Web browser. (Since this content of this page changes regularly, you may want to bookmark it.) And remember -- Kemper.com is searchable by keyword. Holiday Greetings! We review the many gifts of 1996. Scroll through Kemper.com's on-line photo album of happy retirees and links to favorite Web sites. To share your happiness (or the happiness of a loved one) with visitors to Kemper.com, mail a color print or slide and a list of favorite Web sites, along with the retiree's name, address, telephone number and e-mail address, to: On-line Photo Album Kemper Distributors, Inc. Shareholder Marketing -- 33rd Floor 222 South Riverside Plaza Chicago, IL 60606-5808 Kemper Funds as gifts for children. Just in time for the holiday season, you'll find complete information on how to give the gift of a Kemper fund to a child. Also included: An explanation of how the gift of a mutual fund compares with the gift of a U.S. savings bond. An interactive feature enables you to view the 20-year performance of a $1,000 savings bond versus the performance of $1,000 invested in one of the six Kemper funds with a 20-year history. "On The Horns Of A Dilemma." A special report on growth and value investing -- you'll find the full text and charts that appeared in Kemper's November 14, 1996, special supplement to The Wall Street Journal. Best of Kemper.com. Recognizing that time is at a premium for Web surfers, we've assembled a Best of page -- just so you don't miss the best of what we have to offer. Of the tens of thousands of commercial sites on the World Wide Web, Kemper.com is one of 850 highlighted within the WebTV service as a "preferred destination." And, of course, we're continually refreshing: Our economic outlook by Stephen B. Timbers, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. president and chief investment and executive officer Kemper Funds shareholder news Kemper Funds press releases Kemper Funds prospectuses General investing topics What more would you like to see on Kemper.com? Tell us now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016630-E WT01-B12-126IA018-000194-B037-252http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/economy.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160746 text/html 2701HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:03:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 16-Sep-96 14:46:15 GMTContent-length: 2519Content-type: text/html The Economy Should you care about your fellow consumer's confidence? Why is inflation the big, bad boogieman? These commentaries from John Silvia, chief economist for Kemper Funds' management, and others can give you a basic foundation for interpreting current economic developments. Inflation: Tamed! Understanding Consumer Psychology The Game Of Federal Funding The Long And Short Of Interest Rates The Risks Of Investing Health Care Debate Will Shift the Burden Only in America: Income Mobility What's So Special About 6 Percent? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010160 WT01-B12-127IA018-000194-B037-266http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/global_economy.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160753 text/html 3386HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:03:56 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 11-Oct-96 15:35:03 GMTContent-length: 3204Content-type: text/html The Global Economy The United States is the largest single market in the world for both stocks and bonds. However, two-thirds of the world's stock market opportunity and more than half of the world's bond market opportunity is outside the U.S. In this section of Kemper.com, we present the global economic outlook of David D. Hale, global economic strategist for Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The Weekly Money Report Will Investors Or The Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? Will Federal Devolution Set The Stage For A State And Local Privatization Boom In The Next U.S. Recession? How Will Investors Respond To The U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? Economic Implications Of The Mutual Fund Boom 1021720 WT01-B12-128IA018-000194-B037-275http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/markets.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160802 text/html 2836HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:04:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 20:57:35 GMTContent-length: 2652Content-type: text/html The Markets The economy provides an environment, but the markets are whereinvestments perform. Securities are bought and sold in many types andsizes of markets. There are money markets for short-term investors, U.S.and foreign markets for equities investors and a wide range of U.S. andforeign government and corporate markets for income investors. Anynumber of variables - corporate earnings, government stability,interest rate movements, just to name a few - influence these marketsand, by extension, your success as an investor. Presidents And The Stock Market How The Markets React Market Indices Are You Prepared For More Volatility? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010170 WT01-B12-129IA018-000194-B037-283http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/outlook.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160810 text/html 7748HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:04:12 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 18-Dec-96 20:11:03 GMTContent-length: 7563Content-type: text/html Our Outlook December 10, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer As we approach the close of 1996, it's remarkable how eventful the year has been and yet, economically, we are essentially where we were one year ago. The fundamentals of the economy are remarkably similar today to what they were in 1995. Long-term interest rates are approximately 6.5% compared to 6.3% in November 1995. The economy is growing at a rate of approximately 2.2%. Inflation continues to be well under control, at about 3.0%. One significant difference between today and one year ago is that stock prices are on average up 20%. While price movements were more volatile in 1996 than in the past few years, the patient investor was amply rewarded. The prime element sending the stock market higher was strong positive cash flows. Such liquidity in an environment of modestly increasing corporate profits and relatively stable interest rates pushed stocks higher for most of the year. This higher stock market has caused many market observers to worry. While we cannot ignore what has happened, we find no reason to be bearish over the long term. The environment is benign to favorable for financial assets. Given steady interest rates, moderate economic growth and continued moderate corporate earnings growth, there are few excesses in the system. In fact, real interest rates are probably too high considering our outlook for inflation, and we may see them decline over time. Naturally, we cannot rule out the possibility of a market correction. But, in our belief, the downside would appear to be limited to 5% to 8%, which is the size of a typical correction based on historical data. As we have said in previous outlooks, three elements tend to move the market: Earnings. We forecast corporate earnings to range between 0% and 5% on average for the Standard & Poor's 500* in 1997 -- not as high as in recent previous years but positive nonetheless. Interest rates. Rates should remain stable, and short-term interest rates may even decline. Liquidity. Investors, through mutual funds, 401(k)s and qualified contribution plans in particular, will continue to create strong demand for securities. In order to move the market more than would be expected in a typical decline, one or more of these elements will have to turn negative in 1997, and, while future conditions cannot be predicted with certainty, we fail to see what would materially change our outlook. Our outlook going forward is that 1997 should be a lot like 1996. While the economy continued along a relatively consistent path, the United States took some politically significant steps in 1996. First, of course, President Bill Clinton and a Republican Congress were re-elected by the voters. In the first few days after the general election, especially, investors demonstrated their support for such a balance in our leadership. But of much greater long-term significance is the expressed commitment by both parties to balance the federal budget and address certain entitlement programs. The first year after an election can be a fertile time to accomplish major initiatives, and we are hopeful that progress can be made. The future of the Social Security system, which many experts believe will run out of money about 20 years from now, will be a subject in which you can expect Zurich Kemper Investments to play a leadership role. The possible solutions for "fixing Social Security" are finite: raise Social Security taxes, reduce benefits, raise the retirement age, change inflation assumptions or pursue a higher rate of return on assets contributed by workers. We believe that a bipartisan solution will be worked out, which will include giving individuals the option of investing a portion of their Social Security contributions in an account earmarked for them. This change is needed to return credibility to the system, which many Americans have lost faith in. What to do with Social Security is a debate that spans generations and promises to occupy much attention in the coming years. As we hope to help advance constructive debate, we'll be advocating partial privatization for this federal program while maintaining a safety net for many low-wage earners and providing a seamless transition for seniors near or in retirement. With this letter as an economic backdrop, we encourage you to read the following detailed report of your fund, including an interview with your fund's portfolio management. Thank you for your continued support. We appreciate the opportunity to serve your investment needs. Sincerely, Stephen B. Timbers President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. December 10, 1996 *The Standard & Poor's 500 is an unmanaged index generally representative of the U.S. stock market. Stephen B. Timbers is president, chief executive and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI and its affiliates manage approximately $79 billion in assets, including $45 billionin retail mutual funds. Timbers is a graduate of Yale University and holds an M.B.A. from Harvard University. A Weather Forecast For International Markets © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1002180-T WT01-B12-130IA018-000194-B037-299http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/understand_fundsmenu.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160824 text/html 3777HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:04:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 14-Nov-96 00:23:47 GMTContent-length: 3593Content-type: text/html Understanding Mutual Funds Mutual funds have made it possible for the individual investor tobenefit from professional management. And, if you're a shareholder inKemper Funds, it's likely that you also have the benefit of theexpertise of your financial representative. Even with both of theseadvantages, there's plenty that the curious investor may want to learnabout mutual funds. On The Horns Of A Dilemma A special report explaining growth and value investing. This article, which presents Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. as the only U.S. asset manager with separate organizations to manage growth and value portfolios, appeared as a special advertising supplement in the November 14, 1996, Wall Street Journal. How To Arrive At Total Return The Power of Diversification The 13 Most Common Mistakes To Avoid When Investing In Mutual Funds Dollar Cost Averaging Taxable Or Tax-Exempt? How Kemper Shareholders Evaluate Performance The Difference Between Mutual Fund And Stock Dividends What's In A Yield? What You Might Miss If You Don't Read The Prospectus The Benefits Of Automatic Investing Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment What's A Signature Guarantee? Why Mutual Funds Waive Expenses © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010060 WT01-B12-131IA018-000194-B037-312http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/shortterm.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160833 text/html 2583HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:04:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:34 GMTContent-length: 2399Content-type: text/html Short Term Investing Most investing is done for the long term. But investors who are lookingfor a temporary stopping place or who have only a short time for theirmoney to work have certain needs. If you're a short-term investor, yourdesire to maintain a stable principal may guide the investment decisionsyou make. We have some ideas just for you. Do You Need A Rainy Day Fund? Do's And Don'ts For Daydreamers The Down Payment Just Gets You In The Door Purchasing A New Car? Money Market Funds Balance Income, Stability © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010080 WT01-B12-132IA018-000194-B037-321http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/planning.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160840 text/html 2807HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:04:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:01 GMTContent-length: 2623Content-type: text/html Planning As an investor, you have a schedule of your own. You know when yourchild will be entering college or the number of years until you plan toretire, for example. But what can be complicated about investing is thatyour investing cycle - when you invest and when you use the proceeds -takes place within the realm of a broader cycle. Your objective as aninvestor is to find a way to dovetail your investing cycle with theunpredictable ups and downs of the overall economy. Planning for Your Child's Future includes what you can do with your owninvestments as well as the possibilities with a child's portfolio. Be sure to visit Your Retirement for insights on the all-important taskof planning for your retirement. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010090 WT01-B12-133IA018-000194-B037-333http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/childsfuture.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160851 text/html 2530HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:04:54 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:31:13 GMTContent-length: 2345Content-type: text/html For Your Child's Future Encourage The Habit Of Investing College Planning How To Give The Gift Of A Kemper Fund How The Gift Of A Mutual Fund Compares With The Gift Of A U.S.Savings Bond What Are The Tax Consequences For Gift-Givers? U.S. Savings Bonds vs. The Standard & Poor's 500 U.S. Savings Bonds vs. Kemper Funds About Custodial Accounts © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016160-A WT01-B12-134IA018-000194-B038-8http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/your_ret.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160858 text/html 3134HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:05:01 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 22:25:56 GMTContent-length: 2952Content-type: text/html Your Retirement Our Photo Album Of Happy Retirees Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. Are You Ready To Retire? Pre-Retirees Have Special Planning Pressures Get Ready To Retire! How Early IRA Contributions Can Add Up Don't Touch Your Retirement Plan Distribution FREE! Call For Your Free Kemper Retirement Dream Planner National Council On The Aging The Price Of Your Retirement Dream Can You Rely On A Savings Account? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009760-A WT01-B12-135IA018-000194-B038-20http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/tour.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160907 text/html 5358HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:05:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:26:44 GMTContent-length: 5174Content-type: text/html Tour Our Site Welcome aboard! On this tour, you're free to chew gum, play your musicloud and stand in the aisles to get a better view. To orient yourself, you should know that Kemper.com has six main hubs.Clicking on one of them will take you into a separate hierarchy. If you're looking for general information about the company as a whole,you'd go to About Kemper Funds. For general investing and financial planninginformation, head for For The CuriousInvestor. To obtain detail about a Kemper Fund and its performance, as well asan explanation of the importance of a financial representative, drop inat Kemper Funds. The better informed Kemper Funds shareholders will want to spend time in Just For Kemper FundsShareholders. To Learn More is a starting pointfor people who'd like to know moreabout Kemper Funds, including a system for referrals to an areafinancial representative. The sixth hub, Are You AFinancial Representative?, is apassword-restricted section of the site. Think of it as a 24-hour salesand marketing meeting for the financial representatives who offerKemper Funds to the investing public. As you make your way through the site, there are several features thatyou might want to use: The Kemper Funds logo at the bottom right-hand of every page will takeyou back to the welcome page. Clicking on the Prospectuses And Important Information link at the top left-hand corner of every page enables you to request a prospectus. Kemper is just a click away. Search will enable you to search the entire site for a keyword or phrase. Our Financial Whiz-dom icon flags an interactive feature. For detail about what's in each one of our hubs, go to the Kemper.com Site Map. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010010 WT01-B12-136IA018-000194-B038-29http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/newownership.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160917 text/html 3233HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:05:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:06 GMTContent-length: 3051Content-type: text/html  New Ownership In January, Kemper Financial Services, Inc. became an indirect subsidiary of Zurich Insurance Group. In March, KFS changed its name to Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. "The name is different," says Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive and chief investment officer, "but our fundamental mission is the same: To manufacture and distribute high quality investment management products and services to individuals and institutions and to help them achieve their long-term financial goals. Our goal is to fulfill this mission better than anyone else in the investment management business." The transfer of ownership provided an occasion for us to update our look. Specifically, at the bottom right-hand of every page of Kemper.com, you'll see our new Kemper Funds logo, which includes a "wealthmark." The wealthmark relates to both our Midwest home base and to the concept of harvest. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-137IA018-000194-B038-38http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/afundmilestone.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160926 text/html 3483HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:05:29 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:04 GMTContent-length: 3301Content-type: text/html  A Fund Milestone Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, America's first retail municipal bond fund, celebrated its 20th birthday on April 20. Since Kemper introduced its fund, 1,847 tax-free mutual funds have been launched, representing approximately $252 billion in municipal bond fund assets as of September 30, 1996. Kemper Municipal Bond Fund Class A shares have outperformed the Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. general municipal debt mutual fund category averages for the one-, five- and 10-year periods ended September 30, 1996. Kemper tax-free funds, including Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund and eight state tax-free income funds, totaled $4.9 billion in assets as of September 30, 1996. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, download one now, talk to your financial representative or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 800-621-1048. The prospectus contains more complete information including management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-138IA018-000194-B038-47http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/ournewhome.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160934 text/html 2914HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:05:37 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:06 GMTContent-length: 2732Content-type: text/html  Our New Home Cutting the ribbon at Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc.'s new headquarters are (from left) Ed Noha, chairman, Chicago Economic Development Commission; Chicago Mayor Richard Daley; ZKI President, Chief Executive and Chief Investment Officer Stephen B. Timbers; and Kemper Funds Group President Jack Neal. Our address is 222 South Riverside Plaza, directly above Union Station. If you're in the neighborhood, be sure to stop in to our Service Center on the ground floor. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-139IA018-000194-B038-64http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/twowebsites.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160951 text/html 2954HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:05:51 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:10 GMTContent-length: 2772Content-type: text/html  Two Web Sites In March, Kemper.com arrived on the World Wide Web! The site was established as an extension of the services we provide to our shareholders and to the financial representatives who offer Kemper Funds to the investing public. In our first year, we've received positive reviews from organizations such as Yahoo Internet Life!, the Microsoft Network and EyeOnTheWeb. In August, a second site, kempercash.com debuted. The site, which focuses on money market funds only, is written from the view of an experienced investor based on a private island in the South Pacific. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-140IA018-000194-B038-80http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/threefunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106160959 text/html 4356HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:06:01 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:08 GMTContent-length: 4174Content-type: text/html  Three Five Star Funds As of October 31, 1996, Kemper High Yield Fund, Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund and Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund all received Morningstar's five-star "highest" rating for overall performance in their respective categories. Kemper High Yield Fund also has five stars for the three-, five- and 10-year periods. It was rated among 1,054, 572 and 233 fixed-income funds for the three-, five- and 10-year periods, respectively. For the one-year period, the fund received four stars and was rated among 1,654 fixed-income funds. In addition to its five-star overall rating, Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund received five stars for the one-, three- and five-year periods. It was rated among 2,864, 1,724, 1,031 and 575 domestic equity funds for the one-, three- and five-year periods, respectively. Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund also received five stars for the three-year period in the small company category. For the one-year period, the fund's rating is four stars or "above average." Ten percent of the funds in a rating category receive five stars, and the next 22.5 percent receive four stars. Morningstar proprietary ratings reflect risk-adjusted performance through October 31, 1996. Ratings are calculated from the funds' three-, five-, and, where applicable, 10-year returns (with fee adjustments) in excess of 90-day Treasury bill returns. The one-year rating is calculated using the same methodology, but is not a component of the overall rating. Ratings are subject to change every month. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, download one now, talk to your financial representative or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 800-621-1048. The prospectus contains more complete information including management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-141IA018-000194-B038-93http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/sixnewfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161007 text/html 3024HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:06:09 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:07 GMTContent-length: 2842Content-type: text/html  Six New Funds Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund, Kemper Europe Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fund and three Kemper Horizon Fund portfolios were introduced during 1996, broadening the range of investment options available from Kemper Funds. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, download one now, talk to your financial representative or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 800-621-1048. The prospectus contains more complete information including management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-142IA018-000194-B038-109http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/holiday/tvseries.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161021 text/html 3141HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:06:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:19:09 GMTContent-length: 2959Content-type: text/html  TV Series Sponsored In September, Kemper introduced its exclusive sponsorship of a new public television series that focuses on topics of particular interest to those between the ages of 45 and 60. In 26 half-hour programs, In the Prime explores themes such as financial planning, mid-life career changes, elder care and approaches to a healthy life. The series, produced by Washington, D.C.-based public television station WETA, airs on PBS stations nationwide. In the Prime weekly show topics Where and when you can find In the Prime in your area. Videotapes Available At A Discount WETA's In the Prime Web site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025910 WT01-B12-143IA018-000194-B038-169http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/prospectus_email.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161114 text/html 3744HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:07:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 21-Oct-96 16:03:53 GMTContent-length: 3562Content-type: text/html Request A Kemper Funds Prospectus By E-mail Thank you for your interest in Kemper Funds. Please select whichprospectus or prospectuses that you would like to receive and completethe following information. A package containing your prospectusrequest and a Kemper Funds account application will be mailed to youwithin two weeks. New! Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Money Funds Kemper Fixed Income Funds Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds Kemper Retirement Fund Series VI Kemper Equity Funds Kemper-Dreman Fund, Inc. Kemper Europe Fund Kemper International Fund and Kemper Global Income Fund Kemper Horizon Fund Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: If we have questions processing your request, may we contact you bytelephone? Yes No If yes, your daytime telephone number: © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010930-A WT01-B12-144IA018-000194-B038-185http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/prospectus_download.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161122 text/html 2941HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:07:24 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 17-Dec-96 20:57:11 GMTContent-length: 2758Content-type: text/html Download A Kemper Funds Prospectus Or Account Application Now (All files are in Adobe Acrobat .pdf format. If you have not previouslyinstalled Adobe Acrobat Reader, the software requiredto view these files, you can download a free copy now.) New! Kemper Asian Growth Fund (620k) Kemper Europe Fund (620k) Kemper Money Funds (166k) Kemper Fixed Income Funds (766k) Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds (669k) Kemper Retirement Fund Series VI (400k) Kemper Equity Funds (719k) Kemper-Dreman Fund, Inc. (338k) Kemper International Fund and Kemper Global Income Fund (900k) Kemper Horizon Fund (526k) Kemper Funds account application (445k) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010940 WT01-B12-145IA018-000194-B038-196http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/contact_about.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161129 text/html 3218HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:07:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:52 GMTContent-length: 3034Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper         Your first name:          Your last name: Your media organization:     Your e-mail address: How would you prefer us to respond to your inquiry? (Check one) By e-mail By telephone - Your telephone number By fax - Your fax number Your inquiry: Deadline date: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Thanks for your interest. We'll respond to your inquiry as quickly as possible. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011430 WT01-B12-146IA018-000194-B038-207http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/learn/contact_learn_other.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161136 text/html 1996HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:07:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:54:35 GMTContent-length: 1812Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 between 7 a.m. and 6pm. Central Time Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. Kemper Funds P.O. Box 419151 Kansas City, MO 64141-6151 © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1011470 WT01-B12-147IA018-000194-B038-222http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/friendslist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161145 text/html 2898HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:07:47 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:51:21 GMTContent-length: 2714Content-type: text/html  Friends Kemper Funds is the proud sponsor of several educational institutions, cultural organizations, charitable, civic and health and welfare organizations. Many of these organizations are groups to which our employees also contribute their time and money. AIDS Walk 7 American Cancer Society Easter Seals Juvenile Diabetes Foundation WETA Kemper Funds Group has provided sole corporate support for In the Prime,a multimedia project produced by WETA, the third largest producer of programs for publictelevision. In the Prime addresses a wide variety of subjects of interest to the baby boomer generation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014230-A WT01-B12-148IA018-000194-B038-238http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/teamkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161156 text/html 3900HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:07:55 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 20:23:49 GMTContent-length: 3716Content-type: text/html Team Kemper Kemper Funds management proudly sponsors seven professional golfers participating in the 1996 PGA and Senior PGA Tours. While each golfer plays as an individual, each member of our "team" wears the Kemper Funds name on either their chest or on their hat. As you watch their progress this season, whether on television, in print publication coverage or in person, look for the Kemper Funds name. What does golfing have to do with mutual fund asset management? Team Kemper Funds is a group of hard-working professionals focused on perfecting the fundamental skills of their game, day after day. These golfers are dedicated to achieving the consistency that leads to exceptional results. Our sponsorship celebrates the world's most civilized game -- an emblem of the patient, dedicated effort that excellence requires. PGA Tour Schedule Senior PGA Tour Schedule Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1017850 WT01-B12-149IA018-000194-B038-251http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/neighborslist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161205 text/html 2808HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:08:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:47:54 GMTContent-length: 2624Content-type: text/html  Neighbors Kemper Funds management considers sports sponsorship an important element in its public relations.Sponsorships give Kemper added exposure in its target market and helps build brand loyalty in ourhome base of Chicago and in Kansas City, the home of 400 Kemper employees. Chicago Bears Chicago Bulls Chicago Cubs Chicago White Sox DePaul Basketball Ellsworth Bicycles Kane County Cougars Kansas City Royals © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014240 WT01-B12-150IA018-000194-B038-266http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/chicagomap.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161213 text/html 3961HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:08:15 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 22:01:23 GMTContent-length: 3779Content-type: text/html  Free Chicago Map Just complete this form for a free map of downtown Chicago. Your First Name: Your Last Name: Street Address: or P.O. Box City: State: ZIP: Telephone Number: (in case we have a problem processing your request) We're happy to serve as your guide to our hometown -- no strings attached. Check this box if you'd also be interested in receiving a publication that describes each Kemper fund and Kemper Funds' most recent quarterly performance. Thanks for your interest and look for your map within about a week! © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016490 WT01-B12-151IA018-000194-B038-281http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/high_return.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161221 text/html 10718HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:08:24 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 10535Content-type: text/html Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund Investing primarily in the common stocks of larger listed companies with arecord of earnings and dividends, low price-earnings ratios, reasonable returns on equity and sound finances believed to have intrinsic value. Federal National Mortgage Assoc., Atlantic Richfield, Amoco, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., UST, Philip Morris, Columbia Gas Systems Inc., Nationsbank, Humana, Hanson PLC $437,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KDHAX       KDHBX       KDHCX            Initial Offering       3/18/88     9/11/95     9/11/95                      YTD Total Return       17.61%      16.78%      16.77% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       10.86%      12.78%      15.77%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year       23.08%      26.46%      29.46%                      5 year       17.27%         -           -                 Life of class       16.92%      26.99%      29.84% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year.Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015230-B WT01-B12-152IA018-000194-B038-291http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/letter.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161232 text/html 5822HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:08:31 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 18-Oct-96 14:12:18 GMTContent-length: 5640Content-type: text/html Letter To Shareholders October 15, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer Concerns about rising interest rates, thepossibility of higher price inflation and Federal Reserve tighteningof credit continue to contribute to considerable market volatility. But whilethe professional investors tend to debate every economic release,individuals who invest in mutual funds for the long term have beenwise to stay the course. Indeed, several recent economic measuresare quite reassuring and argue in favor of a continued healthyeconomy with low inflation. The economy expanded at a 4.2% annual rate in the second quarter,the fastest pace since the second quarter of 1994. This robustgrowth is welcome in general but has tended to roil markets, whichfear strong growth will lead to overheating and inflationary pressures.So far, however, such fears have been largely unwarranted. Withthe exception of food prices, whose increases were weather-related,there have been no significant signs of inflationary pressures.As it has so often recently, the economy is in the process ofslowing itself down. While the Federal Reserve Board stands byready to attempt to moderate economic growth with either interestrate cuts or increases, such intervention can run the risk ofgoing too far in one direction. It appears that our economy todayis self-regulating. Based on these snapshots of the economy, then, we look for a relativelycalmer remainder of the year. Our forecast calls for growth to slowdown in the fourth quarter, to result in an advanceof about 2.5% for the entire year. Assuming that bond and stockmarket investors concur that there is no chance of an overheatingeconomy or significantly rising interest rates, the markets shouldrelax, as well. Our market forecast 10 months into the year is not much differentfrom what we forecasted in January. The bond market, which isclimbing back from a decline this year, may produce a 5% totalreturn in 1996. The stock market, after the correction is completed,may advance 10% to 15% for the year. Naturally, future market conditionscannot be predicted with assurance. In addition, we are projecting that long-term (30-year) interestrates will hover in the 6.5% to 7.0% range. Short-term interestrates may drop below their current levels. Finally, we would besurprised if the Federal Reserve Board moved to adjust interestrates either way more than 25 basis points for the remainder ofthe year. Given the economic environment, we do not look for an upset inthe upcoming presidential election. Much more interesting willbe which party wins the most congressional seats. If the Democratsregain control of Congress, a bond market selloff could be expected. While U.S. markets are expected to provide modest returns, wecontinue to advocate the benefits of diversification into alternatemarkets. Many overseas markets are forecasted to grow at a ratewell above our 2.5% growth expectation for the U.S., and thereare many equity and fixed-income opportunities abroad. The valueof the U.S. dollar, always a concern to international investors,will probably not strengthen much against other currencies forthe foreseeable future. Thank you for your continued support. We appreciate the opportunity to serve your investmentneeds. Stephen B. Timbers is president, chief executive and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI and its affiliates manage approximately $79 billion in assets, including $45 billionin retail mutual funds. Timbers is a graduate of Yale University and holds an M.B.A. from Harvard University. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1002180-S WT01-B12-153IA018-000194-B038-306http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/bluechip.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161246 text/html 10698HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:08:49 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 10515Content-type: text/html Kemper Blue Chip Fund Seeks growth of capital and of incomeby investing primarily in common stocks of well-capitalized, establishedcompanies having a market capitalization of at least $1 billion. Ryder System, Eli Lilly & Co., Harris Corp., Mobil, Sundstrand Corp., ITT Hartford Group, Perkin-Elmer Corp., Great Western Financial, Crown Cork & Seal Co., BF Goodrich $245,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KBCAX       KBCBX       KBCCX                                                        Initial Offering      11/23/87     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                        YTD Total Return       20.09%      19.30%      19.29% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                           YTD Total Return       13.18%      15.30%      18.29%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year       18.94%      22.24%      25.24%                                                                  5 year       10.70%         -           -                                                             Life of class       11.26%      18.93%      20.18% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Blue Chip Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015210-B WT01-B12-154IA018-000194-B038-321http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/growth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161254 text/html 10641HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:08:57 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 10458Content-type: text/html Kemper Growth Fund Seeks long-term growth of capital byinvesting in a diversified portfolio of primarily common stocks issuedby established companies with potential for long-term capitalgrowth. Ceridian Corp., Paging Network, General Re Corp., Viacom, Advanta Corp., Tele Communications Inc., Lone Star Steakhouse, Cisco Systems, Cadence Design, Autozone $2,739,000,000                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KGRAX       KGRBX       KGRCX                                                        Initial Offering        4/4/66      5/31/94     5/31/94                                                           YTD Total Return        14.96%      14.11%      14.22% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return         8.38%      10.11%      13.22%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        12.75%      15.47%      18.65%                      5 year         9.84%         -           -                       10 year        14.15%         -           -                 Life of class        12.67%      16.31%      17.53% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Growth Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015290-B WT01-B12-155IA018-000194-B038-333http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/international.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161305 text/html 10787HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:09:08 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 10604Content-type: text/html Kemper International Fund Seeks total return, a combination ofcapital growth and income, principally through an internationallydiversified portfolio of equity securities. The fund may also invest inother types of foreign securities including fixed-incomesecurities. Ciba-Geigy, Roche Holdings, Astra AB, British Petroleum, Reed International Geographic Distribution of Common Stocks: Japan 26%, United Kingdom 12%, Netherlands 12%, Switzerland 6%, France 5%, Ireland 5%, Canada 5%, Hong Kong 4%, Spain 4%, Germany 3% $471,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KITAX       KITBX       KITCX                           Initial Offering       5/21/81     5/31/94     5/31/94                        YTD Total Return       10.28%       9.49%       9.49% Unadjusted for Sales Charge             YTD Total Return        3.93%       5.49%       8.49%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        4.27%       6.65%       9.65%                               5 year        7.85%         -           -                                             10 year        8.65%         -           -                                      Life of class       12.16%       6.81%       7.97% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper International Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015370-B WT01-B12-156IA018-000194-B038-348http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/contrarian.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161314 text/html 10945HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:09:16 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 10762Content-type: text/html Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund Seeks long-term growth of capital with current income as a secondaryobjective by investing primarily in the common stocks of larger listedcompanies with a record of earnings and dividends, low price-earningsratios, reasonable returns on equity and sound finances believed to haveintrinsic value. Chase Manhattan Corp., Exxon, Allstate Corp., Mobil, Glaxo Holdings, SLMA, Boeing, General Electric, Philip Morris, Westinghouse Electrical $65,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KDCAX       KDCBX       KDCCX                                                        Initial Offering       3/18/88     9/11/95     9/11/95                                                        YTD Total Return        5.95%       5.31%       5.22% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                      YTD Total Return       -0.15%       1.31%       4.22%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                          Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year       10.72%      13.57%      16.48%                                                                  5 year       12.84%         -           -                                                             Life of class       11.99%      14.87%       17.59% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015220-B WT01-B12-157IA018-000194-B039-8http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/smallcap.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161326 text/html 10898HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:09:27 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 10715Content-type: text/html Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Seeks long-term growth of capital byinvesting primarily in the common stocks of smaller companies with marketcapitalizations ranging from $100 million to $1 billion, consideredundervalued and having a record of earnings, low price-earnings ratios,reasonable returns on equity and sound finances believed to have intrinsicvalue. KCS Energy, Bally Entertainment, Blount International, Imperial Credit Industries, PHH Corp., Atlantic Tele-Network, Quanex Corp., Tesoro Petroleum, Mueller Industries, Fleetwood Enterprises, $172,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KDSAX       KDSBX       KDSCX                                                        Initial Offering       5/22/92     9/11/95     9/11/95                                                        YTD Total Return       22.08%      21.28%      21.56% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       15.10%      17.28%      20.56%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year       14.86%      17.92%      21.20%                                                           Life of class       17.62%      14.31%      17.37% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class Bshares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one quarter. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015330-B WT01-B12-158IA018-000194-B039-18http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/muni_bond.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161334 text/html 11389HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:09:36 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:48 GMTContent-length: 11206Content-type: text/html Kemper Municipal Bond Fund America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! Seeks as high a level of current income exempt from federal incometaxes as is consistent with preservation of capital by investing inmunicipal bonds and tax-exempt notes primarily rated investmentgrade. Cash and Equivalents 2%, US Government Secured 11%, General Obligations 14%, Revenue Bonds 73% $3,327,000,000 17.6 years 7.7 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KMBAX       KMBBX       KMBCX                                                        Initial Offering       4/20/76     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield         4.83%      4.19%       4.20%       (month ended 9/30/96)    Taxable Equivalent Yield         7.68%*     6.66%*      6.68%%*                                                        YTD Total Return         0.58%     -0.18%      -0.17% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -3.97%     -4.05%      -1.14%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         1.22%      1.97%       4.99%                                                                  5 year         6.50%        -           -                       10 year         7.50%        -           -                 Life of class         7.68%      4.65%       6.01% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Municipal Bond Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1%federal income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011130-A WT01-B12-159IA018-000194-B039-98http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr961031.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161456 text/html 4536HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:10:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:51:29 GMTContent-length: 4352Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Group Joins Schwab's Institutional OneSource October 31, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/537-1801 Steve Radis, 312/537-8393 KEMPER FUNDS GROUP JOINS SCHWAB'S INSTITUTIONAL ONESOURCE CHICAGO (October 31) -- Kemper Funds management today announcedthat it has signed an agreement with Charles Schwab & Co.to offer Class A shares of 22 mutual funds at net asset valuethrough Schwab's Institutional OneSource program. Kemper recentlybegan offering its funds to advisors at net asset value throughFidelity's Institutional FundsNetwork and Jack White & Co.'sNoFee Network, and is currently in negotiations with several otherfund "supermarket" programs. "Schwab's Institutional OneSource was the next logical stepfor us in gaining a stronger foothold in the burgeoning fee-basedadvisory channel," said John Norris, first vice presidentand head of the registered investment advisor unit at Kemper Distributors,Inc., the principal underwriter and distributor for the KemperFunds. "In order to be well-positioned in the future, weneed to form relationships with established distribution outletsthat cater to this very important and growing segment of our business.Schwab is a market leader in providing registered investment advisorswith superior back-office services, so it was very natural forus to gravitate toward them." Norris emphasized that Kemper remains fully committed to sellingits funds through investment professionals. "We believe inthe power of financial advice and we will continue to expand distributionrelationships with programs where financial advisors are providingtheir services to customers." Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), is the investment advisorto the Kemper Funds, which consists of 30 open-end funds withover 70 portfolios and seven closed-end funds. Kemper Funds hasnearly $45 billion in assets. ZKI is part of Zurich InsuranceGroup, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland,that provides services in life and property-casualty insurance,reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. For a prospectus containing more complete information on KemperFunds, including management fees and expenses, contact your financialrepresentative or call Kemper at 1-800-621-1048. Please read theprospectus carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1020390 WT01-B12-160IA018-000194-B039-116http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr962308.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161505 text/html 10588HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:07 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 18-Sep-96 20:23:14 GMTContent-length: 10402Content-type: text/html KEMPER FUNDS SURVEY FINDS TWO OUT OF THREE "EMPTY NESTERS"GAIN $5,000+ ANNUAL BOOST WHEN KIDS FLY THE COOP; DESPITE CONCERNS  ABOUT THE FUTURE, FEW DIVERTING MOST OF"PARENTAL BONUS" TO RETIREMENT SAVINGS August 23, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 KEMPER FUNDS SURVEY FINDS TWO OUT OF THREE "EMPTY NESTERS"GAIN $5,000+ ANNUAL BOOST WHEN KIDS FLY THE COOP; DESPITE CONCERNS ABOUT THE FUTURE, FEW DIVERTING MOST OF"PARENTAL BONUS" TO RETIREMENT SAVINGS CHICAGO (August 23) - After decades of paying for theirchildren's food, clothing, education, sports equipment, dancelessons and orthodontia, a vast majority of "empty nesters"enjoyed a significant monetary boost after their children lefthome, yet few are diverting most of this "parental bonus"to their own retirement savings, according to the recent surveyKemper Funds/Age Wave Lifestage Monitor: A National Surveyof Empty Nest Couples. The Kemper Funds/Age Wave Lifestage Monitor in March polled bymail 1,007 married Americans between the ages of 40 and 59, withincomes of more than $50,000 and whose children had left homeand become financially independent within the past four years. "For many years, Americans have been telling us that they'vehad to sacrifice their own retirement savings needs in part tomeet the financial needs of their children," said WilliamE. Chapman II, president of Kemper Retirement Plans Group. "Soit's somewhat surprising that once that hurdle is removed, few were willingto divert the lion's share of that income boost into retirementsavings -- despite the fact that most expressed concern about the amount of money they had saved for retirement so far." A vast majority (84.5%) of empty nesters surveyed reported thatthey received a parental bonus - a boost in income - once theirchildren left home, finished school and became financially independent.Of those, two-thirds (66.8%) reported having a boost of incomeof $5,000 or more a year; approximately one-third (34.6%) reportedhaving a boost of more than $10,000 a year; a little less thanone third (29.6%) reported a boost of $1,000 to $4,999, while3.2% reported having a $1,000 or less annual boost. Even though well over half of those surveyed (60.4%) said theyhad not saved enough for retirement, few seem willing to use the"found" money that came as a result of their childrenbecoming financially independent for that purpose. Only 40.7%of those surveyed said that they were spending "all"or "most" of the parental bonus on retirement. A littlemore than half (55.7%) were earmarking only "some" forretirement savings, and 3.6% were using "none" for retirement. "Our survey uncovered that the parental bonus amounts toanywhere from a 10% to 20% boost annually," Chapman pointedout. "If you pause a moment to think about it, that amountsignificantly exceeds projected wage increases expected this year.What's more, the wage and salary increases are an even smallerpercentage once you take into account taxes. Empty nesters maybe missing a golden opportunity to make up for lost time if they'renot directing this parental bonus to their retirement savings." Chapman advises that when children leave home, it's a good timefor parents to reassess their financial goals, savings and investmentplans. "Most Americans understand that a change in lifestyle-- be it getting married, changing jobs, buying a home, or retiring- requires that they re-examine and modify their financial goalsand objectives. Like those lifestages, having your children leavehome is a critical time for this reassessment." A significant portion of the parental bonus is being divertedto debt payments and travel. About one in five (18.4%) of thosesurveyed who reported a boost in income when their children lefthome said they were spending "all" or "most"of the parental bonus paying off debts, and 11.7% were spending"all" or "most" on traveling. Of those who reported some excess income after their childrenleft, the following number of respondents spent at least "some"of the parental bonus on: entertainment/dining (100%) charitable giving (87.5%) traveling (81.4%) "buying things we couldn't afford before" (74.7%) hobbies (70.4%) helping children with expenses (69.5%) remodeling their home (62.9%) grandchildren (58.8%) retirement savings (55.7%) paying off debts (49.3%) Home, sweet home Few empty nesters are willing to trade in their home for a smallerversion after their children left home. Only 11.8% of respondentsreported moving to a smaller home. Of those who did move, only14.4% said they did so because they wanted more money to invest;38.1% said they moved because they didn't need the space of theirformer residence. Empty nesters welcome boomerang children, but aren't yetsandwiched "One explanation as to why empty nesters are reluctant tomove to a smaller home is that they may not be convinced thatthose kids are gone for good," Chapman noted. In fact, one third (33.7%) of empty nesters surveyed have experiencedboomerang children - who leave their parents' home for a briefperiod, but return at some point thereafter. And as mentionedearlier, about three-quarters of the respondents said they wereusing some of the parental bonus "to help their childrenout" after they had flown the coop. But contrary to the predictions of some demographers, most emptynesters haven't yet felt the crunch of the "sandwich,"in which they are simultaneously responsible for the well-beingof both their children and their parents or other elderly relatives.Less than one-quarter (22.2%) reported that they were caregiversfor elderly relatives. Of those who are caregivers, very few (13.4%)are financially responsible for those elderly relatives. Interestingly,roughly two-thirds (63.4%) of respondents who said they were caregiversalso reported that they managed their elderly relatives' financialaffairs. Lots of toys for tots, less money for ABCs Among those empty nesters surveyed, 59.6% reported having grandchildren.Of those with grandchildren, 20.8% reported spending more than$1,000 on annual savings for their grandchildren's education orinvestments. More than double that amount (45.1%) spent $1,000per year on toys, clothes and entertainment for their grandkids. "Grandparents often are more motivated by their grandchildren'sgratitude to indulge their most immediate needs and desires, ratherthan to provide for their grandchildren's future financial needs,"Chapman said. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America, having more than $78 billion in assets undermanagement. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds,which consists of 36 open-end funds with over 70 portfolios andseven closed-end funds. It has nearly $45 billion in assets andthree million shareholder accounts. ZKI is part of Zurich InsuranceGroup, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland,that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsuranceand asset management in more than 45 countries. Age Wave Communications Corporation (AWCC), an Age Wave, Inc.company, is America's leading lifechange, targeted marketers focusingon the baby boom and current mature market. AWCC works with leadingcompanies in the United States and Europe to help them find andcommunicate to highly targeted market niches by focusing on consumerswhose product needs and wants have changed due to migration intoa new lifestage. Distribution of this press release must be preceded or accompanied byprospectuses for the Kemper Equity Funds, Kemper-Dreman Funds, Kemper Horizon Fund and Kemper Europe Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1019860 WT01-B12-161IA018-000194-B039-125http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr961908.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161512 text/html 5131HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:15 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 18-Sep-96 20:23:11 GMTContent-length: 4946Content-type: text/html KEMPER MONEY FUNDS BUILD A SOUTH PACIFIC HIDE-AWAY ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB August 19, 1996 For more information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER MONEY FUNDS BUILD A SOUTH PACIFIC HIDE-AWAY ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB CHICAGO (August 19) -- Have a question about money market funds? If you do, it's time to pay a visit to a mysterious millionairelocated at kempercash.com. This experienced investor, based ona private island in the South Pacific, guides visitors throughthe essentials of money market funds. "While islands in the South Pacific usually don't come tomind when you think about money funds, we thought this would bean unusual 'location' for our new web site," said Mike Harrington,the Kemper Funds Group senior vice president for money fund marketing. "Our goal was to create a relaxed site on an essential,yet overlooked, investment." Harrington added that while several large fund families, includingKemper Funds, have web sites featuring their entire investmentline-up, this is the first site that just focuses on a particularfund category. Drawing on his years of investment experience, the site's hostprovides comprehensive information on how to select a money fund. His "Financial Jargon to Plain English Dictionary,"which defines relevant terms such as commercial paper and repurchaseagreements, is designed to, "...help make you fluent whentalking about money fund investments." Current 7-day yieldsand competitive rankings for Kemper Money Market Fund, KemperGovernment Money Fund and Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund are available. The site also allows visitors to try two different investmentscenarios with Kemper Money Market Fund. Harrington stated that the site will be expanded to offer newfeatures and to reflect visitor feedback. The site just establishedreciprocal links with the IBC/Financial Data web site and willsoon add the Kemper Money Funds prospectus and an application. The prospectus for the Kemper Money Funds containing more completeinformation, including management fees and expenses, is availableby calling 800/537-6001. Investors should read it carefully before investingor sending money. Money funds seek to maintain a net asset valueof $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will. Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America, having more than $78 billion in assets under management. ZKI is theinvestment advisor to the Kemper Funds. The Kemper Family of Funds consists of 36 funds, with over 70portfolios, representing approximately $45 billion in assets and3 million shareholder accounts. Kemper Distributors, Inc., asubsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributorof the Kemper Funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1020150 WT01-B12-162IA018-000194-B039-133http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960606.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161520 text/html 4096HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:23 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:17 GMTContent-length: 3912Content-type: text/html Charles R. Manzoni, Jr. Joins Zurich Kemper As General Counsel June 6, 1996 For more information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Bob Schuerings, 312/499-8467 CHARLES R. MANZONI, JR. JOINS ZURICH KEMPER AS GENERAL COUNSEL CHICAGO (June 6) -- Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI)announced today that Charles R. Manzoni, Jr. joined the companyas executive vice president and general counsel. Manzoni willbe senior legal officer of ZKI, responsible for overseeing theactivities of ZKI's legal department and providing legal counselingto senior management of the $79 billion mutual fund and assetmanagement company. Manzoni reports to ZKI President and Chief Executive OfficerStephen B. Timbers. "Charlie brings nearly 25 years of experience to our company. His solid background and broad-based knowledge will be a greatbenefit to our company," said Timbers. "We are verypleased that he will be part of our team as we move into a newera for our company -- a time period filled with aggressive growthplans." Manzoni joins ZKI from the law firm of Gardner, Carton &Douglas in Chicago where he was a partner. His practice concentrationareas have been general corporate and federal securities laws,including general counseling, public and private financing, venturecapital financing, mergers and acquisitions, broker/dealer, investment adviser and investment company regulatorymatters. He received his law degree in 1972 from the Universityof Santa Clara. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America, having more than $79 billion in assets undermanagement. The company operates with three main business units:retail mutual funds, retirement plans and institutional assetmanagement. ZKI is the investment adviser to theKemper Fundsand is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquarteredin Zurich, Switzerland, that provides services in life and property-casualtyinsurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countriesworldwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1017340 WT01-B12-163IA018-000194-B039-142http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960603.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161527 text/html 6203HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:16 GMTContent-length: 6019Content-type: text/html Patrick Adams Named Portfolio Manger Of Kemper Funds Flagship Growth Equity Fund June 3, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 PATRICK ADAMS NAMED PORTFOLIO MANAGER OF KEMPER FUNDS FLAGSHIP GROWTH EQUITY FUND CHICAGO (June 3) -- In a move designed to further strengthenits position as a leading equity mutual fund manager, Kemper Fundsmanagement today announced that Patrick S. Adams, 35, has beennamed portfolio manager of the $2.6 billion Kemper Growth Fund,the company's flagship growth equity mutual fund. Adams replaceschief investment officer for equities, Steven H. Reynolds, whohas been the Fund's interim manager since September 1995. Adamswill report directly to Reynolds. "We are thrilled to have a person of Pat's caliber at thehelm of our flagship growth equity fund," said Reynolds. "His experience as a growth manager and his impressive recordwill not only benefit our current Kemper Growth Fund shareholders,but will enhance our ability to provide consistent, quality, growth-styleinvestment management expertise." Adams joins Kemper from Founders Asset Management in Denver,Colo., where he managed the $400 million Founders Blue Chip Fundand the $160 million Founders Balanced Fund. Previously, he wasdirector of research and senior portfolio manager atFirst Of America Investment Corporation, the investment managerfor the Parkstone Group of Funds. From 1990 to 1992, he managedthe Parkstone Equity Fund, a $600 million growth fund. The addition of Adams to Kemper Funds' equity investment teamis the latest action by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI),the investment adviser to the Kemper Funds, in its plan to furtherstrengthen its equity investment capabilities. In August 1995,a company subsidiary acquired substantially all of the assetsof Dreman Value Management, L.P., enabling the company to provideretail and institutional clients with an enhanced product offeringthat includes the value style of equity investing. As part ofthe acquisition, Kemper assumed management responsibility forthe Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund. Shortly after the Dreman acquisition, Kemper hired veteran portfolio manager Steven Reynoldsfrom Alliance Capital Management to oversee and direct the company'sequity investment department. In addition to assuming responsibility for the Kemper-DremanFunds, the company has also expanded its equity product offeringconsiderably since August of 1995 by introducing three new funds:Kemper Value+Growth Fund,Kemper Horizon Fund andKemper Europe Fund. "These bold actions on the equity side of our investmentmanagement business support our company's strategic plan for growthand success, and we will continue to aggressively implement ourexpansion plan to help ensure our position as one of the leadingequity mutual fund managers in the industry," said StephenB. Timbers, chief executive officer and chief investment officerat ZKI. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., formerly known as Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America. Together with its affiliates, ZKI has morethan $79 billion in assets under management. The company operateswith three strategic business units: retail mutual funds, retirementplans and institutional asset management. ZKI is the investmentadviser to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group,a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, thatprovides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsuranceand asset management in more than 45 countries worldwide. Distribution of this press release must be preceded or accompanied byprospectuses for the Kemper Equity Funds, Kemper-Dreman Funds,Kemper Horizon Fund and Kemper Europe Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1017250 WT01-B12-164IA018-000194-B039-151http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960423.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161534 text/html 7318HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:14 GMTContent-length: 7134Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Marks 20th Anniversity of Nation's First Retail Municipal Bond Fund April 23, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 KEMPER FUNDS MARKS 20TH ANNIVERSARY OF NATION'S FIRST RETAIL MUNICIPALBOND FUND CHICAGO (April 23) -- Twenty years ago this month Kemper Financial Services launched the Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, the nation's first municipal bond fund designed for individual investors. The municipal bond mutual fund management was pioneered largely through the efforts and vision of the fund's first manager, the late Robert J. Butler. "Bob Butler was noted for his work in developing new investment products, including the Kemper Municipal Bond Fund. The introduction of a municipal bond fund tailored for individual investors represented a major innovation in tax-free investing and underscored Kemper's reputation as an innovator in the mutual fund arena," said Chris Mier, senior vice president and portfolio manager for all of Kemper's tax-free income funds. "The Kemper Municipal Bond Fund paved the way for wider participation in the tax-exempt market by individuals with small sums to invest." From its inception date on April 20, 1976, the Kemper Municipal Bond Fund has had only three portfolio managers -- Robert Butler (1976 - 1985), J. Patrick Beimford (1985 - 1992) and Chris Mier (1989 - present). Kemper manages 10 tax-free income funds, including an intermediate-term fund and eight single state funds, representing assets of more than $5 billion. The Municipal Bond Market: Then and Now Chris Mier, a 20-year veteran of the municipal bond market, points out a number of significant changes in the municipal bond industry during the past two decades. "While the municipal bond market has grown in size and sophistication, it is still a diffuse, over-the-counter market with no central trading arena. What has changed are the make-up of the market, the players, the technology and the sophistication of portfolio management practices." In particular, Mier cites: Market participants: "Twenty years ago, most muni bond investors typically were banks, bank trust departments and property-casualty insurers. Today, individual investors account for approximately two-thirds of muni bond holdings acting through mutual funds, trust departments and on their own behalf." Credit quality: "Increasingly, insurance has become a major feature of the municipal marketplace. In 1976, insurance on municipal bonds didn't exist. In 1995, more than 43 percent of new issuance came to the market insured." Market composition: "In 1976, tax-free investing was fairly simple. Plain vanilla general obligation bonds comprised roughly half of the municipal market. Changes in tax laws at the federal and state levels altered the ways in which municipalities and states finance their capital needs. At present, revenue bonds make up 62 percent of the muni bond market, and general obligation bonds now make up less than 38 percent." Technological advancements: "Price information is more readily available today, resulting in narrower bid-ask spreads and a more efficient market. Additionally, more professional investors are employing sophisticated analytical tools. Today, fund managers are focused on complex strategies involving management of duration, convexity and option-adjusted spreads in the marketplace. In the past, portfolio managers used a 'basis book' to calculate yields. Now they use desktop computer systems to compute duration and other financial information." The Future Over the next several years, Mier sees a continuation of some of the trends that have helped shape the municipal bond market over the previous 20 years. "Portfolio managers will make greater use of technology in order to employ more sophisticated trading techniques as well as sophisticated risk management and performance attribution tools," said Mier. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $79 billion in assets under management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end funds. It has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and $45 billion in assets. Kemper Distributors, Inc. (KDI), a subsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributor of the Kemper Funds. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. This press release must be preceded or accompanied by a Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds Prospectus. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016370 WT01-B12-165IA018-000194-B039-162http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960402.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161542 text/html 5649HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:12 GMTContent-length: 5465Content-type: text/html Zurich Kemper Investments Launches New Retirement Plans Unit April 2, 1996 For Further Information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 ZURICH KEMPER INVESTMENTS LAUNCHES NEW RETIREMENT PLANS UNIT CHICAGO (April 2) -- As part of a strategic plan to further strengthen its position as a leading provider of qualified retirement plan products and services, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc.) has formed a new strategic business unit, Kemper Retirement Plans Group. "The formation of a separate, stand alone business unit to support and service qualified plans underscores our commitment to this increasingly important marketplace," said Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive officer and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Separately, the company announced that William E. Chapman II has been named president of the Kemper Retirement Plans unit. Chapman was formerly executive vice president of marketing and product management for Kemper. He has more than 30 years experience in the retirement plans business. "Bill Chapman is a seasoned veteran and an accomplished executive with a tremendous wealth of knowledge and expertise in the qualified plans arena," said Timbers. "Under his capable direction, we are confident that our retirement plan business will grow significantly and that in a few short years Kemper will be recognized as one of the leading providers of retirement plan products and services to businesses of all sizes." "Our vision is clear: by the year 2000, we expect to be the acknowledged leader in the retirement plan business in a much broader sense than we are today," said Chapman. "One of our first priorities is to increase our sales capability to support the broker-sold market and at the same time, hire salespeople to directly market to larger plan sponsors." Chapman cited several other factors that he believes will drive Kemper's success in the coming years. These factors include superior recordkeeping; innovative and broad use of technology to service the needs of participants, plan sponsors and administrators; and investment products that "make sense" to plan participants and address their investment needs and expectations. With more than 45 years of professional investment management experience, Kemper has long been a household name for investment products and services. Kemper is an experienced qualified plan provider who currently serves more than 8,000 plans and manages more than $4 billion in retirement plan assets. The company believes it was the first to dispatch a field sales force committed exclusively to supporting qualified plan sales, and also the first to establish a fully dedicated in-house retirement plan marketing staff to market the company's retirement plans. Kemper Retirement Plans is a unit of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI is the investment manager for the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end portfolios. It has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and approximately $45 billion in retail assets. Prospectuses for the Kemper Funds are available from the principal underwriter, Kemper Distributors, Inc. They contain more complete information including fees and expenses and should be read carefully before investing or sending money. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1012360 WT01-B12-166IA018-000194-B039-172http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960328.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161549 text/html 5031HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:11:52 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:11 GMTContent-length: 4847Content-type: text/html Zurich Kemper Investments Announces Definitive Agreement To Sell Invest Financial Corporation To First American Corporation March 28, 1996 For Further Information: Bob Schuerings, 312/499-8467 ZURICH KEMPER INVESTMENTS ANNOUNCES DEFINITIVE AGREEMENTTO SELL INVEST FINANCIAL CORPORATION TOFIRST AMERICAN CORPORATION CHICAGO (Mar. 28) -- Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI) announcedtoday that it has signed a definitive agreement to sell its 96 percent ownership interest in its INVEST Financial Corporation subsidiary to FirstAmerican Corporation of Nashville, Tennessee. In a related transaction, INVEST has agreed to merge with Investment Center Group, Inc. of Bismarck, N.D., making INVEST the largest institution-based investment brokerage firm in the U.S. "This sale allows us to focus more of our energies and resources on our core business of investment management," said Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive officer and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments. Tampa, Florida-based INVEST, which was incorporated in 1982, is licensed as a broker-dealer in 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. The company has more than 800 registered INVEST centers at financial institutions in 45 states. "First American Corporation recognizes the value of INVEST maintaining its position as an independent firm that offers the highest quality investment products from leading mutual funds, insurance companies and other financial organizations," said Merlin R. Gackle, chairman, president and chief executive officer of INVEST. "We also share the philosophy that financial planning should be at the core of all relationships." INVEST sells through registered representatives, including licensed sales professionals and bank personnel who sell annuities, other insurance products, mutual funds, unit investment trusts, bonds and stocks. Consummation of the transaction is subject to certain regulatory approvals and other conditions. The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $79 billion in assets under management. The company operates with three main business units: retail mutual funds, retirement plans and institutional asset management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries worldwide. First American Corporation (NASDAQ: FATN) is the third largest independent bank holding company headquartered in Tennessee. The corporation currently operates 172 banking offices. Through its subsidiaries, First American Corporation engages in a general commercial and retail banking business and provides personal and corporate trust, agency, and investment services. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014200 WT01-B12-167IA018-000194-B039-180http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960321.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161557 text/html 4649HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:12:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:09 GMTContent-length: 4465Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Announces New Chief Investment Officer For Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. March 21, 1996 For Further Information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER FUNDS ANNOUNCES NEW CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER FOR DREMAN VALUE ADVISORS, INC. CHICAGO (Mar. 21) -- Kemper Funds management today announced that Christian C. Bertelsen has been named chief investment officer for Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (DVA), the investment advisor to the Kemper-Dreman mutual funds, effective immediately. The announcement was made by James R. Neel, chief executive officer of DVA. As chief investment officer, Bertelsen, 52, will oversee more than $1.9 billion in retail and institutional assets and direct DVA's investment department, including portfolio management, research and trading. In addition, he will assume management responsibilities for the Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and DVA's separate accounts. Bertelsen will report directly to Neel. "With a background spanning nearly 30 years in the investment management business, Chris brings a wide breadth of experience to our company," said Neel. "We are extremely pleased to have a person of his caliber at the helm of our investment department. His expertise, leadership abilities and outstanding track record will further strengthen and enhance our investment capabilities." Before joining DVA, Bertelsen was a senior vice president and money manager for Eagle Asset Management, a subsidiary of Raymond James Financial, Inc. Prior to that, he spent seven years as senior vice president and head of Colonial Advisory Services, Inc.'s equity department. Bertelsen holds an M.B.A. in Finance and Marketing and a B.A. in History and Economics from Boston University. Based in New Jersey, Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (DVA) acquired substantially all the assets and business of Dreman Value Management L.P. in August, 1995. DVA is the investment advisor to the Kemper-Dreman Funds. DVA is a subsidiary of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end funds, representing nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and $45 billion in assets. Kemper Distributors, Inc. (KDI), a subsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributor of the Kemper Funds. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1012220 WT01-B12-168IA018-000194-B039-187http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/pr960320.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161607 text/html 4287HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:12:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:08 GMTContent-length: 4103Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Forms New Distribution Unit For Fee-Based Advisers And Mutual Fund Wrap Programs March 20, 1996 For Further Information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER FUNDS FORMS NEW DISTRIBUTION UNIT FOR FEE-BASED ADVISERS AND MUTUAL FUND WRAP PROGRAMS CHICAGO (Mar. 20) -- Kemper Funds management today announced the formation of a new distribution unit to focus on the growing fee-based adviser and mutual fund wrap marketplace. "While we are fully committed to selling our funds through the traditional channels of distribution, we recognize the increasingly important role of registered investment advisers and fee-based programs," said Jim Greenawalt, executive vice president, director of sales for Kemper Distributors, Inc., the principal underwriter and distributor for the Kemper Funds. "We have always believed in and have stressed the importance of investors working with professional financial advisers when it comes to making their investment decisions. And, as long as a customer is working directly with a financial adviser, we will be flexible with our pricing structure." Kemper has hired John A. Norris as a first vice president to head up the new registered investment adviser unit. Norris was previously a senior vice president at Cozad Asset Management, Inc. He will seek to form strategic alliances with various fee-based mutual fund wrap programs. "We expect to further strengthen our relationships with our key broker/dealer clients as they expand their fee-based activities," said Norris. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $79 billion in assets under management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end funds. It has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and $45 billion in assets. Kemper Distributors, Inc. (KDI), a subsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributor of the Kemper Funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011850 WT01-B12-169IA018-000194-B039-198http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/zurichacq.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161617 text/html 5629HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:12:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:24 GMTContent-length: 5445Content-type: text/html Zurich Insurance Group Completes Acquisition Of Kemper Corporation January 4, 1996 Contact: Zurich Insurance Group Elizabeth Ventura Centre ReSource Limited (312) 499-8831 or (212) 898-5050 Insurance Partners Own Blicksilver (212) 546-2240 or (212) 303-7603 after January 8, 1996 ZURICH INSURANCE GROUP COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF KEMPER CORPORATION CHICAGO (January 4, 1996) - Zurich Insurance Group and InsurancePartners today announced the completion of the acquisition of KemperCorporation (NYSE: KEM) of Long Grove, IL, in a merger transactionvalued at more than $2 billion. Kemper common stockholders will receivecash consideration of $49.80 per share in the merger. All approvals and transactions required by the merger agreement,including the spin-off of Kemper's securities brokerage operations andsales of a considerable part of its real estate holdings, werecompleted. As of the closing, Kemper Corporation will consist of FederalKemper Life Assurance Company, Kemper Investors Life Insurance Companyand certain real estate subsidiaries. Subsequent to the closing, the twolife insurance companies will operate under the trade name "ZurichKemper Life Insurance Companies." Zurich Insurance Group will own 80percent of Kemper Corporation and Insurance Partners will own 20percent. As part of the transaction, Zurich Insurance Group acquired KemperFinancial Services, Inc. (KFS). Following the merger, KFS is to berenamed "Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc." It is anticipated that ZurichKemper Investments will become the flagship operation for the Zurich'sU.S.-based investment fund and institutional asset managementactivities. Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Company will own 3 percent ofZurich Kemper Investments. Rolf Hüppi, chairman and chief executive officer of The Zurich InsuranceGroup said, "The completion of this transaction marks a significant steptoward implementing our financial services strategy. With theacquisition, Zurich will be able to move closer to our goal of deriving30 percent of our total revenues from life insurance operations andbuild a solid foundation for its worldwide asset management business."Mr. Hüppi continued, "We appreciate the efforts of the management andstaff of Kemper over the past months during this transition period." Kemper Corporation, a financial services holding company with principaloperations in asset management and life insurance, had approximately $98billion in life insurance premiums in force; KFS ranked as the nation's13th largest mutual fund family with $42 billion in mutual fund assetsunder management and managed $21 billion in institutional assets. Zurich Insurance Group is a leading, internationally recognized companyproviding services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and assetmanagement. Headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, the Group operatesoffices in more than 45 countries worldwide and offers customers globalcoverage in all lines of insurance. Zurich had worldwide premiumwritings of approximately $19.3 billion in 1994 and over $7.3 billion incapital and surplus at year-end 1994. Insurance Partners is a $540 million investment partnership formed inFebruary 1994 to sponsor acquisitions, recapitalizations,demutualizations and other structured transactions in theproperty/casualty, life and health insurance industries in the U.S. andabroad. Principal partners include Centre Reinsurance Holdings Limited;Keystone, Inc. (formerly The Robert M. Bass Group); and The ChaseManhattan Corporation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010770 WT01-B12-170IA018-000194-B039-208http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/execplusplan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161624 text/html 5882HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:12:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:56 GMTContent-length: 5698Content-type: text/html Kemper Rolls Out Executive Plus - A Retirement Plan Solution For KeyExecutives November 28, 1995 For more information contact: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Bob Schuerings, 312/499-8467 KEMPER ROLLS OUT EXECUTIVE PLUS - A RETIREMENT PLAN SOLUTION FOR KEYEXECUTIVES CHICAGO (November 28) - Kemper today announced the introduction ofExecutive Plus, a new turnkey nonqualified deferred compensation programfor key executives that can offer a solution to the sometimesrestrictive requirements of qualified retirement plans. "Executive Plus is a retirement option for 401(k) plan sponsors lookingto provide additional tax-deferred investing opportunities to keyexecutives," said Ed Miner, first vice president of Kemper's qualifiedplans area. Last year's tax code changes lowered the maximumcompensation on which qualified plan benefits can be based to $150,000,making it difficult for executives to accumulate desired retirementassets in traditional qualified plans. Additionally, many sponsors havehad to further reduce executive 401(k) salary deferral levels below the$9,240 limit in order to pass nondiscrimination tests. "Under Executive Plus a participant may defer compensation on a pre-taxbasis until those dollars are needed for retirement. Contributions andany investment earnings generally are not taxable to the participantuntil they are received," Miner said. "In addition, the employer also may contribute to the nonqualified planon behalf of the participant. These contributions, as well ascompensation deferred by participants, are not tax-deductible until theyare paid to the participant, usually at retirement." Some of the benefits of Executive Plus include: A flexible plan agreement Safe harbor model rabbi trust Corporate trustee services through Trust Company of America, Inc. (Notaffiliated with Kemper. The trustee services will be provided through aseparate agreement with that company.) Convenient contribution submission options Accurate and efficient record keeping through the KemFlex system The Kemper Mutual Fund Family Opportunity for current Kemper qualified plan clients to combinenonqualified plan assets with assets in a Kemper qualified plan toproduce pricing breaks. Unlike qualified plans, nonqualified programs have no contributiondollar limits or employee coverage, eligibility or participationrequirements. As a result, their sponsors avoid complex reporting andcompliance testing necessary for qualified plans. Generally, reportinginvolves only a one-time filing with the Department of Labor. Planadoption is easier because a sponsor avoids many of the formal set-uprequirements of a qualified plan. Usually, nonqualified plans are sponsored by C corporations. Because theowners of S corporations, partnerships and sole proprietorships aretaxed as pass-through entities, nonqualified deferred compensation plansdo not provide effective deferral of compensation for owners of theseentities. Program costs vary by provider but typically involve fees for legalcounsel corporate trustee services and the plan's funding mechanism. Formore information about Executive Plus, employers should talk with theirfinancial representative or call Kemper Sales Support at 1-800-621-5027to order information. To obtain a Kemper Mutual Fund prospectus, please call KemperShareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. The prospectus contains morecomplete information including management fees and expenses. Please readit carefully before you invest or send money. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. is one of the nation's largest assetmanagers with approximately $44 billion in mutual fund assets undermanagement. It is a subsidiary of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM), aholding company with principal operations in asset management and lifeinsurance. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010670 WT01-B12-171IA018-000194-B039-222http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/dremanacq.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161633 text/html 5637HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:12:35 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:53 GMTContent-length: 5453Content-type: text/html Kemper Financial Completes AcquisitionOf Dreman Value Management Assets; Names President & CEO Of AcquiredOperations August 24, 1995 FOR MORE INFORMATION: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER FINANCIAL COMPLETES ACQUISITIONOF DREMAN VALUE MANAGEMENT ASSETS; NAMES PRESIDENT & CEO OF ACQUIREDOPERATIONS CHICAGO (August 24) - Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), asubsidiary of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM) and the investment advisorto the Kemper Mutual Funds, today announced the completion of theacquisition of substantially all of the assets of Dreman ValueManagement, L.P. (DVM), including assignment of the Dreman mutual fundsadvisory contracts. Specific terms of the transaction were notdisclosed. Separately, the company announced that James R. Neel has been namedpresident and chief executive officer of Kemper Advisors, Inc., asubsidiary of KFS and the investment advisor to the Kemper-Dreman funds. The Dreman mutual funds will be renamed as follows: the Kemper-DremanHigh Return Fund, the Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, the Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and the Kemper-Dreman Fixed Income Fund. "The closing of this transaction is significant because it immediatelyallows us to provide retail and institutional clients with an enhancedproduct offering that includes the value style of equity investing,"said Stephen B. Timbers, chairman and chief executive officer of KFS."Furthermore, the acquisition affords Kemper tremendous flexibility inbringing new products to market." As previously reported, the investment functions of KFS and the acquiredoperation will remain separate. David Dreman will remain as chairman ofthe acquired operation. "We are extremely pleased that David willcontinue to play an integral role in the new company, including hisactive participation in managing key retail and institutionalportfolios," said Timbers. The acquired operation will continue to be based in New Jersey. "Bykeeping the investment functions separate, we believe that theoperations will retain the integrity of their investment process anddiscipline," said Timbers. Neel most recently was an executive vice president and equity portfoliomanager for Kemper Financial's institutional accounts. Prior to that hemanaged several of the Kemper retail mutual funds and served as chiefequity strategist. He has been with KFS for six years. Before joiningKFS, Neel was with Loomis Sayles & Co. where he managed a variety ofinvestment portfolios. "We are delighted to have a person of Jim's caliber in the role ofpresident and CEO," said Timbers. "He is a highly qualified andrecognized professional in the investment community. His experiencecoupled with his knowledge of Kemper will benefit him significantly inhis new position." KFS has approximately $43.7 billion in mutual fund assets undermanagement, including 30 open-end funds and seven closed-end funds, asof July 31, 1995. KFS' domestic institutional subsidiary, Kemper AssetManagement Company, has approximately $5.3 billion under management, notincluding assets managed for Kemper Corporation's affiliates and theKemper National Insurance Companies. The acquired operation currentlyhas approximately $1.5 billion of institutional assets under management. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. is one of the nation's largest assetmanagers with more than $63 billion under management. It is a subsidiaryof Kemper Corporation, a holding company with principal operations inasset management and life insurance. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010680 WT01-B12-172IA018-000194-B039-236http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/changeretdef.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161650 text/html 8023HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:12:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:50 GMTContent-length: 7839Content-type: text/html Changing Definition Of Retirement June 15, 1995 For more information contact: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 CHANGING DEFINITION OF RETIREMENT: MAJORITY OF AMERICANS EXPECT TO WORK DURING RETIREMENT, ACCORDING TOKEMPER-ROPER RETIREMENT MONITOR CHICAGO (June 15) - A majority of working Americans believe they will beforced to continue to work during retirement in order to make ends meetand maintain their desired standard of living, according to a pollreleased today by Kemper and Roper-Starch Worldwide. The "Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor" polled 2,086 randomly selectedAmericans about their attitudes and expectations regarding retirement.The survey included representation from demographic age groupsincluding: 20-Somethings (aged 20-29), Baby Boomers (aged 30-49),Pre-retirees (aged 50-64) and Retirees (aged 65 and older). The surveyhas a margin of error of plus/minus two percent. "For Americans under the age of 50, the word "retirement" has taken onnew meaning," said William E. Chapman II, executive vice president ofKemper. "When America's younger generations hit retirement age, it won'tnecessarily mean the end of their working years - especially if theywant to maintain a comfortable lifestyle. Their challenge is to plancarefully in an environment that is much more dynamic than their parentshad to contend with." Wages to replace Social Security, savings shortfalls "The old yardsticks by which current retirees measure their success infunding a comfortable retirement no longer apply to younger Americans,"noted Chapman. "These younger generations will try to fill the gap leftby what they expect to be limited Social Security benefits, diminishedhealth-care support and the lack of their own savings with wages earnedduring retirement," Chapman predicted, and pointed to a number offindings to support that claim: A vast majority of the two younger generations surveyed - 71% of BabyBoomers and 81% of 20-Somethings - believe that Social Security will notbe there for them. Some 65% of Baby Boomers and 74% of 20-Somethings acknowledged thatthey were not saving enough for retirement. Paying off a mortgage,reducing credit card debt, and the costs of raising children are citedas barriers to saving more. Despite their pessimistic expectations about government benefits theymight receive in retirement and their inadequate level of savings, 61%of 20-Somethings and 68% of Baby Boomers believe that they will haveenough to live comfortably during retirement. Nearly six out of 10 of working Americans surveyed believe that theywill need to work - at least part-time - during their retirement years.Fortunately, perhaps, the same amount of respondents said they want tocontinue working after retirement, regardless of their financial status. 20-Somethings, Boomers and Pre-retirees seek more advice "Clearly, most Americans understand the importance of carefully planningfor retirement, so attitude is not the problem," Chapman said. "Rather,changing political and economic conditions are causing uncertainty.Despite the dearth of information available on retirement planning,Americans are still clamoring for help." An overwhelming majority of 20-Somethings (69%), Baby Boomers (65%), andPre-Retirees (65%) said that their respective generations need more helpplanning for retirement. Roughly one in three of 20-Somethings and BabyBoomers and one in five Pre-Retirees feel "uncertain" or "at a totalloss" when it comes to planning for their own retirement. When asked who they did or will turn to for advice on most of theirretirement planning, Americans cite a number of sources: a broker orfinancial advisor (39%); spouse (37%); friends (24%); parents (23%);other family members (15%); personal finance magazines (12%); researchpublications (6%); and on-line financial services (3%). Six out of 10 Americans felt they need a broker or financial advisor tohelp them cut through the clutter and deal with all the information outthere about investments. Yet most weren't very confident in theirability to chose a broker or financial advisor. More than half of the20-Somethings and Baby Boomers feel either "uncertain" or "at a totalloss" when it comes to knowing how to select a broker or financialadvisor. Among the survey's other key findings: When asked what one piece of advice they would give younger generationsabout saving for retirement, retirees said "start saving early" (62%),and "take advantage of company sponsored savings plans (18%). Fewmentioned "save more money" (8%). Not surprisingly, 47% of retirees saidthey did not start saving early enough for retirement. Only one in four retirees said they were able to accurately predicttheir financial needs before they retired. Americans across all groups named company sponsored plans - including401(k) (52%) and 403(b) (4%) plans - as their top retirement savings vehicle,followed by savings accounts (44%), mutual funds (40%), life insurance(39%) and IRA or Keogh accounts (39%). Roughly two out of three Americans say that they share thedecision-making about investing for retirement with their spouse. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), is one of the nation's largestmoney managers with over 45 years of experience. Kemper Distributors,Inc. (KDI), is the principal underwriter and distributor of Kemperproducts. Together with its affiliates, KFS has approximately $60billion in assets under management. KFS and KDI are indirectsubsidiaries of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM). Roper-Starch Worldwide is a leading marketing, public opinion andadvertising research firm. It was the first company in the world to usescientific survey techniques to study consumer behavior, marketingstrategy, public opinion and corporate image. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010690 WT01-B12-173IA018-000194-B039-249http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/slackers.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161658 text/html 5214HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:29:20 GMTContent-length: 5030Content-type: text/html "20-Somethings" No Slackers When It Comes To Retirement Planning, According To Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor June 15, 1995 For more information contact: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 "20-SOMETHINGS" NO SLACKERS WHEN IT COMES TO RETIREMENT PLANNING, ACCORDING TO KEMPER-ROPER RETIREMENT MONITOR CHICAGO (June 15) - When it comes to retirement, Americans in their 20sshatter the "slacker" myth of being lost and living for the now,according to a poll released today by Kemper and Roper-Starch Worldwide. The "Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor" polled 2,086 randomly selectedAmericans about their attitudes and expectations regarding retirement.The survey included representation from demographic age groupsincluding: 20-Somethings (aged 20-29), Baby Boomers (aged 30-49),Pre-retirees (aged 50-64) and Retirees (aged 65 and older). The surveyhas a margin of error of plus/minus two percent. "The so-called '20-Something' generation shows surprising sophisticationabout issues pertaining to planning, saving, and investing forretirement," said William E. Chapman II, executive vice president ofKemper. "They are cognizant of their responsibility to plan, are willingto hold off on personal consumption in order to save for retirement, andhave thought seriously about their future and their retirement." Among the survey's key findings: Half (50%) of 20-Somethings said they had started putting money away forretirement within the last one to five years. In contrast, 40% of BabyBoomers aged 40 to 44, and 35% of Boomers aged 45 to 49, waited until atleast their 30s to start saving for retirement. 61% of Americans in their 20s said they or their spouse had put moneyaside for retirement in either savings or investments, while 71% of BabyBoomers said the same. 58% of 20-Somethings said they or their spouse had put money into a401(K), somewhat more than 52% of the Baby Boomers who indicated thatthey had done so. Roughly three out of four 20-Somethings said that retirement is apriority in their savings plan; 20-Somethings are as likely as BabyBoomers to say that retirement is something they think a great dealabout. 20-Somethings (55%) were as likely as Baby Boomers (53%) to say they areprepared to reduce personal spending now in order to save forretirement. About one in four 20-Somethings reported that they had increased theamount of money they put into retirement savings during the past year;39% of Baby Boomers reported doing the same. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), is one of the nation's leadingmoney managers with over 45 years of experience. Kemper Distributors,Inc. (KDI), is the principal underwriter and distributor of Kemperproducts. Together with its affiliates, KFS has approximately $60billion in assets under management. KFS and KDI are indirectsubsidiaries of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM). Roper-Starch Worldwide is a leading marketing, public opinion andadvertising research firm. It was the first company in the world to usescientific survey techniques to study consumer behavior, marketingstrategy, public opinion and corporate image. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010640 WT01-B12-174IA018-000194-B039-260http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/kempernews/fivethings.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161706 text/html 4681HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:08 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:57 GMTContent-length: 4497Content-type: text/html Five Things Investors Should Know BeforeChoosing A Money Market Fund May 31, 1995 For more information contact: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 FIVE THINGS INVESTORS SHOULD KNOW BEFORECHOOSING A MONEY MARKET FUND CHICAGO (May 31) - Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), the investmentadviser to Kemper Money Market Fund, today announced it is offering afree brochure to help savers and investors make wise decisions whenselecting a money market fund. Titled Shopping Around for a Money MarketFund? Five Things You Should Know Before You Invest, the brochure can be obtained by calling 1-800-694-1080, ext. 501. The brochure identifies five important considerations in choosing amoney market fund and offers guidelines for understanding eachconsideration. "Money market funds are an essential building block for any soundfinancial plan. They are designed to deliver money market yields and tomaintain stability of principal," said Michele Rudin, director of retailmoney fund marketing at KFS. "Yet, some money market funds have turnedto risky strategies to deliver higher yields. Helping to educateinvestors on how to make sound investment decisions is one of ourprimary goals." According to the money fund specialists at Kemper, whether a person is aconservative saver or a savvy investor, there are a few things he or sheshould know before choosing a money market fund, including: consider your tax bracket and the benefits of taxable versus tax-exempt income look for consistent performance over time, not just today's hottestyields check out the fund's expenses and how big a bite they will take out of your return think about the account services you will use and find out if they will cost you extra take a look at the fund's sponsor and track record Kemper Money Market Fund, one of the largest and oldest U.S. moneyfunds, has assets of more than $5 billion. An investment in Kemper MoneyMarket Fund is neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. Government.The Fund does seek to maintain a stable $1.00 share value, though therecan be no assurance that it will be maintained. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), is one of the nation's largestmoney managers with over 45 years of experience and, together with itsaffiliates, has approximately $60 billion in assets under management.KFS is a subsidiary of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM), a holding companywith continuing operations in asset management and life insurance. This press release must be preceded or accompanied by a prospectus for Kemper Money Market Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010650 WT01-B12-175IA018-000194-B039-277http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/company.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161720 text/html 4428HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:22 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:47:24 GMTContent-length: 4244Content-type: text/html  The Company Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS) was formed in 1948 when five Chicago entrepreneurs formed a mutual fund to capitalize on a technological breakthrough called television. They started Television Shares Management Corporation, and their Television Fund was the first to focus on the success and technological advances related to the television industry. Through successful innovation and diversification, KFS has enjoyed more than four decades of growth and prosperity. From its predecessor company managing a single mutual fund in 1948, KFS has grown to manage more than 28 different open-end mutual fund offerings as well as several closed-end funds. With more than $63 billion in assets under management, KFS is one of the nation's largest asset management firms and a recognized leader in the financial services industry. 1995 brought many changes to KFS. With the completion of the sale of Kemper Corporation, KFS is doing business as Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI) The name looks different, but our fundamental mission is the same: To manufacture and distribute high-quality investment management products and services to individuals and institutions and to help them achieve their long-term financial goals. ZKI employs a select group of talented professionals as well as entry level candidates. Qualified individuals would be considered for a variety of positions including: Shareholder Services Representatives Staff Accountants Investment Analysts Marketing Professionals Programmer/Analysts Wholesalers ZKI is committed to providing its employees with quality training and continuous professional as well as personal career development opportunities. Opportunities ZKI offers a competitive compensation as well as benefits package. Our comprehensive benefits package includes various medical plans, dental plans, vision insurance, life insurance, profit sharing/401(k), and tuition assistance. We are located in the heart of Chicago's financial market. It is an easy commute for city dwellers and suburban commuters. Easy access to all forms of public transportation. We are an Equal Opportunity Employer. ZURICH KEMPER INVESTMENTS, INC. 120 South LaSalle Street Chicago, IL 60603 Contact: Human Resources (312) 781-1121 (800) 621-1148 Fax (312) 499-8545 E-mail: job@kemper.com WT01-B12-176IA018-000194-B039-290http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/joblist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161727 text/html 2419HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 22:34:38 GMTContent-length: 2237Content-type: text/html  Opportunities Lead Analyst Database Technician Inside Wholesaler Application For Employment (Kemper.com has been optimized to be viewed using Netscape Navigator 2.0.Accessing this application using a Netscape 1.x browser may cause your software to freeze. Click here to download a copy of Netscape Navigator 2.0.) WT01-B12-177IA018-000194-B039-299http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/application.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161735 text/html 16185HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:47:16 GMTContent-length: 16000Content-type: text/html Kemper Online Application (An Equal Opportunity Employer) Please complete this entire application. Personal Information First Name M.I. Last Name Social Security Number Street Address City State Zip Code Home telephone Work telephone Have you ever worked or attended school under a different name? Yes No If yes, what name and at what school and/or employer? If hired can you provide proof that you are eligible to work in the UnitedStates? Yes No Are you at least 18 years of age? Yes No Position applying for (and if part time, hours available per week) Starting salary expected: General Information What prompted you to seek employment with us? Have you previously applied for a position with or been employed by a Zurichcompany? Yes No If yes, list dates and company: Are you a relative of an employee of a Zurich company? YesNo If Yes, which company and department? Please provide any additional information such as special skills, training,experience, equipment operation or qualifications you feel will be helpfulto us in considering your application. Educational Background Highest education level completed: ElementaryHigh SchoolCollegeGraduate12341 - 67 - 8 High School Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received College Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received College Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received College Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received Other Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received Other Information Have you ever been refused a bond? Yes No If yes, please explain Have you ever been convicted, pleaded guilty or nolo contendere("no contest") to any felony? Yes No If yes, please explain Have you ever been convicted, pleaded guilty or nolo contendere("no contest") to a misdemeanor involving a fraudulent or dishonsetact? Yes No If yes, please explain Note: A conviction will not necessarily be a bar to employment. Factorssuch as age and time of the offense, seriousness and nature of the violation,and rehabilitation will be taken into account. Employment History LIST MOST RECENT JOB FIRST. All employers prior to your current employermay be contacted to verify the information provided. May we contact your current employer at this time? Yes No Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time EmployedFrom (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Zurich companies comply with federal, state and local laws governingemployment and business practices, and provide equal employment opportunitiesto all applicants and employees in a manner that will not discriminate againstany person because of race, color, religion, age, sex. national origin,disability or other status protected by applicable law. Carefully read the following statements BEFORE agreeingbelow. I understand that accuracy and completeness of the information providedon this application are required. I understand that any misstatement oromission of fact on this application may result in the failure to be hiredor discharged. I understand that it is a requirement of employment that I be bonded (atthe expense of the employer) and that my employment is therefore subjectto my acceptance by the bonding company. I authorize Zurich to make a thorough investigation of my past employment,education and other activities and release from all liability all personsand entities supplying such information. I understand that it is the practiceof this company to obtain fingerprints of all employees and submit themto the Federal Bureau of Investigation. I agree, if employed, to permitZurich to obtain my fingerprints. I understand that some positions at Zurich have special continuing qualificationrequirements, such as the acquisition and maintenance of a license and/orthe passing of an examination after employment begins, or such other qualificationrequirements as may be established by the company, and acknowledge thatemployment in any position must terminate if a job qualification requirementis not met. I understand that as part of the normal procedure for processing my employmentapplication, a consumer report may be prepared. Such reports may includeinformation as to credit standing, character and general reputation. I alsounderstand that I have the right to make a written request within a reasonableperiod of time to receive additional detailed information about the natureand scope of this investigation. In the event that I am hired, and as a requirement of any employment withZurich, I agree to conform to the rules and standards of conduct of my employingcompany. I understand that my employment can be terminated for any or noreason and with or without notice, at any time, at the option of eitherthe company or myself. I understand that no employee or agent of Zurichis authorized to offer me an employment relationship other than one thatis terminable at will. I also understand and agree that the terms and conditions of my employment(other than my at-will status) as well as any employee benefits with Zurichmay be changed or discontinued at any time with or without notice. WT01-B12-178IA018-000194-B039-311http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/intheprime/intheprime_times.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161743 text/html 11291HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:45 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 23:26:38 GMTContent-length: 11108Content-type: text/html  In The Prime: Show Times                                             PremiereSTATE                       Call Letters    Date        ScheduleALASKA     Anchorage              KAKM            Oct. 19     Sat. @ 2:00 p.m.ARIZONA     Phoenix/Tempe          KAET            Oct. 24     Thurs. @ 10:00 p.m.             CALIFORNIA     Eureca                 KEET            Oct. 11     Fri. @ 7:00 p.m.     Fresno                 KVPT            Oct. 2      Wed. @ 11:30 p.m.     Los Angeles            KCET            Oct. 26     Sat. @ 1:30 p.m.     Huntington Beach       KOCE            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 6:30 p.m.     Rohnert Park           KRCB            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 10:30 a.m.     Sacramento             KVIE            Oct. 12     Sat. @ 2:00 p.m.     San Bernadino          KVCR            Sept. 23    Mon. @ 8:00 p.m.     San Diego              KPBS            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 10:30 a.m.     San Francisco          KQED            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 12:30 a.m.     San Jose               KTEH            Sept. 23    Mon. @ 12:00 a.m.FLORIDA     Miami                  WLRN            Dec. 3      Tues. @ 11:00 a.m.     Orlando                WMFE            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 12:30 p.m.     Pensacola              WSRE            Sept. 21    Sat. @ 11:30 p.m.GEORGIA                     GA Public TV    Sept. 22    Sun. @ 12:30 p.m.     Albany/Pelham          WABW     Atlanta                WGTV     Augusta/Wrens          WCES     Chatsworth/Dalton      WCLP     Columbus/Warm Springs  WJSP     Dawson/Americus        WACS     Macon/Cochran          WDCO     Savannah/Pembroke      WVAN     Waycross/Valdosta      WXGAIDAHO                                       Oct. 12     Sun. @ 11:00 p.m.     Boise                  KAID                 Couer d' Alene         KCDT     Moscow                 KUID     Pocatello              KISU     Twin Falls             KIPTILLINOIS     Charleston             WEIU            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 7:30 p.m.     Chicago                WYCC            Oct. 19     Sat. @ 10:00 p.m.     Chicago                WTTW            Sept. 28    Sat. @ 7:00 a.m.     Jacksonville           WQEC/WSEC       Oct. 5      Sat. @ 5:00 p.m.     Peoria                 WTVP            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 3:00 p.m.     Springfield/Quincy     WMEC            Oct. 5      Sat. @ 5:00 p.m.INDIANA     Indianapolis           WFYI            Nov. 16     Sat. @ 6:30 p.m.     Merrillville           WYIN            Sept. 22    Fri. @ 7:00 p.m.KENTUCKY                    Educational TV  Oct. 5      Sat. @ 7:00 p.m.      Ashland                WKAS     Bowling Green          WKGB     Covington              WCVN     Elizabethtown          WKZT     Hazard                 WKHA     Lexington-Richmond     WKLE     Louisville             WKMJ     Madisonville           WKMA     Morehead               WKMR     Murray-Mayfield        WKMU     Owensboro-Henderson    WKOH     Paducah                WKPD     Pikeville              WKPI     Somerset               WKSOLOUISIANA     New Orleans            WLAE            Sept. 26    Thurs. @ 8:30 p.m.MARYLAND     Baltimore              WMPB            Oct. 9      Wed. @ 2:00 p.m.MASSACHUSETTS     Boston                 WGBX            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 12:30 p.m.MICHIGAN     Detroit                WTVS            Nov. 3      Sun. @ 4:00 p.m.     Flint                  WFUM            Oct. 1      Tues. @ 6:00 p.m.     East Lansing           WKAR            Sept. 27    Fri. @ 6:00 p.m.     University Center      WUCM            Oct. 19     Sun. @ 6:00 p.m.MINNESOTA     Austin                 KSMQ            Sept. 25    Wed. @ 7:00 p.m.         Minn/St. Paul          KTCA            Oct. 13     Sun. @ 11:30 a.m.MISSISSIPPI                 Miss. Educ. Network     Biloxi                 WMAH            Sept. 28    Sat. @ 7:30 p.m.     Booneville             WMAH     Bude                   WMAU     Greenwood              WMAO     Jackson                WMAA     Meridian               WMAW     Oxford                 WMAVMISSOURI     Kansas City            KCPT            Oct. 5      Sat. @ 5:00 p.m.          St. Louis              KBTC            Sept. 28    Sat. @ 4:30 p.m.     Warensburg             KMOS            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 8:30 p.m.                                                             @ 9:00 p.m.NEBRASKA                                    Oct. 27     Sun. @ 2:00 p.m.     Alliance               KTNE     Bassett                KMNE     Hastings               KHNE      Lexington              KLNE     Merriman               KRNE     Norfolk                KXNE     North Platte           KPNE      Omaha                  KYNE     Lincoln                KUONNEW JERSEY                                  Oct. 12     Sat. @ 4:00 p.m.     Camden                 WNJS     Montclair              WNJM     New Brunswick          WNJB      Trenton                WNJTNEW MEXICO     Albuquerque            KNME            Nov. 17     Sun. @ 4:00 p.m.    NEW YORK     Binghamton             WSKG            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 5:30 p.m.     Buffalo                WNEQ            Sept. 19    Thurs. @ 8:30 p.m.     New York City          WNET            Sept. 21    Sat. @ 4:30 p.m.     Plattsburgh            WCFE            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 5:00 p.m.          Rochester              WXXI            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 1:00 p.m.     Syracuse               WCNY            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 12:30 p.m.OHIO     Bowling Green          WGBU            Sept. 21    Sat. @ 5:00 p.m.     Cleveland              WVIZ            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 11:00 p.m.     Columbus               WOSU            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 1:00 p.m.     Oxford                 WPTO            Sept. 23    Mon. @ 8:00 p.m.OREGON                                      Oct. 5      Sat. @ 11:30 a.m.     Corvallis              KOAC                 Bard                   KOAB                 Eugene                 KEPB     La Grande              KTVR     Portland               KQPBPENNSYLVANIA     Philadelphia           WHYY            Oct. 6      Sun. @ 12:00 p.m.     Pittsburgh             WQEX            Sept. 23    Mon. @ 8:30 p.m.     Pittsburgh             WQED            Nov. 2      Sat. @ 5:30 p.m.      University Park        WPSX            Oct. 5      Sat. @ 7:30 p.m.SOUTH DAKOTA                Network         Sept. 25    Wed. @ 9:30 a.m.     Aberdeen               KDSD                 Brookings              KHSD     Eagle Butte/Faith      KPSD     Lowry                  KQSD     Martin                 KZSD     Pierre                 KTSD     Rapid City             KBHE     Vermillion             KUSDTENNESSEE     Chattanooga            WTCI            Oct. 1      Tues. @ 9:30 p.m.     Cookeville             WCTE            Nov. 3      Sun. @ 2:30 p.m.TEXAS     Amarillo               KACV            Nov. 21     Tues. @ 2:30 p.m.          College Station        KAMU            Sept. 19    Thurs. @ 10:00 p.m.     Dallas                 KDTN            Sept. 26    Thurs. @ 9:00 p.m.     Houston                KUHT            Oct. 27     Sun. @ 3:00 p.m.     San Antonio            KLRN            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 2:30 p.m.UTAH     Salt Lake City         KUED            Sept. 22    Sun. @ 5:00 p.m.                        VERMONT                     ETV             Oct. 20     Sun. @ 2:30 p.m.     Burlington             WETK     Rutland                WVER     Saint-Johnsbury        WVTB     Windsor                WVTAVIRGINIA     Harrisonburg           WVPT            Oct. 19     Sat. @ 7:30 p.m.WASHINGTON     Seattle                KCTS            Sept. 21    Sat. @ 1:30 p.m.     Spokane                KSPS            Nov. 10     Sun. @ 4:00 p.m.WASHINGTON, D.C.            WETA            Sept. 21    Sat. @ 5:30 p.m.                                            Sept. 27    Fri. @ 2:30 p.m.                                            Oct. 10     Thurs. @ 10:30 p.m.WISCONSIN     Green Bay              WPNE            Oct. 4      Fri. @ 7:30 p.m.     LaCrosse               WHLA            Oct. 4      Fri. @ 7:30 p.m.     Madison                WHA             Oct. 4      Fri. @ 7:30 p.m.     Menomomie/Eau Claire   WHWC            Oct. 4      Fri. @ 7:30 p.m.     Milwaukee              WMVS/WMVT       Oct. 6      Sun. @ 3:30 p.m.     Park Falls             WLHF            Oct. 4      Fri. @ 7:30 p.m.     Wausau                 WHRM            Oct. 4      Fri. @ 10:00 p.m.WYOMING     Riverton               KCWC            Oct. 17     Thur. @ 5:30 p.m. In the Prime weekly show topics Videotapes Available At A Discount WETA's In the Prime Web site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022640-A WT01-B12-179IA018-000194-B040-12http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/intheprime/intheprime_shows.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161756 text/html 6046HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:13:59 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 23:28:47 GMTContent-length: 5864Content-type: text/html  In The Prime: Show Topics What Now? Episode #1 What have today's mid-lifers accomplished -- personally, professionally? Am I Grown Up? Episode #2 Explore what it means to be a true adult. Career Change Episode #3 What are the options and the possibilities? Couples And Money Episode #4 Evaluate how to resolve financial issues. Creativity Episode #5 Discover how to start, continue and enjoy the creative process during mid-life and beyond. Minds At Work Episode #6 Does the human brain lose its capacity to learn as we age? Take A Chance Episode #7 Meet several mid-life "thrill/risk-takers" and examine the impact and nature of risks -- personally and professionally. Looking For Love Episode #8 Explore romance at mid-life. Future Of Work Episode #9 Examine the impact of technology on the job market, and the effects of today's mid-lifers. Community Episode #10 People present varying definitions of community and debate whether or not today's mid-life generation has succeeded in creating a "sense of place." Hearts And Minds Episode #11 Learn about alternative treatments to traditional Western medicine, especially regarding cancer and heart disease. Search For Soul Episode #12 Examine the spiritual awakening that seems to be affecting today's mid-lifers. What's To Eat? Episode #13 Assess the challenges of healthy eating, while not sacrificing enjoyment in today's fast-paced lifestyle. Me No More Episode #14 Examine the common mid-life change in focus from "me" to "they." You've Got A Friend Episode #15 Discuss how the meaning of friendship changes at mid-life. Life Choices Episode #16 Understand the experience of regret that develops from "inaction" or "actions that did not produce the expected outcome." Let's Rock Episode #17 Look at how music culturally changed today's mid-lifers, and what elements of that culture have managed to endure. Take Charge Episode #18 From the opposing perspectives of two leading financial authorities, learn how to get out of debt, save money and invest wisely. Spiritually Speaking Episode #19 Discover how to implement spirituality into everyday life, as well as maintain good health through the mind. Generations Episode #20 Evaluate the generations of this century -- what distinguishes one from another, and what insight can be gained from determining our place in history. Time For Sex? Episode #21 Review the current status of sex at mid-life. Life And Death Episode #22 Examine the stages of grief and why they are critical. The Better Half Episode #23 Address the issues of mid-life transition in family life, career and the ability to remain financially secure. Mom And Dad Episode #24 What are the unusual and difficult problems facing today's mid-life generation as they take on the role of caretaker to their parents? Three leaders in public policy and services present the many options now available. Youth For Sale Episode #25 The search for eternal youth and denial of the aging process has become an even more elaborate process; evaluate the current trends, the methods and the long-term effects. Leading Citizens Episode #26 Assess the professional and societal achievements of today's mid-life generation. Click here for a schedule detailing where and when you can find In the Prime in your area. Videotapes Available At A Discount Go to WETA's In the Prime Web site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022620-A WT01-B12-180IA018-000194-B040-22http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/intheprime/intheprime_videos.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161803 text/html 4238HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:14:06 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 23:23:32 GMTContent-length: 4056Content-type: text/html  In The Prime: Videotapes Available At A Discount Career change. Health concerns. Money issues in a relationship. Chances are that either you or someone you know is experiencingone or more of these issues in everyday life. If so, you may benefitfrom viewing one of the new self-help videotapes produced by WETAin Washington, D.C., in conjunction with the new public televisionseries "In the Prime." "In the Prime," a 26-parttelevision series dealing with issues and topics for people whoare in the prime of their life, was underwritten by Kemper FundsGroup. Couples and Money Psychotherapist Olivia Mellan is a ground-breakerin the field of money psychology and conflict resolution. Mellanexplains what makes people irrational about money and identifiesmoney myths, money personalities and the dynamics of couples andmoney. The Mind-Body Connection James S. Gordon, M.D., a HarvardMedical School graduate, takes an approach that emphasizes thepower of self-care through self-awareness, meditation, relaxation,self-hypnosis, nutrition and exercise. This video shows how thesetechniques and approaches -- from acupuncture to herbalism, frommeditation to massage -- improve health and treat serious illnesses. Changing Careers Through a series of simple exercises,motivational speaker, author and career specialist Carole Hyatthelps viewers identify their own "strands" and explorehow to reweave them into new patterns to create their next careers. As the national underwriter of "In the Prime," KemperFunds Group can offer these videos at a significant discount.When offered through normal channels, the videos sell for $24.95each with postage and handling. But you can purchase each foronly $14.95 with postage and handling by calling (800) 498-4041.That's a $10 savings on each video. "In the Prime" can be seen weekly throughout most ofthe country on the local PBS affiliate. Check local listingsfor times. Click here for a schedule detailing where and when you can find In the Prime in your area. Go to WETA's In the Prime Web site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024650 WT01-B12-181IA018-000194-B040-32http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/technology.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161813 text/html 10614HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:14:16 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 10431Content-type: text/html Kemper Technology Fund Seeks growth of capital by investingprimarily in common stocks of companies that use, develop or benefit fromtechnology. Cisco Systems, Intel, Sun Microsystems, Microsoft, 3Com, Parametric Technology, Computer Associates INTL, Ascend Communications, U.S. Robotics, Dell Computer $1,089,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KTCAX       KTCBX       KTCCX                                                        Initial Offering        9/7/48     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                        YTD Total Return       15.44%      14.55%      14.63% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        8.81%      10.55%      13.63%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        5.18%       7.67%      10.69%                                                                  5 year       18.16%         -           -                       10 year       15.01%         -           -                 Life of class       13.15%      28.37%      29.60% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Technology Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015340-B WT01-B12-182IA018-000194-B040-38http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/totalreturn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161821 text/html 10684HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:14:23 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 10501Content-type: text/html Kemper Total Return Fund Seeks the highest total return, asmeasured by income and capital gain, consistent with reasonable risk byinvesting in common stocks, preferred stocks, convertible and nonconvertiblebonds and money market instruments. Preferred and common stocks 63%, Governments 14%, Nonconvertible bonds 19%, Cash and equivalents 4% $3,005,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KTRAX       KTRBX       KTRCX                                                        Initial Offering       3/2/64      5/31/94     5/31/94                                                        YTD Total Return       10.45%       9.80%       9.77% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        4.14%       5.80%       8.77%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        8.00%      10.63%      13.66%                                                                  5 year        8.73%         -           -                       10 year       10.09%         -           -                 Life of class       11.59%      11.45%      12.70% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Total Return Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015270-B WT01-B12-183IA018-000194-B040-51http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/smallcapequity.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161829 text/html 10808HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:14:32 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 10625Content-type: text/html Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund Seeks maximum capital appreciation byinvesting primarily in common stocks of smaller companies (marketcapitalization of $1 billion or less) considered undervalued, emerging orrecovering. LCI International, Omnicare, Dura Pharmaceuticals, Idexx Labs, CRA Managed Care, MGM Grand, Tellabs, Mohawk Industries, Risk Capital Re Inc., Alternative Resources $935,000,000                                      Class A     Class B     Class C                                 ---------------------------------------                NASDAQ Symbol         KSCAX       KSCBX       KSCCX                                                         Initial Offering        2/20/69     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                         YTD Total Return        16.83%      15.82%      15.84%  Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                         YTD Total Return        10.05%      11.82%      14.84%    Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                             Average Annual Total Returns##                        1 year        9.58%      12.23%      15.16%                                                                    5 year       14.52%         -           -                         10 year       14.27%         -           -                   Life of class       12.70%      18.80%      19.75% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015310-B WT01-B12-184IA018-000194-B040-63http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/preservation.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161839 text/html 11054HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:14:41 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 10871Content-type: text/html Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund Seeks as high a level of currentincome as is consistent with preservation of capital by investing inprimarily investment grade corporate bonds, government securities,commercial paper and money market instruments. Treasury bonds and notes 14%, Foreign bonds 13%, Corporate bonds 66%, Cash and equivalents: Cash equivalents 1%, Treasuries 1-3 6% $570,000,000 13.7 years 5.1 years                                     Class A      Class B     Class C                                 ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KICAX        KICBX       KICCX                                                        Initial Offering        4/15/74      5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield         6.38%        5.71%       5.72%       (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return        -1.22%       -1.82%      -1.79% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -5.70%       -5.56%      -2.73%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        -0.58%        0.30%       3.26%                                                                  5 year         7.01%          -           -                       10 year         7.79%          -           -                 Life of class         9.24%        6.11%       7.43% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015010-B WT01-B12-185IA018-000194-B040-71http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/money_market.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161852 text/html 8942HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:14:51 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 02-Jan-97 18:26:13 GMTContent-length: 8758Content-type: text/html Kemper Money Market Fund Seeks to provide maximum currentincome to the extent consistent with stability of principal by investingin high quality money market instruments. Comercial paper first tier 63%, Domestic CDs/BAs 8%, Repurchase agreements 27%, Federal agencies 1%, U.S. Treasuries 1% $4,165,000,000     Initial Offering       11/25/74                                             Current 7-Day Yield Week Ending 12/31/96        5.14%                                             Compound 7-Day Yield Week Ending 12/31/96        5.27% *A series of Kemper Money Funds. # Portfolios are subject to change. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014930-B WT01-B12-186IA018-000194-B040-80http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/retire_series.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161907 text/html 2062HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:10 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:11:24 GMTContent-length: 1878Content-type: text/html Target Equity Funds Prospectuses And Important Information Kemper Retirement Fund Series I Kemper Retirement Fund Series II Kemper Retirement Fund Series III Kemper Retirement Fund Series IV Kemper Retirement Fund Series V Kemper Retirement Fund Series VI © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1012050 WT01-B12-187IA018-000194-B040-90http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/valuegrowth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161915 text/html 10292HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:17 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 10109Content-type: text/html Kemper Value+Growth Fund Seeks growth of capital through professional management of aportfolio of growth and value stocks. Phillip Morris, General Electric, UST Inc., Compaq, FNMA, FHLMC, Merrill Lynch & Co., Walt Disney, 3Com, Carnival $30,000,000                                   Class A     Class B     Class C                              ---------------------------------------              NASDAQ Symbol        KVGAX       KVGBX        KVGCX           Initial Offering      10/16/95    10/16/95     10/16/95           YTD Total Return       16.22%*     15.45%*      15.35%* Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       9.51%*     11.45%*      14.35%*   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                                                              *Since inception. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Value+Growth Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015320-B WT01-B12-188IA018-000194-B040-99http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/mmfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161922 text/html 2293HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:25 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 19:02:43 GMTContent-length: 2111Content-type: text/html Kemper Money Funds Kemper Money Funds Kemper Money Market Fund Kemper Government Money Fund Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund Kemper Cash Reserves Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012030 WT01-B12-189IA018-000194-B040-109http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/govt_sec_port.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161929 text/html 9072HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 02-Jan-97 18:26:13 GMTContent-length: 8888Content-type: text/html Kemper Government Money Fund* Seeks to provide maximum current income to the extent consistentwith stability of principal by investing in exclusively short-termobligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government, its agencies orinstrumentalities and repurchase agreements of such obligations. Repurchase agreements 61%, Federal agencies 36%, U.S. Treasuries 3% $681,000,000     Initial Offering          11/30/81                                             Current 7-Day Yield            Week Ending 12/31/96           5.14%                                              Compound 7-Day Yield           Week Ending 12/31/96           5.27% *A series of Kemper Money Funds. #Portfolios are subject to change. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014940-B WT01-B12-190IA018-000194-B040-121http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/tax_exempt.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161938 text/html 9188HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 02-Jan-97 18:26:13 GMTContent-length: 9004Content-type: text/html Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund* Seeks to provide maximum current income to the extent consistent with stability of principal by investing in short-term, high quality, tax-exempt municipal obligations. Tax-exempt commercial paper 49%, Variable rate demand notes 44%, Tender option securities 2%, General market obligations 5% $734,000,000               Initial Offering      9/10/87                         Current 7-Day Yield           Week Ending 12/31/96       3.56%                                       Tax Equivalent Current Yield           Week Ending 12/31/96       5.66% ##           Compound 7-Day Yield           Week Ending 12/31/96       3.63%            Tax Equivalent Compound Yield           Week Ending 12/31/96       5.77% ## * A series of Kemper Money Funds. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% federal income tax. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014950-B WT01-B12-191IA018-000194-B040-131http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/income.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161945 text/html 2524HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:48 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:59:17 GMTContent-length: 2342Content-type: text/html Kemper Income Funds Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund Kemper Diversified Income Fund Kemper High Yield Fund Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012040 WT01-B12-192IA018-000194-B040-141http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/capgrowth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106161952 text/html 2603HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:15:55 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:39:46 GMTContent-length: 2421Content-type: text/html Kemper Capital Growth Funds Kemper Growth Fund Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund Kemper Technology Fund Kemper Value+Growth Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015280 WT01-B12-193IA018-000194-B040-149http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/horiz20.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162000 text/html 10597HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:16:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 10414Content-type: text/html Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio Through professional management and diversification across domestic and foreign markets, asset classes and management styles, seeks relative consistency of returns by controlling risk for its given time horizon. Development Bank of Singapore, Compaq, British Petroleum, General Electric, Steris Corp., Honda Motor, FNMA, Circle K Japan, FHLMC, Matsushita $25,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KHOAX       KHOBX       KHOCX                                                        Initial Offering       12/29/95    12/29/95    12/29/95                                                        YTD Total Return        9.68%       8.84%       8.95% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        3.37%       4.84%       7.95%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                                                           * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses.* Since fund's inception. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015240-B WT01-B12-194IA018-000194-B040-165http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/horiz10.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162009 text/html 10578HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:16:11 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 10395Content-type: text/html Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio Through professional management and diversification across domestic and foreign markets, asset classes and management styles, seeks relative consistency of returns by controlling risk for its given time horizon. Development Bank of Singapore, Compaq, Steris Corp., FNMA, Kyocera, General Electric, British Petroleum, ING, FHLMC, Circle K Japan $25,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KHRAX       KHRBX       KHRCX                                                        Initial Offering       12/29/95    12/29/95    12/29/95                                                        YTD Total Return        7.42%       6.85%       6.88% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        1.24%       2.85%       5.88%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                                                            * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses.* Since fund's inception. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015250-B WT01-B12-195IA018-000194-B040-177http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/horiz5.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162018 text/html 10577HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:16:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 10394Content-type: text/html Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio Through professional management and diversification across domestic and foreign markets, asset classes and management styles, seeks relative consistency of returns by controlling risk for its given time horizon. Development Bank of Singapore, ING, Honda Motor, Compaq, Canon, Steris Corp., General Electric, ASTRA, Banco Bilbao, Mitsui & Co. $18,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KHZAX       KHZBX       KHZCX                                                        Initial Offering       12/29/95    12/29/95    12/29/95                                                        YTD Total Return        5.90%       5.38%       5.29% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       -0.20%       1.38%       4.29%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                                                           * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. * Since fund's inception. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015260-B WT01-B12-196IA018-000194-B040-186http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/intlglobal.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162026 text/html 2192HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:16:28 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 19:07:20 GMTContent-length: 2010Content-type: text/html Kemper International and Global Funds Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Europe Fund Kemper Global Income Fund Kemper International Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015350 WT01-B12-197IA018-000194-B040-198http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/worldwide.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162035 text/html 10208HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:16:36 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:52 GMTContent-length: 10025Content-type: text/html Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund Seeks to provide long-term capitalgrowth with guaranteed return ofinvestment on the maturity date to investors who reinvest all dividendsand hold their shares to the maturity date. The fund invests a portionof its assets in U.S. government guaranteed zero coupon bonds and thebalance of its assets in international securities, primarilystocks. Ciba-Geigy, Aegon, British Biotech, Roche Hldg., Tsubakimoto Chain Co. $37,000,000                                ----------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KWIVX                                                        Initial Offering        5/3/94                                                       YTD Total Return          1.43% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -3.61%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         0.86%                                                               Life of class         7.14%                                                Maturity Date:                                   11/15/04 # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.0% for Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015190-B WT01-B12-198IA018-000194-B043-312http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/aboutacrobat.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163629 text/html 4919HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:32:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:45:54 GMTContent-length: 4735Content-type: text/html About Adobe Acrobat Files Some documents on Kemper.com are available to you online in the AdobeAcrobat Portable Document Format (.pdf). We make them available in thisformat so the document you view or print on your own printer issimilar to the printed piece that you wouldreceive from your financial representative or Kemper ShareholderServices. Adobe Acrobat files are universally available -- whether you're usinga Windows, DOS, Macintosh or Unix system, you can view and print the fileusing the free Acrobat Reader. In order to access these or any otherAdobe Acrobat file available on Kemper.com, you will need to GetAcrobat if it is not yet installed on your computer's hard drive.Copying the Acrobat Reader should take no more than a few minutes. Once it'sinstalled on your hard drive, you will be able to click on all AdobeAcrobat files and easily view or print. Within the Acrobat Reader you can: Scroll through the pages of the document Print parts or all of the document Zoom in and out Search for words After installing Adobe Acrobat on your hard drive, configure your Webbrowser to use the Reader for .pdf files. You can either do itimmediately by setting up your viewer options (accessible via HelperApps in Netscape,for example) to associate the file type "application/pdf" with theAcrobat Reader. Or, you could wait until the first time that youdownload a .pdf file, when your browser will prompt you through thisprocess. Download the Acrobat Reader from Adobe's web site. Adobe's public anonymous ftp server - ftp.adobe.com- also has Acrobat Readers for various systems. Note: Occasionally the Adobe web site and ftp site are busy withrequests. At such times, you may have difficulty connecting to Adobe'ssites. If you have difficulty connecting to Adobe, try some of the followingmirror ftp sites which also have the Acrobat Reader software for Windowsand Macintosh. Windows ftp://ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Web/Mosaic/Windows/viewers/ftp://ftp.uu.net/networking/info-service/www/ncsa/Mosaic/Windows/viewers/acroread.exe-split/(split into 6 parts) Macintosh See Various Info-Mac and UMichigan Mac archive sites including INFO-MACHyperArchive ftp://mirror.apple.com/mirrors/Info-Mac.Archive/_Application/ftp://ftp.uu.net/systems/mac/info-mac/app/adobe-acrobat-reader-21.hqx-split/(split file) http://www.umich.edu/~archive/mac/util/text/ © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010920 WT01-B12-199IA018-000194-B040-231http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/global_economy.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162100 text/html 3091HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 11-Oct-96 15:35:03 GMTContent-length: 2909Content-type: text/html The Economy The United States is the largest single market in the world for both stocks and bonds. However, two-thirds of the world's stock market opportunity and more than half of the world's bond market opportunity is outside the U.S. In this section of Kemper.com, we present the global economic outlook of David D. Hale, global economic strategist for Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The Weekly Money Report Will Investors Or The Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? Will Federal Devolution Set The Stage For A State And Local Privatization Boom In The Next U.S. Recession? How Will Investors Respond To The U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? Economic Implications Of The Mutual Fund Boom © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1021720 WT01-B12-200IA018-000194-B040-239http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/business/smallbus.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162109 text/html 4193HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:11 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 16:35:27 GMTContent-length: 4009Content-type: text/html Small Businesses To Benefit From Pension Law Changes With the new pension law changes, small businesses are expectedto be among the biggest winners. In fact, according to estimatesby the U.S. Department of Labor and the Profit Sharing/401(k)Council of America, at least 10 million workers could benefitfrom the changes in the pension laws. One of the most critical pieces of the legislation includes anew savings plan option called SIMPLE (Savings Incentive MatchPlan for Employees). With SIMPLE, employers of 100 or fewer employeeswould be able to set up a plan using a one-page form. In addition,the cumbersome task of conducting nondiscrimination testing willno longer be required, making it even easier to set up a plan. SIMPLE contributions will be immediately vested and fully portable,making it easier for employers to accept plan rollovers. Employersmust contribute 3 percent of pay for participating employees or2 percent of pay for all employees earning at least $5,000, whetheror not they participate. Under a special rule, the match couldbe reduced (but not below 1 percent) in not more than two outof any five years. As incentive to keep participants in the plan,the distribution penalty tax is increased to 25 percent underSIMPLE and applies to distributions made within the first twoyears the employee first participates in the plan. The new laws now allow tax-exempt organizations, other than stateand local governments, to offer 401(k) plans to their workers. Further changes include the repeal of the family aggregationlaw, which will now enable relatives who work in a family businessto earn their own retirement benefits without undue restrictions. Consult your tax or legal advisor for a better understanding ofthe new legislation and how it may impact your business. If youknow his or her e-mail address, send an e-mail now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1025550 WT01-B12-201IA018-000194-B040-249http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/business/helpprotect.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162116 text/html 3687HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:19 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 16:35:24 GMTContent-length: 3503Content-type: text/html Help Protect Your Company's Retirement Plan From Claims A decision by the Supreme Court this past March (Varity Corp.v. Howe) ruled that plan beneficiaries may sue on their ownbehalf for breaches of fiduciary duty under ERISA. This was allowedeven though ERISA had historically prohibited participants frombringing suit on their own behalf. The decision concluded thatERISA Sec. 502(a)(3) was intended to be a general "catch-all"that would protect plan participants and beneficiaries, by allowingparticipants to bring claims on their own behalf, as well as onthe behalf of the plan itself, in the case of an employer's allegedmisrepresentation and breach of fiduciary duty. Now some employers fear that they could be more vulnerable tolitigation. Although more suits may indeed be filed as a resultof the Supreme Court ruling, you may help protect your intereststhrough proper plan communication and documentation. Comprehensive written documents All of your company's benefits plans should be in writing. Thecompany's right to make changes to the plan should be clearlyspelled out in plan documentation. Oral communication Any communication about the plan, written or oral, could be usedin litigation. Therefore, consider limiting the number of approvedplan spokespersons and refrain from oral statements about theplan as much as possible. A centralized benefits plan departmentcan help control the flow of information and make it less likelythat inappropriate information is communicated. With proper plan disclosure you may be able to limit your company'srisk. Consult your financial or tax advisor to ensure that yourplan's documentation is appropriate. If you know his or her e-mailaddress, send an e-mail now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1025540 WT01-B12-202IA018-000194-B040-256http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/business/dolpushes.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162123 text/html 5136HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:26 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 16:35:18 GMTContent-length: 4952Content-type: text/html The DOL Pushes For Better Investment Education Workers are increasingly finding themselves responsible for theinvestment management of their retirement savings. The reason? The growing popularity of participant-directed individual accountretirement plans, such as 401(k) plans. An advantage of theseplans is that they remove the burden of investment allocationfrom employers. In return, workers hold ultimate control overtheir accounts and are oftentimes given more flexibility in theirinvestment options. Although such plans are generally viewed as positive, the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) has become concerned. The DOL fearsthat participants may not understand investment principles wellenough to make informed decisions that will ensure an adequateretirement income. In addition, the responsibility of choosinginvestments may frighten workers who do not understand investmentprinciples, thus deterring them from plan participation. To combat these drawbacks, many employers and plan sponsors haveprovided workers with basic investment education programs. Manyothers, however, have held back. They fear that their investmenteducation may be construed as offering "investment advice"under section 3 (21) (A) (ii) of ERISA, which could give riseto fiduciary status and potential liabilities. In an effort to promote better investment education by employers,the DOL recently published Interpretive Bulletin 96-1. The bulletin clarifies the differences between investment educationand investment advice. It also identifies four categories of investmenteducation, which are summarized below. 1) Plan Information Any materials that explain the operation of the plan, its investmentalternatives, the benefits of enrolling, the advantages of increasingcontributions and how preretirement withdrawals may lessen retirementincome. 2) General Financial and Investment Information Information that explains such topics as risk and return, diversification,dollar cost averaging, compounded return, tax deferred investment,effects of inflation, determining time horizons, and other similarfinancial and investment concepts. 3) Asset Allocation Models Materials that illustrate different portfolio asset allocationsbased on various time horizons and risk profiles and are basedon generally accepted investment theories and principles. 4) Interactive Investment Materials Worksheets, software and similar materials, which provide a participantthe means to estimate future retirement income needs and assessthe impact of different asset allocations on retirement income. Ongoing investment education can play a crucial role in helpingyour workers understand what it takes to invest successfully. A better understanding by employees may also expand your plan'sparticipation and contribution rates. As always, contact yourfinancial or legal advisor if you have questions about your company'sinvestment education programs. If you know his or her e-mailaddress, send an e-mail now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1025530 WT01-B12-203IA018-000194-B040-268http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/business/linkstosmall.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162130 text/html 2483HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 18:15:21 GMTContent-length: 2299Content-type: text/html Links To Small Business Sites The World Wide Web offers a wealth of information for the smallbusiness investor. Dun & Bradstreet PSI-Research smallbizNet The Small Business Resource Center Smart Business Supersite U.S. Chamber Of Commerce U.S. Small Business Administration Your Small Office © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1026430 WT01-B12-204IA018-000194-B040-276http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/contact_other.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162138 text/html 2567HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:40 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:18 GMTContent-length: 2383Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 between 7 a.m. and 6pm. Central Time Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. For up-to-date Kemper Fund and account information 24 hours a day, sevendays a week, call our automated telephone response system, KemperACCESS. By calling 1-800-972-3060 on a touch-tone telephone, you can receive thefollowing information: Account balance Most recent transactions Dividend earnings Current yields and returns Current net asset values. Selected account transactions also are available. Kemper Funds P.O. Box 419151 Kansas City, MO 64141-6151 © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1011460 WT01-B12-205IA018-000194-B040-287http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/asian_growth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162230 text/html 10090HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:17:48 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:48:35 GMTContent-length: 9908Content-type: text/html Kemper Asian Growth Fund Long-term capital growth. Equity securities of primarily Asian companies.                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KANAX       KANBX       KANCX                           Initial Offering       10/21/96    10/21/96    10/21/96                        YTD Total Return          -           -           -   Unadjusted for Sales Charge             YTD Total Return          -           -           -     Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year          -           -           -                          Life of class          -           -           -  # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Asian Growth Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1024580 WT01-B12-206IA018-000194-B040-297http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/europe.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162241 text/html 10376HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:18:44 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:52 GMTContent-length: 10193Content-type: text/html Kemper Europe Fund Long-term capital growth. Bayer AG, Glaxo Wellcome, British Petroleum, Koninklijke Ahold, Independent Newspaper Geographic Distribution of Common Stocks: United Kingdom 25%, Netherlands 24%, Germany 10%, France 10%, Switzerland 7%, Spain 7%, Ireland 6%, Italy 4%, Sweden 2%, Norway 2% $2,200,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KEFAX       KEFBX       KEFCX                           Initial Offering       5/1/96      5/1/96      5/1/96                        YTD Total Return        5.26%       4.84%       4.84% Unadjusted for Sales Charge             YTD Total Return       -0.79%       0.84%       3.84%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year          -           -           -                          Life of class       -0.79%       0.84%       3.84% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Europe Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1019840-B WT01-B12-207IA018-000194-B040-308http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/quantitative.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162250 text/html 10360HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:18:52 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 10177Content-type: text/html Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund Seeks growth of capital and reduction of risk by investing primarily in common stocks. Compaq, Philip Morris, UST, Viacom, General Electric, U.S. Robotics, Union Texas Petro Hldgs., 3Com, Consolidated Stores, Walt Disney $4,000,000                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KQEAX       KQEBX       KQECX                                                        Initial Offering        2/15/96     2/15/96     2/15/96                                                           YTD Total Return        8.10%       7.37%       7.47% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        1.88%       3.37%       6.47%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            * Since fund's inception # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. For Class C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015300-B WT01-B12-208IA018-000194-B041-7http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/high_yield.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162302 text/html 10983HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:19:00 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 10800Content-type: text/html Kemper High Yield Fund Seeks the highest level of currentincome by investing primarily in high-yield fixed-income securities.Capital gain is a secondary objective. Bonds 91%, Cash and equivalents: Cash equivalents 6%, Treasuries 1-3 1%, Preferred and common stocks 2% $4,095,000,000 7.7 years 5.4 years                                     Class A      Class B     Class C                                ----------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KHYAX        KHYBX       KHYCX                                                        Initial Offering        1/26/78      5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield         8.90%        8.43%       8.47%       (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return         9.62%        8.85%       8.87% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return         4.65%        4.85%       7.87%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         7.88%        9.02%      12.06%                                                                  5 year        11.98%          -           -                                                                   10 year        10.90%          -           -                                                             Life of class        11.73%        9.51%      10.80% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper High Yield Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015000-B WT01-B12-209IA018-000194-B041-20http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/diversified.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162310 text/html 11103HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:19:13 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 10920Content-type: text/html Kemper Diversified Income Fund Seeks high current return byinvesting in primarily high yield, foreign and U.S. governmentfixed-income securities. High yield corporates 40%, Emerging markets 6%, Foreign currency bonds 23%, Mortgages 14%, Treasury notes & bonds 6%, Cash & equivalents: Treasuries 1-3 10%, Other 1% $778,000,000 8.2 years 4.7 years                                     Class A      Class B      Class C                                ----------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KDIAX        KDIBX       KDICX                                                        Initial Offering        6/23/77      5/31/94     5/31/94                               (1/23/89 new obj.)                                                               SEC Yield         6.88%        6.26%       6.35%       (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return         5.09%        4.44%       4.48% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return         0.40%        0.47%       3.49%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         4.79%        5.69%       8.78%                                                                  5 year        11.50%          -           -                                                                  10 year        10.14%          -           -                                                             Life of class        10.49%        7.43%       8.75% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Diversified Income Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014990-B WT01-B12-210IA018-000194-B041-34http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/global_income.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162318 text/html 11062HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:19:21 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 10879Content-type: text/html Kemper Global Income Fund Seeks high current income consistentwith prudent total return asset management by investing primarily ininvestment grade foreign and domestic fixed-income securities. United States 20%, Netherlands 20%, United Kingdom 20%, Australia 15%, France 12%, Japan 5%, Norway 5%, Italy 3%. $136,000,000 6.8 years 4.8 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KGIAX       KGIBX       KGICX                                                        Initial Offering       10/1/89     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield        4.82%       4.34%       4.36%       (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return        2.01%       1.43%       1.54% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       -2.61%      -2.45%       0.57%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year       -0.45%       0.75%       3.65%                                                                  5 year        5.46%         -           -                                                             Life of class        8.57%       8.17%       9.39% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Global Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Note: Portfolio percentages may not equal 100% due to unrealized gains and losses on forward foreign exchange hedges. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015360-B WT01-B12-211IA018-000194-B041-37http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162327 text/html 2970HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:19:27 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:54:33 GMTContent-length: 2788Content-type: text/html Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund Kemper Municipal Bond Fund America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012130-A WT01-B12-212IA018-000194-B041-55http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/usmortgage.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162349 text/html 10689HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:19:49 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 10506Content-type: text/html Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund Seeks maximum current return by investing in U.S. government securities(primarily mortgage-backed) and repurchase agreements. Mortgage-backed: GNMA 83%, Other 11%, Governments: Short-term 6% $2,962,000,000 8.9 years 4.1 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------              NASDAQ Symbol        KUMAX       KUMBX        KUMCX           Initial Offering       1/10/92     10/26/84     5/31/94                  SEC Yield        6.01%       5.46%        5.55%      (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return       0.04%      -0.46%       -0.57% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return      -4.41%      -4.25%       -1.51%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year      -0.46%       0.63%        3.47%                      5 year       0.00%       5.30%          -                       10 year       0.00%       6.46%          -                 Life of class       4.24%       7.02%        6.28% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015040-B WT01-B12-213IA018-000194-B041-68http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/usgovtsec.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162358 text/html 11043HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:19:59 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 10860Content-type: text/html Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund Seeks high current income, liquidity and security of principal by investing in securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies, including GNMA certificates, andother government securities and repurchase agreements. Mortgage-backed: GNMA 82%, Other 10%, Governments: Short-term 8% $4,157,000,000 8.9 years 4.1 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KUSAX        KUSBX         KUSCX                                                        Initial Offering       10/1/79      5/31/94       5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield        6.33%        5.66%         5.68%       (month ended 9/30/96)                                                       YTD Total Return         0.13%       -0.51%        -0.59% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       -4.42%       -4.32%        -1.55%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year       -0.24%        0.71%         3.55%                                                                  5 year        5.35%          -             -                       10 year        7.30%          -             -                 Life of class        8.94%        5.25%         6.52% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015030-B WT01-B12-214IA018-000194-B041-86http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/int_muni_bond.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162409 text/html 11156HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:20:10 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 10973Content-type: text/html Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund As high a level of current incomeexempt from federal income taxes as is consistent with preservation ofcapital. Average maturity normally ranges from three to ten years. Cash and Equivalents 2%, US Government Secured 8%, General Obligations 23%, Revenue Bonds 67% $22,000,000 9.1 years 5.8 years                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                               -----------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KIMAX       KIMBX       KIMCX                                                        Initial Offering        11/1/94     11/1/94     11/1/94                   SEC Yield         3.98%       3.29%       3.33%       (month ended 9/30/96)    Taxable Equivalent Yield         6.33%*      5.23%*      5.29%*                                                        YTD Total Return         0.98%       0.47%       0.38% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -1.79%      -3.44%      -0.60%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         1.26%       0.37%       3.26%                                                           Life of class         6.82%       6.00%       7.58% # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 2.75% for Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% federal income tax rate.The SEC Yield for Class A, B and C shares would have been 3.66%, 2.98%and 3.08%, respectively, if expenses were not being absorbed. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015060-B WT01-B12-215IA018-000194-B041-96http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/shortintgovt.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162418 text/html 10913HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:20:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 10730Content-type: text/html Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund Seeks high current income andpreservation of capital, with equal emphasis, by investing in primarilyshort- and intermediate-term U.S. government securities and a limitedinvestment in other fixed-income securities. Governments: Short-term 73%, Intermediate-term 25%, Cash equivalents 2% $204,000,000 2.3 years 2.0 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------              NASDAQ Symbol         KSIAX       KSIBX       KSICX                                                       Initial Offering        1/10/92     2/1/89      5/31/94                                                              SEC Yield         5.08%       4.45%       4.57%       (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return        1.34%       0.67%       0.72% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       -2.15%      -3.20%      -0.25%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        0.64%       0.35%       3.36%                                                                  5 year        0.00%       4.40%         -                 Life of class        4.09%       5.78%       4.66% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 3.5% for Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015020-B WT01-B12-216IA018-000194-B041-107http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/adjust_us.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162425 text/html 10801HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:20:28 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:44 GMTContent-length: 10618Content-type: text/html Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund Seeks high current income consistentwith low volatility of principal by investing primarily in adjustablerate securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or itsagencies or instrumentalities. Government agency ARMS 79%, Fixed-rate agency securities 1%, Government bonds: Short-term 20% $94,000,000 3.8 years 3.0 years                                    Class A       Class B        Class C                               --------------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KADAX         KADBX          KADCX            Initial Offering        9/1/87       5/31/94        5/31/94                               (1/1/92 new obj).                   SEC Yield        5.28%         4.68%          4.68%       (month ended 9/30/96)            YTD Total Return         Unadjusted for Sales Charge        3.08%         2.39%          2.54%            YTD Total Return          Adjusted for Sales Charge ##    -0.51%        -1.57%          1.55%Average Annual Total Returns ##                      1 year        1.36%         1.28%          4.29%                      5 year        4.36%           -             -                 Life of class        6.23%         2.95%          4.25% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 3.5% for Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014980-B WT01-B12-217IA018-000194-B041-120http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/capgrowthinc.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162443 text/html 2221HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:20:37 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:43:40 GMTContent-length: 2039Content-type: text/html Kemper Capital Growth and Income Funds Kemper Blue Chip Fund Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012060 WT01-B12-218IA018-000194-B041-133http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/assetallocation.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162452 text/html 2258HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:20:54 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:47:19 GMTContent-length: 2076Content-type: text/html Kemper Asset Allocation Funds Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio Kemper Total Return Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018490 WT01-B12-219IA018-000194-B041-143http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/targetequ.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162500 text/html 2519HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:03 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:50:57 GMTContent-length: 2337Content-type: text/html Target Equity Funds Kemper Retirement Fund-Series I Kemper Retirement Fund-Series II Kemper Retirement Fund-Series III Kemper Retirement Fund-Series IV Kemper Retirement Fund-Series V Kemper Retirement Fund-Series VI Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012050 WT01-B12-220IA018-000194-B041-151http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/comp_total_returns_cls.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162511 text/html 3408HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:15 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:37 GMTContent-length: 3226Content-type: text/html Kemper Closed-End Funds Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 10/31/96 (Based on net asset value, not market price)                                                  YTD    1989    1990    1991    1992    1993    1994    1995   The Growth Fund of Spain, Inc.                 +13.76%    -    - 4.61% +15.84% -23.48% +28.79% + 2.30% +22.12% Kemper High Income Trust                       +12.47  - 9.90  -15.54  +53.85  +18.80  +21.50  - 3.26  +16.88Kemper Intermediate Government Trust           + 1.70  + 9.71  + 7.14  +15.16  + 5.42  + 6.05  - 3.29  +16.65Kemper Multi-Market Income Trust               + 6.69  + 2.55  -11.94  +52.21  +17.29  +14.44  - 3.05  +20.11Kemper Municipal Income Trust                  + 3.95  + 9.05  + 6.79  +16.12  +11.08  +14.65  - 6.64  +17.87Kemper Strategic Income Fund                   +19.55     -       -       -       -       -    - 0.84* +30.80Kemper Strategic Municipal Income Trust        + 4.70  + 9.46  + 6.64  +12.58  + 9.30  +12.34  - 0.16  +12.38 Kemper closed-end funds' returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returns, market price and net asset value fluctuate. *Comparative total return is as of fund's inception on 4/29/94. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016510-F WT01-B12-221IA018-000194-B041-161http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/closedend_news.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162519 text/html 2488HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:22 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 24-Sep-96 20:13:52 GMTContent-length: 2305Content-type: text/html Kemper Closed-End Funds News The Growth Fund of Spain, Inc. Kemper High Income Trust Kemper Intermediate Government Trust Kemper Multi-Market Income Trust Kemper Municipal Income Trust Kemper Strategic Municipal Income Trust Kemper Strategic Income Fund © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016510 WT01-B12-222IA018-000194-B041-173http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/whoswho.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162527 text/html 5114HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 09-Jul-96 14:11:46 GMTContent-length: 4931Content-type: text/html A Who's Who of Financial Representatives Prospectuses And Important Information As you know, Kemper Funds believes that working with a financial representative is the best way to evaluate today's investment alternatives. "Financial representative" is a catch-all term for the licensed professionals who represent others' financial interests. Investors today have their choice of where they meet their representative (at a brokerage office, at a financial institution or in their home, for example), the level of service (from full to limited) they want to receive, and how services will be compensated for. And, as markets become increasingly complex and global, an increasing number of financial representatives have continued with their education. Do you need help in deciphering your financial representative's business card? Despite the many possible affiliations and designations, almost every financial representative comes from one of four basic disciplines. Here's a quick portrait of each "type." The accountant You expect a certified public accountant (CPA) to be able to advise you on audit, accounting and tax issues. To offer more encompassing help, including personal income tax planning, investment planning and estate planning, many CPAs also have sought accreditation from the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, as a Personal Financial Specialist (PFS). A PFS must have several hours of planning experience over a three-year period, pass a comprehensive exam and submit references. Reaccreditation is required every three years. The insurance agent To be serving as a financial representative, an insurance agent can be expected to have a license to sell securities as well as insurance. Insurance agents' interest in the spectrum of personal financial management has led to the creation of a Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC) designation. Accreditation requires coursework (in investments, income taxation and estate and financial planning), a minimum of three years of experience and adherence to a code of ethics. Chartered life underwriters (CLUs) qualify for a fast track to the ChFC, but the designation is not exclusive to the insurance industry. The American College, Bryn Mawr, Pa., awards the ChFC. The financial planner Financial planners represent a broad view, offering advice in investment planning (including mutual funds and individual securities), insurance, taxes, retirement, estate and investment planning. A certified financial planner (CFP) has completed extensive education, examination, experience and ethics requirements set by the Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards, Denver. While almost half of all CFPs work for financial planning firms, they're also employed at securities, accounting and insurance firms and banks. The broker Brokers are sales representatives who work for a brokerage firm, also known as a broker/dealer. They are registered with the National Association of Securities Dealers and have passed a qualifying examination. Because they�re trained in securities laws, their expertise is in the selection and monitoring of stocks, bonds, mutual funds and other financial products. But while the generic "broker" gives you an idea of the representative's training, it does not satisfactorily describe the scope of his or her service. That's why many of those with a foundation in brokerage prefer to call themselves financial consultants or advisors. Many brokers also have additional designations, such as the CFP. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014360 WT01-B12-223IA018-000194-B041-187http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/customplan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162535 text/html 4420HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:37 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:11:22 GMTContent-length: 4236Content-type: text/html A Custom-tailored Plan To Help Achieve Your Goals Prospectuses And Important Information A financial representative can become your trusted partner for thelong-run. He or she will get to know you and work with you, to help youreach a lifetime of financial goals. Here's what you should expect from the start... A detailed analysis of your financial situation. Your representative canexamine your current investments, income and tax situation, to analyzeyour current level of "fiscal fitness." A clear definition of your goals. Together, you and your financialrepresentative can formalize your goals - for the near-term (buy a newhouse in a few years?), and for the long-run (college for children?retirement?). An individualized strategy to help reach your goals. Most likely, yourinvestment plan will include a combination of investments that addressyour time and safety requirements. Your portfolio will be uniquely yours- geared toward helping to meet your financial needs now, and later. Regular portfolio reviews.You and your financial representative should periodically review yourinvestments to be sure you're on track to reaching your goals.Similarly, you should talk with your representative throughout variouslife stages. Marriage, new babies, retirement, aging parents, new jobs -all of these might warrant a change in your investment strategy. Do you really need a professional financial representative? Yes, if you agree with these statements.... I do not have time to continually monitor the financial markets andmy investments, and would rather leave the detailed analysis up to aninvestment professional. Agree ____ Disagree ____ Some of these statements apply to me. (These common life situationsmay indicate a need for specialized investment strategies.) Agree ____ Disagree ____ I have a new job. I have my own business. My household income has recently changed. There has been a change in my family (i.e., a new baby). I will have to finance a college education. I have retired, or soon will retire, or need to start planning for retirement. I have parents who need (or may eventually need) financial support. I'm not completely confident that my assets are strategicallyallocated so that I'm on target to reach my financial goals. Agree ____ Disagree ____ I need to establish a disciplined savings and investment plan. Agree ____ Disagree ____ My investments are serious business, deserving the attention andskill of a dedicated, experienced financial professional. Agree ____ Disagree ____ If you agree with some (or all) of the questions above, a professionalfinancial representative is probably right for you. So keep reading... © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B12-224IA018-000194-B041-195http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/boost.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162543 text/html 3402HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:46 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:11:22 GMTContent-length: 3218Content-type: text/html Boost Your Confidence And Peace Of Mind Prospectuses And Important Information Your financial representative is a licensed professional, trained tohave an in-depth understanding of the financial markets. What's more, heor she is expected to maintain the highest level of integrity andrespect in dealing with clients. Entrusting your investments to an investment professional can actuallylift a weight off your shoulders. Why? Because your financial representative can... Evaluate and help choose the best investments alternatives for you. Yourrepresentative can pre-screen investment choices, and present you withthe ones that make the most sense for your situation. Help you manage risk. Investing to build capital always involves some degree of risk. Afinancial representative can help you find the most comfortablecombination of risk and reward for you, based on your goals andtime-frame. Likewise, he or she can help you employ a variety ofrisk-reduction strategies to help protect your investments. Monitor the markets - and everything that impacts them. You won't haveto worry and watch the markets, because that's your representative'sfull-time job. He or she will help keep your focus on long-term results- and put short-term ups and downs in perspective. This can help reducelosses due to "panic selling" - losses that result from sellinginvestments at the wrong time, for the wrong reasons. Relieve you of administrative details. Your investment transactions cango much more smoothly when handled by a professional financialrepresentative. In fact, he or she can take most of the time-consuming,but necessary, paperwork off your hands. And, if you make all of yourinvestments through one representative, matters like address, telephonenumber, and name changes can be handled with one phone call.Furthermore, your representative can even help you organize and reportyour investments' performance at tax-time. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B12-225IA018-000194-B041-209http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/improve.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162551 text/html 4572HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:21:53 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:11:23 GMTContent-length: 4388Content-type: text/html Improve Your Investment Potential Prospectuses And Important Information Mutual fund investors who worked with a professional financialrepresentative have reaped greater rewards! A well-chosen group of mutual funds can make an excellent cornerstonefor a results-oriented investment portfolio. And, studies have shownthat investors who use professional financial representatives - takingadvantage of their experience and guidance - have achieved betterresults than investors who chose to go it alone. See for yourself... A study of 1,000 equity and fixed income mutual funds showed thatinvestors who bought funds through a professional financialrepresentative had better investment results than those who purchasedfunds themselves - 15% better in equity funds and 9% better in fixedincome funds.* *Source: Dalbar, Inc. study "Quantitative Analysis of Investor Behavior"(6/30/94). This information is historical and does not represent futureresults. Also, there can be no guarantee that a particular investor'sresults will be improved through professional advice. The study comparedcumulative investment returns over the period 12/31/92 to 12/30/94 for awide variety of equity and fixed income funds sold directly to investorsand sold through financial representatives. Performance information doesnot consider the effect of sales charges paid by investors who workedwith financial representatives. Source of investment information was theInvestment Company Institute. Here's how your financial representative's experience and guidance canhelp provide this exceptional benefit... Encouragement to stay the course. A long-term perspective is one of thebest predictors of financial success. And, because studies have shownthat investors who worked with a professional financial representativeheld their mutual fund investments longer than those who did not (3.2vs. 2 years respectively for equity funds, and 2.9 vs. 1.7 years forfixed income funds)** - they may have greater potential for success inthe long-run. Information about emerging opportunities. As an investment professional,it's your financial representative's job to stay abreast of (and let youknow about) new investment opportunities. On the other hand, an investorworking alone would have to do lots of homework, including reading avariety of financial publications and investment newsletters, to gaintimely awareness of such opportunities. Advice when it's time to move. Should you move quickly to take advantageof a new opportunity? Or should you stick with your current investments?With a professional financial representative at your side, you can beconfident that you're making educated choices based on time-testedexperience. And that's the best feeling of all. **Source: Dalbar, Inc. study "Quantitative Analysis of InvestorBehavior" (6/30/94). Comparison of redemption rates in long-term(excluding money market funds) fixed income and equity mutual funds -funds sold through financial representatives vs. direct-marketed funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B12-226IA018-000194-B041-217http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/establish.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162603 text/html 3328HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:22:06 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:11:22 GMTContent-length: 3144Content-type: text/html Establish A Relationship Based On Mutual Respect And Trust Prospectuses And Important Information 15 Important Benefits That Your Financial Representative Can Provide An analysis of your current financial situation. Clear definition of your financial needs and goals. An individualized strategy to help reach your goals. Regular portfolio reviews. Potential for greater returns. A long-term perspective. Advice when it's time for a strategy change. Evaluation of the best investment alternatives for you. Knowledge of emerging opportunities. Risk management strategies. Continual market analysis. Reduce loss due to "panic selling". Tax preparation and/or reporting assistance. Help with paperwork and administrative details. An introduction to Kemper Funds ...the only mutual fund family you may ever need. Ask a financial representative about Kemper Funds. Kemper - one of America's largest asset managers - offers a family ofmutual funds designed to help meet a lifetime of financial goals. And,since Kemper believes that the professional guidance of a full-servicefinancial representative is an invaluable asset to investors, its fundsare available primarily through investment professionals. Kemper Distributors, Inc. 120 South LaSalle Street Chicago, Illinois 60603 This brochure may be distributed to the public only when preceded oraccompanied by a Kemper Funds prospectus. If you would likeprospectuses for other Kemper Funds containing more completeinformation, including management fees and expenses, ask your financialadvisor, call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 or request one now. Please read theprospectus(es) carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010220 WT01-B12-227IA018-000194-B041-232http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/retfunds_1to3.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162614 text/html 11349HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:22:14 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 11166Content-type: text/html Kemper Retirement Fund, Series I-III Seeks to provide long-term capital growthwith guaranteed return of investment on the maturity date to investors whoreinvest all dividends and hold their shares to the maturity date. The fundinvests a portion of its assets in U.S. government guaranteed zero couponbonds and the balance of its assets primarily in growth stocks. KRF I Ryder System Inc., Eli Lilly & Co., Sundstrand Corp., Consolidated Stores, BF Goodrich, Mobil, Emerson Electric, Harris Corp., Perkin-Elmer, Cincinnati Bell KRF II Ryder System Inc., Eli Lilly & Co., Sundstrand Corp., Consolidated Stores, BF Goodrich, Mobil, Emerson Electric, Harris Corp., Perkin-Elmer, Cincinnati Bell KRF III Ryder System Inc., Eli Lilly & Co., Sundstrand Corp., Consolidated Stores, BF Goodrich, Mobil, Emerson Electric, Harris Corp., Perkin-Elmer, Cincinnati Bell Series I $109,000,000 Series II $170,000,000 Series III $122,000,000                                    Series I     Series II    Series III                               --------------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KRFAX        KRFBX         KRFCX            Initial Offering       2/5/90       9/10/90       3/10/92                                 (closed to    (closed to    (closed to                                  investors)    investors)    investors)            YTD Total Return       10.21%        7.06%         7.14% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        4.72%        1.73%         1.79%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        8.68%        5.85%         6.51%                                                                  5 year        9.59%        9.04%         0.00%              Life of Series       12.76%       12.66%         9.48%                                   Maturity     Maturity     Maturity                                     Date:        Date:        Date:                                   11/15/99      8/15/00      2/15/02 # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.0% for Kemper Retirement Fund. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015170-B WT01-B12-228IA018-000194-B041-242http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/retfunds_4to6.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162621 text/html 11325HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:22:24 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 11142Content-type: text/html Kemper Retirement Fund, Series IV-VI Seeks to provide long-term capital growthwith guaranteed return of investment on the maturity date to investors whoreinvest all dividends and hold their shares to the maturity date. The fundinvests a portion of its assets in U.S. government guaranteed zero coupon bondsand the balance of its assets primarily in growth stocks. KRF IV Ryder System Inc., Eli Lilly & Co., Sundstrand Corp., Consolidated Stores, BF Goodrich, Mobil, Emerson Electric, Harris Corp., Perkin-Elmer, Cincinnati Bell KRF V Ryder System Inc., Eli Lilly & Co., Sundstrand Corp., Consolidated Stores, BF Goodrich, Mobil, Emerson Electric, Harris Corp., Perkin-Elmer, Cincinnati Bell KRF VI Ryder System Inc., Eli Lilly & Co., Sundstrand Corp., Consolidated Stores, BF Goodrich, Mobil, Emerson Electric, Harris Corp., Perkin-Elmer, Cincinnati Bell Series IV $138,000,000 Series V $131,000,000 Series VI $56,000,000                                    Series IV     Series V     Series VI                               -------------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KRFDX        KRFEX        KRFFX                                                        Initial Offering        1/15/93      11/15/93      5/1/95                                  (closed to   (closed to                                   investors)   investors)                                                        YTD Total Return         5.21%        5.26%        3.03% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -0.09%        0.00%       -2.11%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         5.20%        5.65%        3.91%                                                          Life of Series         7.15%        6.27%        7.28%                                                                                Maturity     Maturity     Maturity                                      Date:       Date:        Date:                                     2/15/03     11/15/04     5/15/06 # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.0% for Kemper Retirement Fund. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015180-B WT01-B12-229IA018-000194-B041-254http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/ca_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162630 text/html 11314HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:22:31 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 11131Content-type: text/html Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt from federal and California stateincome taxes by investing in municipal securities offered primarily bymunicipal issuers located in California and rated investment grade or ofcomparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 2%, US Government Secured 12%, General Obligations 4%, Revenue Bonds 82% $1,048,000,000 18.3 years 8.0 years                                     Class A    Class B    Class C                                ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KCTAX       KCTBX      KCTCX                                                        Initial Offering       2/17/83     5/31/94    5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield        4.69%       4.05%       4.06%       (month ended 9/30/96)                                                Taxable Equivalent Yield        8.21%       7.09%       7.11%                                                        YTD Total Return        0.46%      -0.18%      -0.33% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                       YTD Total Return       -4.05%      -4.04%      -1.30%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        2.09%       3.04%       5.88%                                                                  5 year        6.28%         -           -                       10 year        7.42%         -           -                                                             Life of class        8.82%       5.18%       6.22% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum salescharge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 42.9% combined federal andState of California income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015080-B WT01-B12-230IA018-000194-B041-262http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/fl_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162637 text/html 11384HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:22:40 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 11201Content-type: text/html Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt fromfederal income taxes by investing in municipal securities offeredprimarily by municipal issuers located in Florida and rated investmentgrade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 6%, US Government Secured 7%, General Obligations 12%, Revenue Bonds 75% $109,000,000 17.5 years 8.0 years                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                                ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KFLAX       KFLBX       KFLCX                                                        Initial Offering        4/25/91     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield         4.73%       4.11%       4.12%       (month ended 9/30/96)    Taxable Equivalent Yield         7.52%*      6.53%*      6.55%*                                                        YTD Total Return         0.23%      -0.42%      -0.43% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -4.26%      -4.28%      -1.39%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         1.35%       2.18%       5.19%                                                                  5 year         6.97%         -           -                                                             Life of class         7.52%       4.97%       6.25% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% marginal federal incometax rate. Income may be subject to state and local taxes, but there isno Florida income tax for individuals. The fund's shares are expected tobe exempt from the Florida intangibles tax but there is no assurancethat they will. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015090-B WT01-B12-231IA018-000194-B041-279http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/mi_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162653 text/html 10969HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:22:54 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 10786Content-type: text/html Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt fromfederal and Michigan state income taxes by investing in municipalsecurities offered primarily by municipal issuers located in Michiganand rated investment grade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 5%, US Government Secured 1%, General Obligations 47%, Revenue Bonds 47% $3,000,000 16.4 years 8.3 years                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                               ----------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KMIAX       KMIBX       KMICX                                                        Initial Offering        3/15/95     3/15/95     3/15/95                                                               SEC Yield         4.08%       3.54%     3.73%       (month ended 9/30/96)    Taxable Equivalent Yield         6.79%*      5.89%*      6.21%*                                                        YTD Total Return         0.02%      -0.53%      -0.54% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -4.44%      -4.40%      -1.51%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##               Life of class         4.69%       5.18%       7.05% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 39.9% combined Michigan andfederal income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015100-B WT01-B12-232IA018-000194-B041-290http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/nj_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162701 text/html 11050HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:23:03 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:48 GMTContent-length: 10867Content-type: text/html Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt fromfederal and New Jersey state income taxes by investing in municipalsecurities offered primarily by government issuers located in New Jerseyand rated investment grade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 6%, US Government Secured 2%, General Obligations 35%, Revenue Bonds 57% $4,000,000 17.7 years 8.4 years                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KNJAX       KNJBX       KNJCX                                                          Initial Offering        3/15/95     3/15/95     3/15/95                                                               SEC Yield         4.07%       3.41%       3.61%       (month ended 9/30/96)                                                Taxable Equivalent Yield         6.89%*      5.77%*      6.11%*                                                           YTD Total Return        -0.44%      -1.00%      -0.77% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -4.89%      -4.86%      -1.73%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##               Life of class         4.17%       4.74%       6.82% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based on the fund's yield and the 40.9% combined New Jersey and federal income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015110-B WT01-B12-233IA018-000194-B042-12http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/ny_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162713 text/html 11315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:23:12 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:48 GMTContent-length: 11132Content-type: text/html Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt fromfederal and New York state and New York City income taxes by investingin municipal securities offered primarily by municipal issuers locatedin New York and rated investment grade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 5%, US Government Secured 6%, General Obligations 3%, Revenue Bonds 86% $304,000,000 17.5 years 7.6 years                                     Class A     Class B     Class C                               ----------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KNTAX       KNTBX       KNTCX                                                        Initial Offering       12/31/85     5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield         4.64%       3.99%       4.03%       (month ended 9/30/96)                                                Taxable Equivalent Yield         8.33%*      7.16%*      7.24%*                                                       YTD Total Return         0.26%      -0.38%      -0.37% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -4.27%      -4.24%      -1.33%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         1.41%       2.28%       5.31%                                                                  5 year         6.41%         -           -                       10 year         7.11%         -           -                 Life of class         7.35%       4.49%       5.67% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the44.3% combined federal andstate of New York and New York City income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015120-B WT01-B12-234IA018-000194-B042-26http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/ohio_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162723 text/html 11152HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:23:25 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:48 GMTContent-length: 10969Content-type: text/html Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt fromfederal and Ohio state income taxes by investing in municipal securitiesoffered primarily by municipal issuers located in Ohio and ratedinvestment grade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 5%, US Government Secured 1%, General Obligations 44%, Revenue Bonds 50% $37,000,000 18.5 years 8.4 years                                     Class A      Class B      Class C                                ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol         KOHAX        KOHBX        KOHCX                                                          Initial Offering        3/22/93      5/31/94      5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield         4.60%        4.01%        3.99%       (month ended 9/30/96)                                                Taxable Equivalent Yield         7.85%*       6.84%*       6.81%*                                                          YTD Total Return         0.44%       -0.19%       -0.20% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return        -4.04%       -4.07%       -1.17%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year         1.53%        2.41%        5.39%                                                           Life of class         5.39%        5.31%        6.49% # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 41.4% combined marginal federal and Ohio income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015130-B WT01-B12-235IA018-000194-B042-36http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/penn_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162733 text/html 10985HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:23:34 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:48 GMTContent-length: 10802Content-type: text/html Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt fromfederal and Pennsylvania state income taxes by investing in municipalsecurities offered primarily by government issuers located inPennsylvania and rated investment grade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 5%, US Government Secured 2%, General Obligations 27%, Revenue Bonds 66% $5,000,000 16.3 years 7.9 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KPNAX       KPNBX       KPNCX                                                        Initial Offering       3/15/95     3/15/95     3/15/95                                                               SEC Yield        4.11%       3.52%       3.55%       (month ended 9/30/96)    Taxable Equivalent Yield        6.73%*      5.76%*      5.81%*                                                        YTD Total Return        0.13%      -0.48%      -0.55% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       -4.40%      -4.36%      -1.50%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##               Life of class        5.19%       5.59%       7.48% # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. *Based on fund's yieldand 38.9% combined Pennsylvania state and federal income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015140-B WT01-B12-236IA018-000194-B042-51http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/tx_taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162740 text/html 11119HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:23:43 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 10936Content-type: text/html Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund Seeks high current income exempt from federal income taxes by investing inmunicipal securities offered primarily by municipal issuers located in Texasand rated investment grade or of comparable quality. Cash and Equivalents 4%, US Government Secured 2%, General Obligations 33%, Revenue Bonds 61% $14,000,000 19.0 years 8.3 years                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------               NASDAQ Symbol        KTXAX       KTXBX       KTXCX                                                        Initial Offering      11/1/91      5/31/94     5/31/94                                                               SEC Yield        4.62%       3.99%       4.00%       (month ended 9/30/96)    Taxable Equivalent Yield        7.34%*      6.34%*      6.36%*                                                        YTD Total Return        1.32%       0.76%       0.68% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                        YTD Total Return       -3.21%      -3.15%      -0.29%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        2.68%       3.57%       6.59%                                                           Life of class        7.61%       5.77%       6.99% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% marginal federal income taxrate. Income may be subject to state and local taxes but there is no Texasincome tax for individuals. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015150-B WT01-B12-237IA018-000194-B042-84http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/wsj/wsj.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162806 text/html 3550HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:09 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 13-Nov-96 20:54:34 GMTContent-length: 3365Content-type: text/html  Growth or Value Investing? On the Horns of a Dilemma Of all the decisions you'll make about investing, this may be one of the biggest: Growth or Value? When it comes to stock investing, there are two ways to take the bull by the horns, two well-known styles of equity management -- growth and value. Both offer a long-term, disciplined approach to capital appreciation, but the two styles go about their business in fundamentally different ways. Growth or value? Is one style better than the other? It's an important decision, one that every investor should consider. And yet, many continue to seesaw between styles, an approach that too often misses the bull's-eye. Zurich Kemper Investments, the only asset manager in the U.S. with separate organizations to manage growth and value portfolios, offers new insights into this timeless question... The GROWTH Investing Strategy The VALUE Investing Strategy The GROWTH and VALUE Strategy Building a DIVERSIFIED Portfolio Growth Investing Hitch your wagon to the stocks of well-known, successful companies with rapidly growing earnings. Value Investing Wave the cape of the contrarian at undervalued, out-of-favor stocks poised for a turnaround. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023560 WT01-B12-238IA018-000194-B042-99http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/asiangrowth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162814 text/html 4910HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 21-Oct-96 15:52:25 GMTContent-length: 4728Content-type: text/html Kemper Asian Growth Fund Why Kemper Asian Growth Fund makes sense Ability to invest in developing or emerging countries Experienced management Potential to increase returns Fund Objective: Long-term capital growth, by investing in a diversified portfolio consisting primarily of equity securities of Asian companies. Ability to invest in developing or emerging countries The fund invests primarily in Asian equity securities believed to have potential for capital growth. The fund invests primarily in developing or "emerging" economies. For example: China Indonesia Korea Malaysia Philippines Thailand Taiwan As a policy, the fund will invest in Japan only when economic conditions warrant and then only on a limited basis. However, the fund may invest without limit in developed countries such as Hong Kong and Singapore. Portfolio Manager: Andrew Mason, director of Asian Equities. Prior to joining Zurich Kemper Investments, Mr. Mason was portfolio manager of the Asian and Japanese portfolios for a United Kingdom pension fund and has 14 years of international investment experience.. Kemper has been managing international equities since 1981---longer than 94% of the companies managing international equities.* *Source: Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. Fund Facts Inception Date : October 21, 1996 Approximate Assets: $2 million NASDAQ Symbols A Shares KANAX B Shares KANBX C Shares KANCX Why should you consider investing in Asia? As you can see, the U.S. market has underperformed some of the major Asian markets since 1990. Returns are historical and do not reflect future performance. The returns represented are for individual markets and do not represent performance of the fund. Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc. Average annual total returns for the 5-year period ending 9/30/96. Please note that there are special risk considerations associated with an investment in the fund, including fluctuating exchange rates, government regulations and differences in liquidity. As with any mutual fund, returns and net asset value will fluctuate. For a prospectus containing more complete information, including management fees and expenses, download now, contact your financial representative or call Kemper Funds at 800-621-1048. Please read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Fund shares are not FDIC insured and are not deposits or other obligations of, or guaranteed by, any bank. Fund shares involve investment risk, including the possible loss of principal. Investment Manager: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Principal Underwriter: Kemper Distributors, Inc. 222 South Riverside Plaza Chicago IL 60606 © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024090 WT01-B12-239IA018-000194-B042-116http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_confirm.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162821 text/html 4074HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:24 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:20:29 GMTContent-length: 3892Content-type: text/html News About Your Transaction Confirmation Statements If you've recently made an account transaction or changed anyof the services or features on your account, you probably noticeda few changes in your confirmation statement. In late August,we introduced the second phase of our project to consolidate yourtransaction confirmation statements. Now, when several changesor transactions occur on your Kemper Funds accounts during thesame day, you'll receive one consolidated statement, instead ofseparate statements for each individual transaction. For example, an exchange of shares from one fund to another wouldpreviously prompt two statements: one confirming a redemptionand one confirming a purchase. Now, one statement confirms bothtransactions. Another difference you'll notice is that your transaction confirmationstatement no longer shows any prior account transactions. Previously,your statement included your transactions year-to-date or thelast 18 transactions on your account, whichever was the smallestnumber of transactions. Now, you'll see only the transactionthat prompted the statement. This change should help to eliminateconfusion by differentiating transaction confirmation statementsfrom quarterly account statements. "We're very pleased to introduce this new phase in our consolidatedstatement project," says Ann Laughlin, first vice presidentof Kemper Shareholder Marketing and Broker Communications. "Bysimplifying the way in which we report transactions and consolidatingdaily account activity onto one statement, we hope to eliminateconfusion and help to reduce fund expenses." Transaction confirmation statements now have the same look andformat as your quarterly statement. No matter what type of statementyou receive from us, information such as the date of your statement,your fund and account numbers and the tax identification numberon your account can always be found in the same place. Transactionconfirmation statements will be consolidated in the same manneras your quarterly statements: All accounts with the same registration,address and tax identification number will appear on one statement,unless you have requested otherwise. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022480 WT01-B12-240IA018-000194-B042-126http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_hold.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162828 text/html 2421HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:32 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:18:29 GMTContent-length: 2239Content-type: text/html Hold Period Reduced Kemper Funds has reduced the 15 calendar day "hold"policy on purchases made by check or ACH transfer. The primarypurpose of such a hold period - a common restriction among mutualfunds and banks - is to protect you and the fund from fraud andtheft. However, we found that the waiting period could be reducedto 10 calendar days without compromising security. Of course,for most Kemper Funds, which are generally used as long-term investments,a hold period is seldom a problem. But short-term investors,particularly those in Kemper Money Funds, may appreciate thegreater flexibility and liquidity of a shorter hold period. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022490 WT01-B12-241IA018-000194-B042-138http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_five.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162837 text/html 5243HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:39 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:17:26 GMTContent-length: 5061Content-type: text/html Five Stars For Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund was recently awarded Morningstar's5-star "highest" rating for its overall performanceand performance over the three years ended July 31, 1996 in thesmall company category. For the one-year period, the fund's ratingis 4-stars, or "above average."* "We're thrilledto see this fund recognized for its outstanding performance,"says Jim Neel, president of Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. "It'sa proven winner that continues to offer an attractive opportunityfor long-term investors." Kemper-Dreman Small Cap ValueFund seeks long-term capital appreciation by investing in smallcapitalization stocks ($100 million to $1 billion) diversifiedacross at least 15 industries. Earlier this year, the fund gained a new portfolio manager. StevenStokes, a chartered financial analyst, joined Dreman Value Advisors,Inc. as managing director. In addition to his work on the SmallCap Value Fund, he is portfolio manager for approximately $200million in institutional assets. Stokes stresses that Kemper-DremanSmall Cap Value Fund's investment strategy and style remain unchanged. "The philosophy takes precedence over personality,"he says. "We'll continue to pursue attractively priced stockswith strong fundamentals - the strategy that has contributed tothe fund's strong performance since its inception in 1992." Returns are historical and do not reflect future performance. Returns and net asset values fluctuate. Shares are redeemableat net asset value, which may be more or less than original cost. * Morningstar ratings range from five stars (highest) toone star (lowest) and represent its assessment of the historicalrisk level and total return of a fund relative to its class asa weighted average for the three-, five- and 10-year periods. Ratings are not absolute or predictive of future performance. Average annual total return measures net investment incomeand capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assumingreinvestment of dividends and adjustment for the maximum applicablesales charge of 5.75%. Average annual total return reflects annualizedchange. Returns and rankings are historical and do not reflectfuture performance. Performance shown is for Class A shares. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditionsas described in the fund's prospectus. Performance of other classeswill vary from that shown because of differences in sales chargesand fees paid by shareholders investing in different classes. Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. rankings are based uponchanges in net asset value with dividends reinvested and do notinclude the effect of sales charges. If they did, results mayhave been less favorable. Investment in small companies presentsgreater risk than investment in larger, more established companies. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus in addition to thoseyou already have, please contact your financial representative,call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or downloadone now. The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you investor send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022500 WT01-B12-242IA018-000194-B042-150http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_yrend.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162845 text/html 3950HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:19:25 GMTContent-length: 3768Content-type: text/html We're Improving Your Year-end Statement We're planning a number of enhancements for your 1996 year-endaccount statement to provide a more comprehensive overview ofthe performance of your Kemper Funds investments. If you have multiple accounts, the first part of your statement,the portfolio summary, reports on your entire Kemper Funds portfolio. The summary will now include your initial investment amount*,any subsequent purchases you've made, any amounts withdrawn andthe change in your account value as of December 31. We'll alsoinclude your investments' market value as of the beginning ofthe statement period, allowing you to compare it to the currentmarket value. Similar to the portfolio summary, for each of your accounts,we will show your initial investment amount*, subsequent purchasesyou've made, any amounts withdrawn and the change in your accountvalue as of December 31. If you've held your account for two years or more, you'llalso receive a "Personal Performance" summary showingthe one-year total return on each of your accounts, as well astheir average annual total return since inception* and a graphicillustration for each of your Kemper fund accounts. The taxable income portion of your dividend summary will beexpanded to show ordinary income (which includes both your incomedividends and short-term capital gains) and long-term capitalgains. * For accounts established prior to December 31, 1989, the market value as of December 31, 1989, will be used in place of your initial investment amount and as a starting point for calculating your average annual total return. For Kemper-Dreman accounts established after September 11, 1995, the market value as of September 11, 1995, will be used in place of your initial investment amount and as a starting point for calculating your average annual total return. A detailed explanation of the enhanced year-end statement willbe in the next issue of Kemper Fundamentals. You'll receiveit, along with your statement, in early January, 1997. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022510 WT01-B12-243IA018-000194-B042-164http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/proc_req.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162902 text/html 4507HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:24:57 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:15:21 GMTContent-length: 4323Content-type: text/html Announcing Improved Flexibility for Processing Requests The choice is yours! Do you use your Kemper fund account as a way to systematicallypay your mortgage or other regular bill? Do you systematically exchange from one Kemper fund to another? Kemper Funds has improved capability to accommodate your needs.Thanks to recent technological advancements, we can be more flexibleabout processing your requests on the date you desire. Now! Our systematic withdrawal plan, a transaction previouslyprocessed on the 25th of every month, is available on any dateyou choose*. You choose the frequency -- monthly, quarterly, semiannually,annually or any months you'd like -- with which you want regularcash withdrawals from your account. You choose the amount-- which could be a fixed dollar amount, a fixed percentage ofyour account or an equal amount sufficient to deplete your accountwithin the number of years or months you stipulate**. Systematicwithdrawals can be mailed to you or, if you choose, depositedinto your financial institution account. *Systematic withdrawal plans are not available for KemperTarget Equity Funds. **For Class B shares and C shares purchased after April 1,1996, no more than 10 percent of your current account value maybe redeemed on an annual basis. Now! Systematic exchanges, transactions previously processed onlyon the 10th of every month, are now available on any date youchoose. You choose the frequency -- monthly, quarterly, semiannually,annually -- with which you want a sum from one Kemper fund transferredinto another Kemper Fund***. You choose the amount -- whichcould be a fixed dollar amount, a fixed percentage of your accountor an equal amount sufficient to deplete your account within thenumber of years or months you stipulate. Sums can be systematicallyexchanged from one Kemper fund into one or more Kemper funds. ***Please note that a minimum balance of $1,000 is requiredin both the "to" and "from" accounts. Theexchange amount must be at least $100. Now! You choose the start and stop dates for when you'dlike to systematically purchase (through a direct deposit froma financial institution account, for example) shares of your Kemperfund, when you'd like to systematically redeem shares and whenyou'd like to stop one transaction and initiate another. To establish either the systematic withdrawal or systematic exchangefeature on your Kemper account, you'll need to complete a form,which you can download now. Or, call Shareholder Servicesat 1-800-621-1048. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019700 WT01-B12-244IA018-000194-B042-177http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/p_adams.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162911 text/html 3740HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:25:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 16-Sep-96 15:55:54 GMTContent-length: 3558Content-type: text/html Meet The Newest Member Of Our Equity Investment Team Patrick S. Adams, 35, in June was named portfolio manager of the $2.6 billion Kemper Growth Fund, our flagship growth equitymutual fund. Adams, who brings an impressive record as a growthinvestment style manager, is the latest in a series of enhancementsto Kemper's equity investment team in the last year. As part of an August 1995 acquisition, Kemper through its newwholly owned subsidiary Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (DVA) assumedmanagement responsibility for Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and Kemper-Dreman Small Cap ValueFund. With the acquisition of DVA came the value investing style ofDavid Dreman, who is generally considered the pioneer of a contrarianinvestment strategy. Dreman is the chairman of DVA and managesKemper-Dreman High Return Fund. Christian Bertelsen in March joined DVA as chiefinvestment officer and portfolio manager of Kemper-Dreman ContrarianFund. Bertelsen has an outstanding track record as an investmentmanager and practitioner of the contrarian investment strategy. Shortly after the DVA acquisition, Kemper hired veteran portfoliomanager Steven Reynolds to oversee and direct the company's equityinvestment department. Reynolds served as interim manager forKemper Growth Fund until Adams joined Kemper in June. In addition to assuming responsibility for the Kemper-Dreman Funds,the company in the last year introduced four new equity funds:Kemper Europe Fund, Kemper Horizon Fund, Kemper Value+GrowthFund and Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019670 WT01-B12-245IA018-000194-B042-195http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/new_name.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162923 text/html 2959HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:25:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:26 GMTContent-length: 2775Content-type: text/html A New Name: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. In January, Kemper Financial Services, Inc. became an indirect subsidiary of Zurich Insurance Group. "The name is different," says Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive and chief investment officer, "but our fundamental mission is the same: To manufacture and distribute high quality investment management products and services to individuals and institutions and to help them achieve their long-term financial goals. Our goal is to fulfill this mission better than anyone else in the investment management business." With nearly $70 billion in total assets at year-end 1994, the Zurich Insurance Group ranks among the largest international insurance organizations in the world. Zurich is a company with four core businesses, three of them insurance-related: property-casualty, life and reinsurance. The purchase of Kemper reflects its commitment to the fourth business - asset management - and to its goal to become a world leader in the global financial services market. Zurich is a public company, traded under the symbols ZURN (Telekurs) and ZURZn (Reuters) on the Swiss Stock Exchange. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014370 WT01-B12-246IA018-000194-B042-208http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/watch_for_ads.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162931 text/html 2156HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:25:33 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:35 GMTContent-length: 1972Content-type: text/html Watch For Our Ads! Kemper Funds' current advertising campaign focuses on the theme of building wealth versus looking for a fast buck. In the coming weeks, look for print ads in Business Week, Forbes, Smart Money, Worth, Smithsonian, Time and Newsweek. Our television ads will run on the CNN, CNBC, Discovery and A&E cable networks. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014410 WT01-B12-247IA018-000194-B042-220http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/20yr_munibond.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162939 text/html 2770HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:25:41 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 21:46:00 GMTContent-length: 2585Content-type: text/html America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, America's first retail municipal bond fund, celebrated its 20th birthday on April 20. Since Kemper introduced its fund, 1,847 tax-free mutual funds have been launched, representing approximately $252 billion in municipal bond fund assets as of September 30, 1996. Kemper Municipal Bond Fund Class A shares have outperformed the Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. general municipal debt mutual fund category averages for the one, five and 10-year periods ended September 30, 1996. Kemper tax-free funds, including Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund and eight state tax-free income funds, totaled $4.9 billion in assets as of September 30, 1996. Click here for more information about Kemper Municipal Bond Fund or request a prospectus now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014400-A WT01-B12-248IA018-000194-B042-231http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_deposit.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162947 text/html 5250HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:25:49 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:27:32 GMTContent-length: 5068Content-type: text/html Direct Deposit Your Government Check Why leave the delivery of your government check to chance? Byfilling out a single form, you can avoid those time-consumingtrips to the bank and rest assured that your check won't be stolen,lost or delayed in the mail. If you receive a Social Securitycheck or other government payments on a regular basis, you'veprobably been contacted in recent months about having your checksdeposited directly into your bank account A trend of the future The U.S. Treasury Department this summer announced thatall Social Security recipients who apply for benefits after August1, 1996, will have their checks automatically deposited into theirbank accounts whenever possible. In addition, by 1999 all federalpayments, including salaries and other benefits such as thosepaid to veterans, will be issued electronically. Jim Hagedorn,the Treasury Department's director of public affairs for the financialmanagement service, reports that converting to electronic paymentscould save the government as much as $500 million over the nextfive years and eliminate about 100,000 check thefts and forgeriesa year. Kemper Funds can help As an alternative to your bank account, consider having your governmentchecks deposited directly into your Kemper Money Funds account. Kemper Money Funds offer the opportunity to earn higher yieldsand easy access to your money - as of September 5, 1996,Kemper Money Market Fund's current 7-day yield was 5.04% whilethe average bank money fund yield was 2.65%* - and many checkingaccounts don't pay interest. Ofcourse, unlike bank products, no money fund is insured or guaranteedby the U.S. government and there is no assurance that any fundcan maintain a $1.00 share value. Bank products offer fixed or variable rates and principal is fixed and may be insured. Once your government check is deposited into your Kemper MoneyFund, you can write an unlimited amount of checks (for $500 ormore) each month free, or use our EXPRESS-Transfer service totransfer as little as $100 into your bank savings or checkingaccount. You can also exchange a portion of the deposit to anotherKemper fund for long-term income or growth opportunities. Plus,you can make and verify account transactions 24-hours a day viaour automated phone service, KemperACCESS. Kemper's three money funds offer you these services and attractiveyields while maintaining a conservative investment philosophythat emphasizes quality and consistency, not risk-taking. To receive a Government Direct Deposit form, contact the governmentagency that issues your checks. Or, call Kemper Shareholder Servicesat 1-800-621-1048. Our representatives can provide the necessaryform (ask for Form 93) and answer your questions about KemperMoney Funds' performance and services. * Yield shown is the average annualized net investment incomeper share. Past performance is historical and is no guaranteeof future results. Yields will fluctuate. Bank interest rateshown is for the 100 leading banks and thrifts as of 9/5/96 accordingto Bank Rate Monitor. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022520 WT01-B12-249IA018-000194-B042-245http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_abroad.html 198.152.185.42 19970106162958 text/html 2638HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:25:59 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:27:17 GMTContent-length: 2456Content-type: text/html Contacting Kemper From Abroad Q: On a recent trip overseas, I was unable to reach Kemper FundsShareholder Services by using the general 800-number. How canI get information about my account or initiate a transaction whenI'm not in the U.S.? A: The easiest way to contact Kemper Funds when you're abroadis through the Internet. Send an e-mail to info@kemper.com andwe'll respond with an e-mail within 24 hours. For security reasons,however, we ask that you don't send account-specific informationvia e-mail. If you need to reach us by telephone to initiate a transaction,you can call us collect at 1-312-781-1121 Monday through Friday, between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m.,Central Standard Time. For your convenience, we've added thisnumber to the contact information shown on the back of your accountstatement. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022530 WT01-B12-250IA018-000194-B042-259http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_access.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163006 text/html 4533HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:26:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:27:59 GMTContent-length: 4351Content-type: text/html New Services On KemperACCESS If you've been invested in Kemper Funds for a while, you're probablyfamiliar with our 24-hour automated information system. By calling1-800-972-3060 and entering your account number and specialpersonal identification number (PIN)*, you can access specificaccount information including : account balances your last dividend or non-dividend transaction current yields and returns income or capital gains distributed year-to-date and initiate certain account transactions including: exchanges between Kemper funds EXPRESS-Transfer purchases and redemptions telephone redemptions by check wire redemptions order checks for your Kemper Money Funds account (*Remember that your PIN number - unless you've changed it - isthe last four digits of your Social Security Number.) In September, three new services were added to the KemperACCESS system. Now, you can order a duplicate account statement, order Invest by Mail slips and postage-paid envelopes (orjust postage-paid envelopes) for your Kemper Funds accounts, create a "fund watch" list, to monitor the performanceof the Kemper Funds you're invested in and funds you're consideringfor future investments. To Create a "Fund Watch" List: Dial 1-800-972-3060 to reach KemperACCESS. The system will promptyou through the following steps: PRESS 1* for fund prices and performance PRESS 2* to create your fund watch list Please note that to initiate an EXPRESS-Transfer purchase orredemption and/or a wire redemption or, for certain institutionalaccounts, a telephone redemption by check, you must first electthese services in writing. To request a form to establish anyof these services, call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. The fund or its agents may be liable for any losses, expensesor costs arising out of any fraudulent or unauthorized telephonerequests pursuant to these services through KemperACCESS or otherwise,unless the fund or its agents reasonably believe, based upon reasonableverification procedures, that the telephonic instructions aregenuine. The shareholder will bear the risk of loss, includingloss resulting from fraudulent or unauthorized transactions, solong as reasonable verification procedures are followed. The verification procedures include recording instructions, requiringcertain identifying information before acting upon instructionsand sending written confirmations. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022540 WT01-B12-251IA018-000194-B042-266http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/nl_mail.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163013 text/html 2538HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:26:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:28:07 GMTContent-length: 2356Content-type: text/html Reduce Your Kemper Mailings You can help us reduce the number of Kemper mailings you receive. If you have Kemper fund accounts with the same address andtax identification number but a different registration (for example,an individual account and an account registered to a trust, oryour single account and joint IRA account), we can consolidatethose accounts on the same statement. If you prefer to keep your accounts on separate statements,but would like them to be combined into one envelope, we'll behappy to oblige. Just complete the Statement Customization Request Form which canbe downloaded now, or call Shareholder Servicesat 1-800-621-1048. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022550 WT01-B12-252IA018-000194-B042-278http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/no_match.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163020 text/html 5081HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:26:23 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:15:50 GMTContent-length: 4897Content-type: text/html Why Published Investment Returns May Not Match Your Experience How much did my investment return? That's usually the bottomlinefor investors.But the actual annual return on your invested dollars may nevermatch the annual total returns that you read in the newspaperor even in your fund's shareholder report. Remember that yourinvestment's progress will be the result of many factors. We've prepared the following hypothetical illustration to explainthe difference between the published return and an individual'sactual experience. In each of the scenarios shown, the shareholdershad a total of $10,000 in the same hypothetical fund on the lastday of the one-year period from April 30, 1995, through April30, 1996. Yet, the actual returns on their investments variedsignificantly. To produce the returns presented below, we've used Towers DataSystems data based on the actual performance of the Standard &Poor's 500 over a recent one-year period (April 30, 1995, throughApril 30, 1996). The S&P 500 is an unmanaged index of commonstocks that is generally considered representative of the U.S.stock market. Investments cannot be made directly in this index.As you know, the stock market enjoyed a generally upward performanceduring this one-year period. The high point of the period wasreached on February 12, 1996, and the low point reached on January10, 1996. For this illustration, however, absolute performanceis not relevant, and we could have used any one-year period todemonstrate how returns vary according to several factors. Hypothetical illustration News item: XYZ Equity Fund today reported a total return of 30.14%for the one-year period that ended April 30, 1996. The calculation of this return used the same assumptions thatyour account statement, shareholder report and most publishedlistings use: That the full sum was invested on the first dayof the one-year period, that the shareholder did not add to orsubtract from the invested amount and that all income and capitalgain dividends were reinvested. The following illustrate how theactual returns earned by various XYZ Equity Fund shareholdersmight have been quite different from the published 30.14% return. The above hypothetical examples are for illustrative purposesonly and are not intended to represent performance of any specificinvestment, which may fluctuate. Today, the best measure of your investment progress is the portionof your quarterly account statement that details the change inthe total value of your invested dollars. But Kemper Funds recognizesthat you need to evaluate your investment's long-term performance,taking into consideration your individual account activity. Towardthat end, we are working on developing an account statement withannual total return figures that reflect your activity. Watchfor more information in this section of Kemper.com on your Personal Performance. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019660 WT01-B12-253IA018-000194-B042-289http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/mailslip.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163033 text/html 2210HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:26:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:36:38 GMTContent-length: 2026Content-type: text/html Invest By Mail Slips Look for our Invest By Mail slips in each of the following: Your quarterly account statement Every transaction confirmation you receive NEW: Invest by mail booklets contain five Invest by Mail slipsprinted with your fund account number and five postage-paid returnenvelopes. For your booklet, e-mail your request now orcall Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019690 WT01-B12-254IA018-000194-B042-304http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/reinvestment.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163046 text/html 3255HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:26:49 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:31 GMTContent-length: 3071Content-type: text/html Your Reinvestment Privilege By acting within six months of your redemption of your Class A Shares orthe equivalent, you can take advantage of Kemper's reinvestmentprivilege, which allows you to reinvest all or a portion of yourredemption proceeds in the same Kemper fund or Class A Shares of anotherKemper fund without opening a new account or paying a new sales charge.This privilege is not applicable to Class A Shares of Kemper CashReserves Fund purchased directly at net asset value. For Class B shareholders, the privilege enables you to reinvest all or aportion of your redemption proceeds in the same fund or Class B Sharesof another fund - plus Kemper will reinvest the amount of contingentdeferred sales charge that was imposed upon the redemption proceedsthat you reinvest. If you reinvest, you will receive the originalpurchase date on the reinvested shares. (The original purchase date is aconsideration when determining any future contingent deferred salescharge. However, depending on your particular situation, this will notbe your purchase date for tax purposes. When calculating your holdingperiod for capital gains purposes, you will need to use your newpurchase date.) Call Kemper Shareholder Services for a reinvestment certificate - or send us areinvestment check with a letter stating your intention to return - andwelcome back! © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011780 WT01-B12-255IA018-000194-B042-315http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/pin.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163055 text/html 2998HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:26:57 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:30 GMTContent-length: 2814Content-type: text/html About Your KemperACCESS PIN Your automated teller machine will ask you for one, your credit cardissuer will ask you for another and don't try to retrieve your voicemail messages if you don't remember its code. You also need a PersonalIdentification Number (PIN) in order to access Kemper's automatedtelephone response system - your preassigned KemperACCESS PIN is thelast four digits of your Social Security number. Are you feeling overwhelmed by all the numbers and codes that today'stechnologies are imposing on you? Remember that you can change yourKemperACCESS PIN at any time. Some shareholders prefer to adopt afour-letter code (the letters correspond to numbers on the telephone keypad) that fits their personality and is therefore more memorable. In order to change your PIN, just dial KemperACCESS (1-800-972-3060) andfollow its series of prompts. Of course, once you've changed your code,be sure to keep it to yourself. KemperACCESS provides up-to-date Kemper fund and account information 24hours a day, seven days a week. Your account balance, most recenttransactions, dividend earnings, current yields and returns and currentnet asset values all are available from KemperACCESS. Selected accounttransactions also are available. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011770 WT01-B12-256IA018-000194-B042-326http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/tracking.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163102 text/html 4676HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:27:05 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:34 GMTContent-length: 4492Content-type: text/html Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment To keep an eye on the progress of your investment, you can turn to many sourcesof information. Here's a quick review of what Kemper provides: Your quarterly statement. You'll find your fund's year-to-datetotal return through the end of the previous month and its averageannualtotal returns as of the closing date of the previous quarter shown inthe fund summary of your quarterly statement. Total return and average annual total return are a measure of netinvestment income and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments,assuming that dividends are reinvested. While total returns are notadjusted, average annual total returns are adjusted for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at theend of the period. Average annual total return reflects annualizedchange while total return reflects aggregate change. Our goal is to mail your statement as close to the end of the quarter aspossible, which restricts our ability to print your fund's returns as ofthe date of the close of that quarter. KemperACCESS. For up-to-date Kemper fund and account information 24hours a day, seven days a week, call our automated telephone responsesystem. By calling 1-800-972-3060 on a touch-tone telephone, you canreceive the following information: Account balance Most recent transactions Dividend earnings Current yields and returns Current net asset values Selected account transactions also are available. Are you a first-time caller? Don't be stumped when asked to enter yourPersonal Identification Number (PIN) - your PIN is the last four digitsof your Social Security number. (You can change your PIN by followingKemperACCESS instructions.) Instant Profiles. This quarterly publication presents performancedata about each fund in the Kemper family of funds. Asset size,portfoliocomposition and applicable duration and maturity information also arereported. Annual and semiannual shareholder reports. A comprehensive reportof your fund's six-month performance is mailed to you twice a year. In ityou will find an economic overview from Kemper's chief investmentofficer, a question-and-answer with the fund's portfolio manager anddetailed performance and financial data. Reminder: Please remember that the performance of your individualinvestment may differ from the total return reported by your fund. Thetotal return on your investment will depend on when you purchased yourshares, at what price and how you handle dividends and otherdistributions. Your financial representative is the best source you canturn to for help in reviewing your Kemper investment. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009920 WT01-B12-257IA018-000194-B042-335http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/diversification.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163117 text/html 5834HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:27:19 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:20 GMTContent-length: 5650Content-type: text/html Diversification When in doubt, diversify. Diversification - investment in a variety ofmutual funds, for example - is a time-tested way of reducing the riskassociated with the often unpredictable financial markets. As a shareholder in the Kemper family of funds, you have lots offlexibility to diversify your holdings. Before taking any action,however, be sure to consult with your financial representative. (If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now.) These shareholder privileges support diversification: You can exchange funds. You can move all or a portion of your sharesfrom one Kemper fund to another fund within the same class of shareswithout incurring additional sales charges (except as noted below). Fund exchanges are subject to the following conditions - and pleasenote that Kemper's exchange privilege may be modified, suspended orterminated at any time. If you exchange shares into a Kemper fund in which you do not currently have an open account, the minimum exchange is $1,000. Shares purchased by check or ACH transaction may be exchanged after they have been owned for at least 15 days. Once shares are exchanged, they must remain in the fund for a minimum of 15 days before they can be exchanged again. This latter rule does not apply to Kemper Money Funds or Kemper Cash Reserves Fund. Your exchange from shares of Kemper Money Funds into any other Kemper mutual fund will be subject to an applicable sales charge. However, exchanges of shares that you acquired through reinvesting your dividends are not subject to any sales charge upon exchange. To find out the amount of your Kemper Money Funds investment attributable to reinvested dividends, call Shareholder Services. Fund exchanges are taxable transactions. The Internal Revenue Service considers an exchange to be the redemption of shares of one fund (a sale) and a new investment (a purchase) into another fund. You can arrange to exchange an amount systematically from one fundinto another fund* each month. In order to exercise the SystematicExchange Privilege, the accounts you are exchanging to and from musteach have a value of at least $1,000. There is a $100 minimum that canbe automatically exchanged each month. You can arrange to have dividends from one fund automatically investedinto shares of another Kemper fund*. You must have a minimum balance of$1,000 in the account from which you are moving dividends and $1,000 inthe account into which you are investing the dividends. Shares purchasedby reinvested dividends are always bought at net asset value - you donot pay a sales charge. You can arrange to have a certain amount (a minimum of $50 each month)invested into a Kemper fund account each month**. Call ShareholderServices to learn more about Kemper's three automatic investment plans(Bank Direct Deposit, Payroll Direct Deposit and Government DirectDeposit). An automatic investment plan does not guarantee a profit orprotect against a loss in a declining market. * This privilege is not available to Kemper Retirement Fund Series andKemper Worldwide 2004 Fund shareholders. ** Investment may be subject to a sales charge. Please consult your fundprospectus for additional information. An investment in Kemper Money Funds is neither insured norguaranteed by the U.S. government. There can be no assurance that thefunds will be able to maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00 pershare. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Shareholder Services or request one now. The prospectus containsmore complete information including management fees and expenses. Pleaseread it carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011790 WT01-B12-258IA018-000194-B042-348http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/certificates.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163127 text/html 3712HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:27:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:15 GMTContent-length: 3528Content-type: text/html Share Certificates Your privileges as a Kemper Funds shareholder are designed to give youmaximum flexibility to adjust your investment portfolio as the generalmarket conditions or your individual investment objectives change. Butif you have share certificates for your funds, you should knowthat your flexibility to move your shares is limited. The traditional purpose of share certificates - which was to provideproof of ownership - has been rendered almost obsolete. Today, thesecurities industry has the capability to settle trades and maintaininvestors' positions electronically. The existence of the paperdocuments and your possession of them, though, can keep you from takingfull advantage of your privileges. Some examples: You cannot redeem shares by telephone or wire transfer oruse the telephone exchange privilege if share certificates have beenissued. The systematic exchange and the systematic withdrawal plan aretwo privileges that cannot be established for fund accounts whose sharesare held in certificate form. If you want to exchange shares that youhold in certificate form, you must first return them to Kemper. Considering these limitations and the risks involved if a certificate islost or destroyed - a bond worth 2% or more of the certificate value isnormally required to replace the certificate, Kemper strongly recommendsthat you not request your shares in certificate form and that you returnany certificates you may have. Please return your certificates by registered mail to thefollowingaddress: Kemper Service Company Special Functions Department 811 Main Street Kansas City, MO 64105 Please do not endorse your certificates or sign them in any way. Once wereceive them, you will be notified that your certificated shares have been deposited in your account. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011800 WT01-B12-259IA018-000194-B043-2http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/changes.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163134 text/html 2629HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:27:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:17 GMTContent-length: 2445Content-type: text/html Changes In Account Ownership Are you getting married in the morning? Or is there any other pendingevent - the coming of age of a minor on a custodial account, theaddition of a companion as a joint tenant, the death of a joint tenant -that will affect the ownership of your mutual fund account? Any change in the ownership of your Kemper Funds account requires transferring theshares to a new Kemper account. And, for security reasons, not allprivileges from your original account can be transferred. However, youcan easily establish privileges on your new account by completing aKemper Account Privileges Form, which can be requested from ShareholderServices. While visiting Kemper.com, you can go to Printable Forms and print one or more forms that enable you to establish individual privileges. Just complete, sign and return to Kemper at the address shown on the form. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011810 WT01-B12-260IA018-000194-B043-13http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/shareholders/changedbanks.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163143 text/html 3167HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:27:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:55:16 GMTContent-length: 2983Content-type: text/html Have You Changed Banks? Many long-time banking relationships have been ended lately as bankcustomers react negatively to increased service charges or servicechanges as a result of changes in bank ownership. If you've recently switched banks, please remember to notify Kemper ifyou take advantage of any shareholder privileges that involve transfersto or from your bank account. These are the specific instances when your Kemper mutual fund accountrecords need to be updated when you change banks: If you've signed up for the wire redemption privilege, which enablesyou to sell all or a portion of your shares and have the proceeds wiredfrom your fund account to your bank account. If you automatically invest a certain amount each month from yourchecking or savings account. If you've signed up for the EXPRESS-Transfer privilege, which enablesyou to use electronic funds transfer to move money between your bank,savings institution or credit union and a Kemper account. If you've arranged to have your dividends automatically deposited intoyour bank account. If you systematically withdraw a certain amount from your Kempermutual fund account and have it deposited into your bank account. Shareholder Services will be happy to send you the appropriate form thatyou'll need to complete in order to supply us with your new bank accountinformation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011820 WT01-B12-261IA018-000196-B047-15http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/compareindices.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171122 text/html 3501HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:07:21 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 21:54:50 GMTContent-length: 3319Content-type: text/html Compare Market Indices Which broad market indices would you like to compare? Select a broad market index you'd like to compare: Consumer Price IndexDow Jones Industrial AverageFT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - EuropeLehman Brothers Aggregate BondLehman Brothers Government/Corporate BondLehman Brothers Municipal BondMorgan Stanley Capital International EAFERussell 1000 GrowthRussell 2000 GrowthStandard & Poor's 500Salomon Brothers World Government BondWilshire Large Company Growth Select another broad market index to compare it with: Consumer Price IndexDow Jones Industrial AverageFT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - EuropeLehman Brothers Aggregate BondLehman Brothers Government/Corporate BondLehman Brothers Municipal BondMorgan Stanley Capital International EAFERussell 1000 GrowthRussell 2000 GrowthStandard & Poor's 500Salomon Brothers World Government BondWilshire Large Company Growth © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. WT01-B12-262IA018-000196-B044-6http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/fundsvsindices.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165952 text/html 6620HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:55:54 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 21:55:27 GMTContent-length: 6438Content-type: text/html Compare Kemper Funds vs. Market Indices When assessing the return of your mutual fund investment, you shouldconsider it in context of the markets in which the fund strives toperform. The most widely quoted measure of the performance of the financialmarkets is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Unfortunately, "the Dow"may provide very little insight on how your mutual fund investment isprogressing. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is a group of 30 blue chipindustrial stocks. More useful to you will be the performance of the particular index - anunmanaged group of similar investments - that your mutual fund uses asa benchmark for its investment objective. Comparing your fund against its index can be enlightening. Note, though,that a fund's return will depend upon its specific investments. Tounderstand why your fund outperformed or underperformed its index, itmay also be helpful to compare the composition of your fund's portfoliowith the composition of the index over the same period of time.Significant performance differences may arise if your fund and the indexwere invested in different companies and industries throughout theperiod. Other factors, such as cash flows in and out of a fund and feesand expenses, may affect the relationship between fund performance andthe index. Which broad market index would you like to compare your fund's performance against? (The graph will present the comparativetotal returns for Class A shares of your fund for the last 10 years and year-to-date, through the most recent quarter end, unadjusted for a sales charge. Multiple classes not available for Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund and Kemper Retirement Fund;fund performance shown.) Select a Kemper fund: Kemper Europe FundKemper Global Income FundKemper International FundKemper Growth FundKemper-Dreman Small Cap Value FundKemper Quantitative Equity FundKemper Small Capitalization Equity FundKemper Technology FundKemper Value+Growth FundKemper Blue Chip FundKemper-Dreman Contrarian FundKemper-Dreman High Return FundKemper Horizon 20+ PortfolioKemper Horizon 10+ PortfolioKemper Horizon 5 PortfolioKemper Total Return FundKemper Retirement Fund - Series IKemper Retirement Fund - Series IIKemper Retirement Fund - Series IIIKemper Retirement Fund - Series IVKemper Retirement Fund - Series VKemper Retirement Fund - Series VIKemper Worldwide 2004 FundKemper Intermediate Municipal Bond FundKemper Municipal Bond FundKemper California Tax-Free Income FundKemper Florida Tax-Free Income FundKemper Michigan Tax-Free Income FundKemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income FundKemper New York Tax-Free Income FundKemper Ohio Tax-Free Income FundKemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income FundKemper Texas Tax-Free Income FundKemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government FundKemper Diversified Income FundKemper High Yield FundKemper Income and Capital Preservation FundKemper Short-Intermediate Government FundKemper U.S. Government Securities FundKemper U.S. Mortgage Fund Select an index whose returns you'd like to compare the Kemperfund's returns (unadjusted for a sales charge) against: Consumer Price IndexDow Jones Industrial AverageFT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - EuropeLehman Brothers Aggregate BondLehman Brothers Government/Corporate BondLehman Brothers Municipal BondMorgan Stanley Capital International EAFERussell 1000 GrowthRussell 2000 GrowthStandard & Poor's 500Salomon Brothers World Government BondWilshire Large Company Growth © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011000 WT01-B12-263IA018-000196-B039-241http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/howmarkets.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164207 text/html 10995HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:38:10 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 07-Dec-96 00:23:54 GMTContent-length: 10810Content-type: text/html How The Markets React 8:30 A.M. EASTERN STANDARD TIME, THE FIRST FRIDAY OF EVERY MONTH: The Bureau of Labor Statistics, a division of the Labor Department, releases an employment situation report that regularly influences the behavior of both the bond and equity markets in which mutual funds invest. Using the data included in the report -- the unemployment rate, the size of nonfarm payrolls, average workweek and hourly earnings -- investors, economists and others make additional estimates about other aspects of the economy for which data are not yet available. These computations take place almost instantaneously and, within 15 minutes of the release of the report, the bond markets react to what the "news" is saying abut the economy. By the time the stock markets open, within the hour, equity investors' reaction also will be apparent. With the help of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Chief Economist John Silvia, we've prepared a quick review of how information can be derived from the employment conditions report. December 6, 1996: THE EMPLOYMENT SITUATION FOR NOVEMBER 1996 For more information about any one of these economic measures, just click on the gear or read below. Unemployment rate Economists believe that the unemployment rate associated with "full employment" is 6 percent -- when fewer than 6 percent of the population is unemployed, wages tend to rise as employers bid for scarce labor. November 1996 level: 5.4% Change: +0.2 The number of people employed The number of people employed is a measure of the economy's strength. November 1996 level: 120 million Change: +118,000 Consumer confidence (measured by the University of Michigan index) Confidence tends to rise and fall with employment news. November 1996 level: 98.9 Change: +2.4% Where people are employed Manufacturing November 1996 level: 18.2 million Change: +9,000 Construction November 1996 level: 5.4 million Change: +14,000 Services November 1996 level: 96.0 million Change: +96,000 Government November 1996 level: 19.5 million Change: -22,000 Detail on the sectors that are hiring is especially important to the stock markets. Tax revenue The employment level will affect the amount of revenue to be generated by income taxes. November 1996 level: $918 billion Change: +0.6% (estimate) Hours worked An increase in the average hours worked in a week can indicate a business upturn -- employers usually extend the number of hours their current employees work as a prelude to hiring more. November 1996 level: 34.5 / week Change: +0.2% Industrial production (measured by an index) Actual production figures are available later in the month, but early insights can be gained by reviewing the number of hours worked in the manufacturing sector. November 1996 level: 1.23 Change: +0.4% (estimate) Capacity utilization This rate, the subject of its own report later in the month, seeks to measure the operating capacity of factories. At full capacity -- generally believed to be around 82 percent -- inflation has historically tended to rise. November 1996 level: 83.4% Change: +0.2% (estimate) How much workers are paid With the total number of workers known, the next logical question is "How much are they being paid?" -- and do these hourly earnings represent an increase or a decrease? November 1996 level: $413.66 / week Change: +$5.49 Personal income The level of earnings will determine the amount that people have to spend on necessities and luxuries. November 1996 level: $6.6 trillion Change: +0.4% (estimate) Consumer spending Consumer spending accounts for two-thirds of the United States' gross domestic product (GDP). Once employment totals are known, market observers can make some educated guesses about income and consumption. November 1996 level: $5.6 trillion Change: +0.5% (estimate) Retail sales Strong retail sales, including auto sales, can contribute to corporate profits, which pleases stock market investors. Bond market investors worry that strong sales can lead to an inflationary economy. November 1996 level: $214 billion Change: +0.4% (estimate) Housing starts When growth is anticipated, builders make more plans. Economic weakness or higher interest rates discourage building plans. November 1996 level: 1.46 million Change: -2.0% (estimate) Gross domestic product (GDP) Market observers track the change in gross domestic product (GDP) -- the dollar value of all goods and services produced in the United States -- as a measure of how fast the economy is growing. The Federal Reserve Board says it considers 2.5 percent to 3 percent an acceptable, noninflationary growth rate. Official GDP numbers are released and revised continually, but the employment conditions report makes it possible to do a quick calculation: Multiplying the number of people working X the average hours worked has produced a rough GDP that has historically been quite close to the GDP data released weeks and months later. September 1996 level: $6.9 trillion Change: +2.0% 3rd quarter (estimate) Federal Reserve Board policy Based on the rough GDP and inflation data that's derived, the Federal Reserve Board will not raise rates. Bond markets Because the value of fixed-income investments can be jeopardized by inflation, bond markets will be mixed in their reaction to signs of a slowing economy and rising inflation. Silvia's analysis of the December 6, 1996, report: Bond rates will stay fairly steady in a narrow trading range. Stock markets Equity investors are encouraged by news that can support corporate profits. But while they favor a healthy economy, they, too, worry about inflation's potential to erode value. Silvia's analysis of the December 6, 1996, report: The report of large wage increases along with slower but still positive growth suggests a more cautious outlook on profits. Interest rates The current short-term federal funds rate is 5.26%. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014340-F WT01-B12-264IA018-000196-B041-94http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/readyretire/readyretire.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164748 text/html 10348HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:43:50 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 27-Aug-96 16:08:26 GMTContent-length: 10164Content-type: text/html Are You Ready To Retire? You're entering a new phase of your life that could last up to 20 or 30 years - that may be as long as you spent working! If you've done even a little preparation for the big event, you know how many decisions and choices are involved. Moreover, the decisions you make at this point in your life could affect how well you live in retirement. Take a moment to complete the Retirement Readiness Test. Answer the questions and then we'll calculate your "readiness" rating. Have you contacted the Social Security Administration to determine your expected benefits? Yes (10 pts) No (0 pts) Have you decided to take Social Security benefits immediately or defer them? Immediately (5 pts) Defer benefits (5 pts) Haven't decided (0 pts) Have you decided where you will live? Yes (8 pts) Have it narrowed down (4 pts) No (0 pts) Are you planning to sell your home? If so, will you take the one-time capital gains exclusion? Selling Yes, we're taking the exclusion (8 pts) What exclusion? (0 pts) Not selling (8 pts) Haven't decided (2 pts) When did you last review your life and health insurance? 3 months (12 pts) Within the last year or two (6 pts) 3 years ago or longer (2 pts) When did you last update your will? Within 6 months (12 pts) 1 year (8 pts) 3 years (5 pts) More than 5 years (2 pts) Don't have a will (0 pts) If married, is your spouse retired or planning to retire? Retired (8 pts) Planning to retire (4 pts) Haven't decided (2 pts) Have you determined how you will provide for long-term health care needs for you and your family? Yes (12 pts) Somewhat (8 pts) No (0 pts) Have you figured out how much income you'll need for a comfortable retirement? Yes (12 pts) Somewhat (5 pts) No (0 pts) Have you determined your net worth? If so, how recently? Within 6 months (12 pts) 1 year (8 pts) 3 years (5 pts) More than 5 years (2 pts) No (0 pts) How diversified are the assets that currently make up your "nest egg"? (Check as many as apply: 5 pts each) CDs IRAs Individual stocks Individual bonds Bank savings/money market account Checking/cash Inheritance/trust Other Mutual funds: Small company stock funds Large company stock funds Government bond funds Corporate bond funds Money market funds Tax-free bond funds Other stock funds Other bond funds Have you decided how to take your company pension? Yes; roll over to IRA (8 pts) Yes; take monthly payments (6 pts) Yes; take the distribution in cash (2 pts) No (4 pts) Don't have one (0 pts) What professional advisors have you sought out to help you make the transition to retirement? (Check as many as apply: 5 pts each) Attorney Financial rep/broker Insurance representative Estate planner Real estate agent Tax planner/preparer Other Have you thought about which hobbies, interests or work you will pursue in retirement? Yes (5 pts) No (0 pts) Are you actively gathering information about health, lifestyle, living arrangements, and financial aspects of retirement? Yes (10 pts) No (0 pts) Click here to see your score... and advice on how to improve your score next time. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020630 WT01-B12-265IA018-000194-B044-37http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/inflation_tamed.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163726 text/html 5251HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:33:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:29 GMTContent-length: 5067Content-type: text/html Inflation: Tamed! Is it true? Can it be possible that inflation - the beast that once intimidated us all - has been tamed? Citing persistently low levels of inflation even during recent strong economic growth, many economists including Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Chief Economist John Silvia believe that the Federal Reserve Board has largely succeeded in controlling inflation. If it's true that the lion will roar no more (or at least for the foreseeable future), there may be some issues that you need to rethink. At its highest in the last 45 years, consumer price inflation was 14.6 percent in March 1980. You would have needed almost 15 percent just to have forward motion in either the return on your investments or in a salary increase. Now, with inflation averaging about 3.5 percent in the last five years, you don't need double-digits to make the kind of progress that you did during high inflation periods. True, the numbers are punier, but low inflation may mean that you can keep more of what you earn. And that may be just about it. Residential real estate's ability to keep up with what was then the high rate of inflation in the 1970s and 1980s provided many homeowners with a nest egg they could live in. But the absence of inflation in today's environment begs the question: If housing keeps pace with inflation and inflation has been de-fanged to about 3 percent, how will tomorrow's nest eggs be built? According to Silvia, many Americans are substituting financial assets for real estate assets as their prime way of building net worth. Rather than being counseled to stretch themselves to buy a home today, younger Americans are now being urged to invest. But savvy shoppers are learning to postpone their buying as long as they can. That's a departure from the 1970s and 1980s when Americans bought as soon as they could rather than run the risk of paying higher prices later. Silvia says the low inflation environment has made it possible for discounters like Wal-Mart and Home Depot to exist. "You have to have stable prices in order for someone to come in and make a business out of discounting those prices," he says. Borrowing makes some sense when you can borrow today and pay your creditor with dollars that will be worth less tomorrow. That's not true in 1996, especially if your borrowing takes the form of charging to a 19.8 percent credit card account at a time when inflation is averaging 3 percent. You're providing your lender with a very high, very real return of approximately 16.8 percent. While it may seem to be under control for now, inflation continues to represent a risk for investors. Even if the U.S. economy continued in its current 3 percent inflation bliss for the next 20 years, the purchasing power of $1 would be reduced to 55 cents by 2016. That's why investment experts continue to recommend investments that have historically outpaced inflation. This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014300 WT01-B12-266IA018-000194-B044-46http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/understand_consumer.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163733 text/html 6000HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:33:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:49 GMTContent-length: 5816Content-type: text/html Understanding Consumer Psychology By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Psychology is a key consideration to financial market and economicanalysis. In fact, psychology is a required course for undergraduatestudents in economics. Consumer purchases of homes and autos rise whenhouseholds feel good about their jobs and their future. In contrast,when consumers are uncertain, auto and home sales weaken. Psychology isalso key to business spending. Survey results on business optimism showthat firms buy more equipment and hire more workers when theirconfidence is fairly high that the economy will continue to grow. One psychological indicator, the monthly University of Michigan'sConsumer Sentiment Index, is considered a leading indicator of thedirection of the economy. When the consumer is reported to be"cautious," for example, the economy may be headed for a slowdown. Forbusiness sentiment, surveys by organizations such as the ConferenceBoard offer a reliable view of hiring plans and capital spendingintentions. Consumer psychology, however, can be tricky. Purchasing in the UnitedStates does not rise and fall solely with the spirits of the Americanconsumers. Because Americans are conditioned to watch for sales, buyingactivity can often be skewed by price. As an example, let's consider the advertising and promotion techniquesused by auto manufacturers. For years, the U.S. auto industry sold autosby offering rebates. What happened? Consumers caught on quickly andstarted to insist on rebates before they would buy. Auto companies werethen forced to use more frequent rebates and broaden the availability ofautos sold with rebates. Today, the U.S. economy has a similar problem. For several years now,the inflation rate has fallen steadily. Consumers have come to expectit. As a result, housing markets have become dependent on prospectivehome buyers waiting for a decline in mortgage rates. Across the board,consumers will tend to postpone purchases because they expect inflationto fall, not rise. Sales of consumer durables such as furniture, carpetsand even autos all have seen the impact of this changed consumerpsychology. How different this is from the buy-now (before prices riseagain) psychology of the 1970s! But consumers cannot help but react to economic news. In the second half of 1995, the economy slowed down. Employment growth, inparticular, fell off. Seeing this, consumers became less confident abouttheir jobs - which, in turn, set off a chain reaction. Reducedconfidence in job security prompted some consumers to reduce spending.Business optimism also turned cautious as economic weakness in Mexicoand the consumer spending slowdown reduced profit and salesexpectations. Job security, not wages, became a key focus of households. As the country moves through this stage of the economic cycle, anotherfactor is influencing consumer psychology today. Consumer expectationstoward retirement also have changed, as most Americans expect that theywill have to provide more and more of their own retirement income. Lessfinancial support will come via Social Security benefits. To be prepared, U.S. householdshave started to raise their savings rates in recent years. This changehas shifted consumer budgets toward more investment in financial assets(for example: mutual funds, equities, bank deposits, life insurance) andless spending on real assets (consumer goods). Where consumer confidence goes from here depends upon employmentprospects and interest rate trends. For as long as employment growth ispositive, consumer psychology will probably remain positive butcautious. Positive consumer sentiment should suggest continued economicgrowth. The pace of growth, however, is likely to reflect Americans'new-found caution on job security. Dr. John Silvia Biography This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009660 WT01-B12-267IA018-000194-B044-54http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/gamefedfund.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163741 text/html 4929HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:33:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:12 GMTContent-length: 4745Content-type: text/html The Game Of Federal Funding In a roundabout way, when you invest in a U.S. government mutual fund,you participate in funding the operations of the U.S. government.Securities that government mutual funds invest in include securitiesissued by the U.S. Treasury, its agencies and instrumentalities. "Think of the federal government as a corporation, and the U.S. Treasuryas the corporation's treasurer," says Kemper Portfolio Strategist RobSchumacher. "The government has business to do (projects to spend moneyon such as defense, social programs and so on) and the treasurer is incharge of making sure that the necessary resources are available." How much money does the country need to run? In 1996, the budgetproposal is for $1.6 trillion. Payroll and corporate taxes provide someofwhat's needed. But because the country's spending has exceeded itsrevenueevery year since 1969, the government borrows heavily to pay for all ofwhat it wants to do. In fact, the U.S. government securities market isthe largest securities market in the world. In a typical week (we'll usethe week starting February 5, 1996 as an example), the U.S. Treasurywillborrow more than $19 billion to meet its maturing obligations andprojected cash needs. Although opinions differ about the appropriateness of Uncle Sam'sspending habits, its system for raising funds is impressive. (AsSchumacher says, "When you owe people several trillion dollars, you haveto have a very efficient method of making sure that you can meet yourobligations.") Unlike what other borrowers might encounter, the government has noproblem raising funds because the securities the U.S. Treasury issuesare direct obligations of the U.S. Treasury - they're backed by the"full faith and credit" of the United States. Mutual funds, institutionsand individuals are among the groups willing to invest in thesesecurities. (Of course, mutual fund shares are not guaranteed.) In order to meet its financing requirements (which include makinginterest payments due on its debt), the Treasury auctions securities ofvarying maturities. Most of the funds are borrowed for a short time, and13-week and26-week Treasury bills are auctioned every week. Treasuries of longermaturities are auctioned less frequently. Perhaps the greatest variable in the process is the price that thegovernment will have to pay for funds it borrows. This "price" isinfluenced by interest rates as set by the Federal Reserve Board and theopen market. And, Schumacher says, it's in the monitoring of interest rates where theprofessional management of a government income mutual fund can providevalue to fund shareholders. "What are interest rates going to do? Whatmaturity Treasury securities should the fund be investing in for maximumperformance?" According to Schumacher, "These are the questions theprofessional manager deals with every day." To obtain a Kemper fixed-income funds prospectus, please callShareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 or requestone now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009680 WT01-B12-268IA018-000194-B044-63http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/longshortrates.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163750 text/html 5612HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:33:53 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:34 GMTContent-length: 5428Content-type: text/html The Long And Short Of Interest Rates By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Interest rates come in several different sizes: short, intermediate andlong. They also have different "flavors": the rates that are availableon U.S. Treasury, corporate and municipal securities. Finally, ratesreflect the push and pull of different forces: growth, inflation,deficits and currency fluctuations. The behavior of interest rates is of more than academic interest.Investors in money market funds and fixed-income funds, for example, owndifferent types of securities with different maturities. Whether short-and long-term interest rates move together or apart will determine therelative performance of these funds. First, let's take a look at the various sizes of interest rates.Short-term rates refer to rates on instruments such as bank loans orU.S. Treasury bills that are fewer than two years in maturity. Rates oninstruments between two and seven years in maturity are consideredintermediate term; long-term rates are those paid on instruments thatare seven or more years to maturity. Securities with a longer timeexposure have a greater possibility of inflation, recession or default. Interest rates also vary by the flavor of the security. Because they areoften tax-exempt, municipal securities (which are issued by state andlocal governments and agencies) tend to offer lower interest rates thangovernment or corporate securities. Corporate securities are consideredmore risky than governments and therefore interest rates on corporatestend to be higher than those on governments. In 1994, a fascinating year for watching interest rates, we saw a divergence in the performance of both different sizeand flavor interest rates. Short rates such as the prime rate charged onbank loans responded as the Federal Reserve Board steadily increased therates it charged on the overnight lending of reserves. When the FederalReserve raises the rates it charges banks, that affects the returns aninvestor can expect on securities. Long rates rose along with short rates as long-term (bond) investorsbelieved that the Fed was raising short rates in response toexpectations of stronger growth and higher inflation. But while shortand intermediate rates tend to be driven by Fed policy, long rates reactto an array of investor expectations - expectations of currencystability and fiscal deficits as well as of economic growth andinflation. The difference in factors that determine rates was clearly evident bythe fourth quarter of 1994. The Fed was still raising short rates. But,by then, long rates had stabilized and even started to decline. Why? Themarket expectations that influence long rates had changed. Financialmarkets started to expect that economic growth would slow and inflationwould not rise. Short rates, on the other hand, continued to react tothe Fed's actions. Interest rate flavors acted differently as well. Rates on corporatesecurities, in particular, did not rise as much Treasuries. Corporatecredit quality was expected to improve as the economy looked strongerand therefore the traditional difference between what an investor mightearn on a corporate versus a Treasury security narrowed even as interestrates, in general, rose. Municipal rates, meanwhile, reflected therelative supply/demand of their own market more than the overall shiftof economic expectations. Dr. John Silvia Biography This article was excerpted from the Spring/Summer 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009690 WT01-B12-269IA018-000194-B044-71http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/risks_investing.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163800 text/html 5695HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:34:01 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:29 GMTContent-length: 5511Content-type: text/html The Risks Of Investing By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The daily news is filled with economic reports that could conceivablyaffect the value of your investments. What should keep you up at nightand what can you afford to ignore? We'll attempt to turn the lights onsome of the risks that could threaten your sleep. Risks are inherent in all our activities. As individuals and asinvestors, we must understand those risks particularly as they apply toan economic forecast. At Kemper, our outlook is for steady economicgrowth without a rapid rise in inflation. But what are the risks associated with this forecast? How can werecognize the risks? If risks become realities, what are we likely tosee? Three risks to our forecast are associated with inflationexpectations, the dollar and consumer confidence. Inflation expectations are a key factor influencing the trend inlong-term interest rates. Recent data suggest that Americans expectinflation to rise at a rate of three percent or so. The risk is thatinflation could rise by more than that. You've probably heard or read the news that prices on commodities,particularly those used in the production of goods for consumers andbusinesses, have risen recently. Prices paid and prices received bypurchasing managers have been higher in recent months. Energy prices arealso up. If these commodity prices are perceived as becoming widespread or beginto filter into consumer products, then inflation expectations may rise.Investors can be expected to start to factor higher inflation into theirpricing and they'll require higher interest rates to compensate for therisk of such higher inflation. If that happens, interest rates couldrise higher than our forecast expects and this could reduce economicgrowth more than expected. Another recent economic newsmaker has been the value of the U.S. dollar.For some time, financial markets were concerned about the dollar'sdepreciation against the Japanese yen. Dollar fluctuations are normal. Each year the dollar appreciates againstsome currencies while it depreciates against other currencies. What happens if the dollar continues to depreciate against the samecurrency? This depreciation would tend to discourageforeign investors from buying U.S. securities - particularly U.S.Treasury bonds. When foreigners think the dollar is weak, they expect tobe compensated with higher interest rates. When higher rates have to bepaid and the U.S. Treasury's cost of borrowing rises, interest ratesrise across the board. This hinders both U.S. economic growth and investmentperformance. Consumer confidence is a third risk. From 1991 through mid-1994, consumerconfidence rose in an environment of improving job growth and lowerinterest rates. Spending by consumers represents approximately two-thirds of totalspending in the economy - so you can see that consumer confidence isimportant. But when interest rates are rising and job growth is slowing,there is a risk that consumer confidence will falter. A decline inconsumer confidence, then, has the result of slowing growth further. Over the next year, these three risks - inflation, the dollar andconsumer confidence - do not appear sufficiently high to threatencontinued economic growth. Consider them benign boogiemen. But the threat they represent can change over time and, of course,non-economic risks (such as politics and war) can make them evenscarier. Because the risk profile of the economy for 1996 remains lowand the probability of continued economic growth high, we think that nowis a good time for you to get your sleep. Dr. John Silvia Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009700 WT01-B12-270IA018-000194-B044-82http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/healthcd.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163807 text/html 6045HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:34:10 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:23 GMTContent-length: 5861Content-type: text/html Health Care Debate Will Shift the Burden By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Concerns about the availability and financing of health care in the future are the primary focus of government and household planning today. For investors, the health care debate provides added emphasis to the need for retirement planning and the need for investment vehicles to provide for health care expenditures associated with retirement funding. Let's review the two different sets of pressures that are forcing today's debate on the future of health care. Budget deficit reduction at the federal government level is the first pressure. The task of reducing federal deficits to somewhere close to balanced over the next seven years requires the government to slow down the growth of its spending on health care. Programs such as Medicare will still grow but the rate of growth must be reduced. Although the elderly will be responsible for paying higher Medicare premiums, their responsibility will equal less than one-third of their Medicare bill, with the other two-thirds of the bill continuing to be paid for by taxpayers. Reducing the pace of federal spending on health care, then, means that more of the burden of retirees' health care must be borne by retirees themselves. Higher co-payments and alternative ways of delivering health care are among the solutions to be considered. Demographics are the second pressure forcing the debate. The baby boom will soon start its inevitable march into retirement, and this will balloon the demand for Medicare services. Certainly the federal taxpayer cannot support the baby boom at the same level of retiree health benefits as is being done for the current generation of retirees. Future retirees will have to provide more for their own health care. The United States is not alone in insisting on this. The retirement financing burden has already forced change in pension programs in Germany and Sweden. As in other countries, the political transition can be expected to meet resistance, however. The elderly, a strong voting bloc in the U.S., will continue to fight for the preservation of retiree benefits, and there are many politicians who are willing to play along in the interest of gathering votes. How will health care be funded? Retirement planning has been developed to meet funding needs. As a result of federal deficit reduction, the present Baby Boomers and Generation Xers need to increase the amount they invest from their current income to provide for a retirement that assumes a greater responsibility for their health care costs. Knowing that their retirement has to provide for everyday living and health care expenses, will workers today try to set aside incrementally more for the future? Yes, at least that's my expectation. Proposals for expanded Individual Retirement Account (IRA) and 401(k) programs also reflect this thinking. The rational individual, if he or she wants to enjoy the retirement standard of living that others enjoyed before cuts in federal benefits, would be expected to increase investment now. Private funding by individuals must make up the shortfall in public funding for retirement. Without increased private funding, the quality of the retirement experience will indeed diminish for future retirees. Present retirees benefited from an unusual coincidence of generous government benefits, demographics and unexpected health care improvements. Future generations will not likely benefit from at least the first two. However, we are starting to see some innovations designed with tomorrow's retiree in mind. Through the development of new payment systems and pricing policies, health care providers such as hospitals, insurers and doctors also have started to alter their means of helping patients finance their health care. Dr. John Silvia Biography This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1996 issue of Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014310 WT01-B12-271IA018-000194-B044-90http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/onlyinam.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163815 text/html 5815HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:34:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:00 GMTContent-length: 5631Content-type: text/html Only in America: Income Mobility By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Mobility is a characteristic of American life. We love our cars. We "go away" to college. We change homes and careers several times in our lives. However, it is income and class mobility that truly differentiates the American way of life from the rest of the globe. America was settled by people from all lands who sought a "better life" for their subsequent generations relative to the life that was possible in the "old country." Our parents ingrained in us that we could "do better." Official U.S. Treasury data* illustrate the income mobility of Americans. A recent study divided households into five groups (quintiles). One conclusion from the study: In the three lowest quintiles, one-third or fewer of the taxpayers in the quintile at the beginning of the sample period were in the same quintile at the end of the sample period just nine years later. Two out of three taxpayers had improved their earnings sufficiently to move out of the bottom earning quintile. Income mobility can be dramatic. More taxpayers in the bottom quintile moved to the top quintile over the nine-year period than stayed in the bottom quintile. Only 14 percent of households in the lowest quintile at the start of this study remained in the lowest quintile 9 years later at the end of the study. One quarter (25 percent) entered the middle class (the third percentile). That's in just nine years! Think about the mobility between generations! What's the explanation for this mobility? Education and freedom, two aspects of American life that we take for granted, are really quite unique in the world and are key to mobility. Rigid social societies, such as Mexico or Iran, have seen violent revolutions as a consequence of angry people who felt trapped in their position. In the United States, access to high school education and the many levels of college education offer people of all ages the opportunity to gather skills necessary for a better job (i.e., income mobility). Freedom allows people, once they have skills, to apply anywhere they want for a job that uses their skills. In some countries, individuals can make money but still not move out of their class. This is true of Indian and Chinese entrepreneurs in southeast Asia and Africa. In the U.S., where people can relocate, change jobs within a career and change careers, labor mobility reduces the average cost of labor and the average level of unemployment. Education and freedom are unique to the American experience because it is so accessible to everyone -- especially because it has the ability to make the greatest impact on those in the lowest quintile. My own career is an example of this. My father never went to high school, my mother graduated from high school but never thought of college. But because I had the advantage of my parents' savings, a scholarship and federal loans, I was able to go to college and beyond that to get my doctorate in economics. Then I exercised my freedom to make a choice by applying for and getting a faculty position at Indiana University. Then I was free again to move to Chicago and work at Kemper. With Kemper, shareholders are attempting to provide mutual funds to provide for the American dream of income mobility for their children. It's our job -- and one we take seriously -- to help them realize that dream. *Household Income Mobility During the 1980s: A Statistical Assessment Based on Tax Return Data, Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1992. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. Dr. John Silvia Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014320 WT01-B12-272IA018-000194-B044-98http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/whatsosp.html 198.152.185.42 19970106163822 text/html 3788HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:34:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:52:15 GMTContent-length: 3604Content-type: text/html What's So Special About 6 Percent? To market-watchers, plenty. A 6 percent yield on a 30-year Treasury bond is a benchmark for the economy. A higher cost of borrowing (when yields exceed 6 percent) limits the possibilities for corporations and consumers. Long-term yields have been as high as 8 percent in 1990, 1992 and 1994 -- which experts do not like to see. Why should Treasuries, which represent insignificant risk, yield 8 percent when the historical average return on stocks* -- an inherently riskier investment -- is 10 percent? So, what's so special about 6 percent? Why not 5 percent or even less? Naturally, the lower the interest rates, the better for the economy. However, 6 percent is about as low as 30-year bonds have gone since they were introduced in 1977. (The yield was at its lowest, 5.78 percent, in the fall of 1993.) John Silvia, chief economist for Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., is among those who look for the 6 percent barrier to be broken over the long run. "Interest rates seem low to us because of recent history," Silvia says. "But when you consider our real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of approximately 2.5 percent and our approximate 3 percent inflation rate, rates ought to be about 5.5 or 5.75 percent. That's assuming that the Federal Reserve maintains its focus on reducing inflation over time and that the federal budget deficit is eliminated over the next several years. Investors earning above 6 percent are getting a fair return given these possible outcomes." *From 1928 through 1995, the Standard & Poor's 500 returned an annual rate of 10.14 percent, according to Towers Data Systems. The S&P 500 is an unmanaged index that's generally considered representative of the U.S. stock market. To obtain a copy of this information, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014330 WT01-B12-273IA018-000196-B045-72http://www.kemper.com:80/search.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170559 text/html 2309HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:01 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:19:32 GMTContent-length: 2127Content-type: text/html Search Kemper.com Search keyword(s): Note: Remember to also search for your keywords in the Kemper Fundsprospectuses. To search these documents, which are accessible in AdobeAcrobat file format, download the prospectus and click on the binoculars icon. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009980 WT01-B12-274IA018-000196-B039-101http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/snapshots.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164001 text/html 3256HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:36:00 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:13:07 GMTContent-length: 3073Content-type: text/html Snapshots Supplied with a steady stream of government reports, corporate earningsreleases, analysts' forecasts and miscellaneous other data,market-watchers are never at a loss for information. Their challenge: Tounderstand what's in each snapshot - as well as in the surroundingenvironment that an individual market report may not have captured. Here's where you'll find current market news, including our outlook and economic interpretations by John Silvia, chief economist for Kemper Funds' management. Because of the changing nature of this information, you'llwant to check back here often. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010150-A WT01-B12-275IA018-000196-B045-95http://www.kemper.com:80/prospectus.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170613 text/html 3656HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:19:27 GMTContent-length: 3474Content-type: text/html Prospectuses And Important Information For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Any overviews herein are intended to be general in nature and for currentinterest. While helpful, these overviews are no substitute forprofessional tax, financial or legal advice. Investors should seeksuch professional advice for their particular situation. NeitherKemper Distributors, Inc. nor any of its affiliates or representativesis providing tax, financial or legal advice. You can request a prospectus one of four ways: Request a Kemper Funds prospectus from your financial representative. Request a Kemper Funds prospectus by calling Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048). Request a Kemper Funds prospectus by e-mail. Download a Kemper Funds prospectus now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010900 WT01-B12-276IA018-000196-B045-108http://www.kemper.com:80/learn/contact_learn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170621 text/html 4577HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 30-Sep-96 22:49:30 GMTContent-length: 4395Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Are you a shareholder? Are you a reporter? If so, please click on the appropriate link to go to the shareholder contact or media contact page that is specially customized for your needs. If you are a member of the general public, please use the information below to contact Kemper. By E-mail: Given ongoing security concerns, please do not refer to any personal information(Social Security numbers or investment account balances) in correspondenceyou send to us by e-mail. Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Your inquiry: By Telephone Or By Mail © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011470 WT01-B12-277IA018-000196-B045-127http://www.kemper.com:80/sitemap.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170629 text/html 6863HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:29 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Dec-96 15:40:34 GMTContent-length: 6679Content-type: text/html Kemper.com Site Map About Kemper.com Best Of Kemper.com New To Kemper.com Friends And Neighbors Kemper Funds In The News Kemper News Employment Opportunities Snapshots The Economy The Global Economy The Markets Our Outlook The Longer View Understanding Mutual Funds Short-Term Investing Planning Your Child's Future Your Retirement For The Curious Business Investor Risk/Return Spectrum Kemper Funds Profiles Kemper Closed-End Funds You And Your Financial Representative News Making The Most Of Your Investment Printable Forms Tour Site May We Introduce You? (Access is restricted to financial representatives) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010010 WT01-B12-278IA018-000196-B039-142http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/david_hale.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164037 text/html 4635HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:36:41 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 13-Sep-96 19:58:30 GMTContent-length: 4453Content-type: text/html David Hale Biography By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. David D. Hale is the global economic strategist for Zurich Group and Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. In this position, he advises the group's domestic and global fund management operations on the economic outlook and a wide range of public policy issues. Mr. Hale, who joined Kemper in 1977, holds a B.Sc. degree in international economic affairs from the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service and a M.Sc. degree in economics from the London School of Economics. Mr. Hale is a member of the National Association of Business Economists and the New York Society of Security Analysts. He writes on a broad range of economic subjects and his articles have appeared in the Wall Street Journal, The Far Eastern Economic Review, The Financial Times of London, The New York Times, The Nihon Kezai Shimbun, The Financial Analyst Journal, The Harvard Business Review, Foreign Policy and other publications. In 1978, he was appointed a member of the Financial Accounting Standards Board TaskForce on the Conceptual Framework (for accounting standards) because of articles he wrote on inflation accounting. He has frequently testified before Congressional committees on domestic and international economic policy issues and done briefings for senior officials in the executive branch, including President Bush. Since 1990, he also has been a consultant to the U.S. Department of Defense on how changes in the global economy are affecting U.S. security relationships. In September, 1990, the New York chapter of the National Association of Business Economists conferred upon Mr. Hale the William F. Butler Award. This award is conferred annually by the society upon a business economist who has made an outstanding contribution to the field. Other recipients have included Paul Volcker, Geoffrey Moore, Lawrence Klein, Alan Greenspan, and Otto Eckstein. In addition to his responsibilities at Kemper, Mr. Hale is a member of the Financial Instruments Steering Committee of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the Academic Advisory Board of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and a variety of government and private sector economic policy research groups in Washington, Tokyo, and Bonn. Mr. Hale also maintains close ties to his native state of Vermont and has served on advisory boards in its state government, including the Governor's Commission on Property Tax Reform (1988-89) and the Governor's Council ofEconomic Advisors (1991-92). © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014850 WT01-B12-279IA018-000196-B039-149http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/wklyreport.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164044 text/html 4025HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:36:48 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 30-Oct-96 15:16:22 GMTContent-length: 3840Content-type: text/html The Weekly Money Report by David D. Hale By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Are World Financial Markets Underpricing Political Risk? (October 21, 1996) How Long Can the Federal Reserve Delay Tightening? (September 26, 1996) Will Rising Bond Yields Force The Fed To Tighten? (September 2, 1996) Is Wall Street Experiencing A Greenspan Or Gephart Correction? (July 29, 1996) Will Delayed Fed Tightening Set The Stage For An October StockMarket Crash? (June 21, 1996) Significance Of The Estonian-Russian Interest Rate Differential (June 20, 1996) Will The Fed Tighten In July Or August? (May 29, 1996) Will Bond Market Perceptions Alter Economic And Political Reality? (May 6, 1996) Will U.S. Output Growth Exceed 3.0% During The Second Quarter? (March 25, 1996) Investing Social Security In Mutual Funds (March 14, 1996) Is The U.S. Yield Curve Discounting Increased Political Risk? (February 29, 1996) Has The Dollar Peaked? (January 31, 1996) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015690 WT01-B12-280IA018-000196-B039-161http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/benefit1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164100 text/html 7834HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:37:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 11-Oct-96 15:24:01 GMTContent-length: 7652Content-type: text/html Will Investors Or The Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The President has confirmed that the U.S. Treasury will beginto issue inflation adjusted bonds in January of 1997. The introductionof the index linked bond represents a potentially important developmentboth for the future structure of the public debt as well as theyield benchmarks which will be used to measure investment performancein the fund management industry. Investors have long used governmentsecurities as a proxy for risk free returns in the financial markets. The introduction of the index linked bonds will now offer a proxyfor measuring inflation adjusted risk free return. The U.S. will be the seventh OECD country to introduce index linkedgovernment debt. It already exists in Britain, Sweden, Canada,Australia, New Zealand and Iceland. Some Latin American nationsalso have offered inflation adjusted securities in the past butthey were designed to help their populations cope with hyper-inflation,not moderate G-7 style inflation. The British government introducedthe first G-7 index linked bonds in August 1981 and the initialsecurity offered a real yield of only 2.0% plus a tax free principaladjustment for inflation. At first, the securities were offeredonly to pension funds but the rules were later modified to permitpurchases by individuals. When the UK government introduced its first index linked bond,many institutional investors responded positively because of theirdisastrous experience with inflation during the 1970's. In themid-1970's, conventional British government bonds had lost overhalf of their value in nominal terms because Britain's inflationrate had shot up to 30%. In 1981, investors also had more modestexpectations of potential returns from securities than exist today. Between 1750 and 1950, the average yield on UK government securitieshad been about 3.0% with an all time low of 2.21% in 1897. TheBritish government's credit standing was so high that it was evenable to finance the First World War by selling bonds with a couponyield of 5.0%. While commodity prices had fluctuated in a widerange because of wars and changes in the global economy, the overallBritish price level had been remarkably stable for nearly twohundred years. As a result, many pension funds perceived thata government security which offered a guaranteed real returnof 2.0% was an attractive asset. High income individuals alsowere attracted to the prospect of a bond principal inflation adjustmentwhich was free of income tax. As a result of this investor support,the UK government was able to sell over 6 billion pounds of indexlinked debt during the first two years after their introductioncompared to a conventional debt stock of 150 billion pounds. Between 1981 and 1995, the UK government's index linked securitiesproduced a cumulative nominal return of 154% and a cumulativereal yield of 40%. But as the UK economy entered a period ofsustained disinflation after 1980, the return on index linkedsecurities significantly underperformed other asset classes, suchas equities and conventional government bonds. Between 1981 and1995, the UK stock market rose 5.7 times in nominal terms andby nearly 3 times in real terms. The price of conventional governmentbonds rose by 72% while the real yield on long-term governmentsecurities averaged 3.7%. The real yield on Treasury bills alsoaveraged about 5.3% during the period 1981-1995 compared to 2.9%on the index linked security. But while the index linked securitydid not out perform conventional financial assets, it did producea better return than other traditional inflation hedges such asgold and property. The British property market boomed duringthe mid-1980's because of easy monetary policy but it slumpedso sharply during the early 1990's that index linked securities have out performed property for the period since they were introduced. The nominalyield on British property has averaged just under 9.0% since 1981compared to an average nominal yield of 10% on the index linkedbonds. The gold price peaked at $800 per ounce in 1980 and currentlysells for about $380 per ounce. As a result of Britain's greatly improved inflation performanceunder Mrs. Thatcher, the market for index linked securities neverdeveloped the breadth and liquidity of other asset markets. But the British government has been attempting to improve the market's liquidityby doing about 15% of its recent funding in the index linked securities. As a result, the stock of index linked debt has expanded to 40billion pounds compared to a net government debt stock of 260billion pounds. The introduction of index linked debt has produced major interestcost savings for the British government. The nominal yield onindex linked debt has averaged about 100-200 basis points belowthe yields on other government securities. The only cost to thegovernment has been the lost tax receipts from the inflation adjustmentfor the depreciating real value of bond principal. But the savingsfrom reduced interest payments have been immediate while the taxlosses from indexation will be felt over the long term. Beforethe index linked bond was introduced, the UK government had collectedtax on all interest income but it had exempted bonds from capitalgains taxation if they were held for longer than one year. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023170 WT01-B12-281IA018-000196-B039-175http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/doleboost1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164110 text/html 9315HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:37:12 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 21:34:32 GMTContent-length: 9131Content-type: text/html Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. August 26, 1996 Several Wall Street newsletters are now suggesting that a victory for the Dole-Kemp ticket in the presidential election would boost equity prices by lowering capital gains taxes while increasing long-term bond yields because of investor concerns about a return to large federal budget deficits. While it is natural for investors to be concerned about the budgetary affects of Republican promises to reduce taxes, the history of the past ten years should have demonstrated that it is the nation's savings and investment balance, not just budget deficits, which determine interest rates. As a result the impact of the Dole economic program on bond yields will depend upon how it influences the country's private savings behavior and demand for capital, not just the federal government's deficit. Several factors suggest that the Dole program will have a less damaging impact on either the federal deficit or interest rates than many Wall Street pundits now fear. First, under current law, no administration can enact a tax cut unless there are offsetting spending cuts. This law was enacted in order to force the Congress to adhere to long-term targets for deficit reduction and it is doubtful that a president as cautious about fiscal policy as Mr. Dole would repeal it. Indeed, the threat of a bond market collapse would probably constrain Congress from repealing the law even if the Dole-Kemp administration decided to revert to high deficit fiscal policy. As the ratio of federal debt to GDP is now about 55% compared to 28% when Ronald Reagan became president, the markets will be far less tolerant of large scale fiscal stimulus than they were during the early 1980's Secondly, the Dole administration has a broad based economic growth agenda of which personal tax cuts are only one part. The Dole program is also committed to reducing the cost of government regulation and the legal system on U.S. business, slashing capital gains taxes and slowing the growth of Federal spending. Regulatory cost push has played such a major role in driving up business costs during the past three decades that there is a stronger statistical relationship between the number of pages in the federal register and interest rates than between federal deficits and interest rates. The register peaked at nearly 90,000 pages during the high inflation era of the late 1970's and fell steadily to a trough of 49,000 during the late 1980's. The Clinton administration has pushed it back to 70,000, so if a Dole White House could reduce it back to Reagan era levels there would be potential benefits for both inflation and interest rates. If the Dole program encourages corporations to invest more aggressively, interest rates could rise because of strong demand for capital in the private sector, not increased government borrowing. But, as the Dole program has far more modest tax incentives for investment than the Reagan program of 1981, it will probably only have a modest impact on private capital demands and interest rates. The Reagan program directly subsidized investment through large increases in depreciation allowances whereas the Dole program is focused on capital gains relief and regulatory reform. The overall scope of the Dole fiscal program is also very modest compared to the tax changes which occurred during the Reagan years. The Dole program would reduce the top marginal tax rate to 34% whereas during the Reagan years it declined to 28%. If Congress enacted every tax change proposed by the Dole-Kemp platform without cutting spending, the net fiscal stimulus to the economy would be only $58 billion during 1998 compared to a nominal GDP of $8 trillion. It is also quite likely that the capital gains tax cut would produce such a huge revenue windfall that the federal deficit would shrink during the twelve to twenty four months after the enactment of the Dole tax program. As a result of the equity bull market since 1991, the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP in the U.S. is now 95% compared to a previous all time peak of 82% in 1929 and a sixty year moving average of 48%. If the household sector could realize capital gains with a tax rate of only 14%, there would be a realignment of portfolios on a scale so large that the Treasury would experience a massive revenue windfall. Thirdly, the presidential campaign cannot be viewed in isolation from the congressional election campaign. Under the influence of consultant Richard Morris, the President recast himself as a conservative on many social and economic issues during the first half of 1996 but the Democratic Party in the Congress remains far to the left of the President. During most of the 20th Century, the Congressional Democratic Party was well balanced between membership from the rural south and the urban northeast and middle west. During the 1990's, though, the Democratic Party has lost most of its congressional membership in the south and became heavily dependent upon the urban centers of the Northeast, the middle west, and California. In the House, for example, the Republicans now have 78 of the 125 seats in the old southern confederacy compared to only 6 in 1960. As a result of the pending retirement of many long-term Democratic incumbents, the Republican share of southern seats could easily rise to 90-100 this autumn even if the party loses seats elsewhere in the country. If the Democratic Party regains control of the House with only 20-30 southern seats, many of their most influential committee chairmen will be far to the left not just of current Republican chairmen but also of previous Democratic chairmen. The contrast between a house speaker Richard Gephardt and the old Democratic house speaker, Tom Foley, would also be very striking. After flirting with so-called "new Democrat" themes in the mid-1980's, Rep. Gephardt has devoted most of the past decade to promoting protectionist trade policies and new forms of federal intervention in the economy. President Clinton has so far resisted most of the congressional Democrats' economic proposals, but as a result of his apparent flexibility on many issues, the financial markets are uncertain about how he would manage a more left wing Democratic Congress if he is reelected to a second term. The great fear haunting the U.S. bond market today is not a Dole-Kemp victory in the Presidential election and the enactment of a modest Republican tax cut program. It is what would happen to government spending, the cost of federal regulation, and trade policy in the event that the Democrats made a sweep of both the White House and the Congress. Such a sweep would probably encourage an immediate wave of selling by foreign investors in the U.S. bond market and a slump in the stock markets of emerging market economies sensitive to U.S. trade policy. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1021750 WT01-B12-282IA018-000196-B039-186http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/feddev1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164122 text/html 12223HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:37:21 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:36:59 GMTContent-length: 12037Content-type: text/html Will Federal Devolution Set the Stage for a State and LocalPrivatization Boom in the Next U.S. Recession? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. An address given to the National Conference of State Legislatures, St. Louis, July 28, 1996 America's system of federalism will face unique challenges during thelate 1990's and early years of the 21st century. The Congress wants to devolve more responsibilities to the states at the sametime that the costs of funding traditional services, such as Medicare andeducation, are projected to rise sharply. As a result of the long expansionwhich the U.S. economy has enjoyed since 1991, most states are currently ingood fiscal shape but the late 1990's could produce great financial stressesfor them if their increased responsibilities coincide with a recession.Indeed, it would not be an exaggeration to suggest that devolution against abackground of recession could set the stage for other radical policy changes,such as the privatization of many state owned enterprises and services. The fiscal challenge which will confront American states during the late 1990'shas several dimensions. First, the Congress wants to reduce the aid which it provides to Americanstates as well as to alter the formulas through which it is distributed. Inthe budget debate, six months ago, the Congress wanted to reduce federalassistance to the states by 26%. It is doubtful that future cuts will be thatlarge but it is not difficult to imagine cuts of 15-20% if Congress continuesto push for a balanced federal budget by the year 2000. The pressure toreduce federal laid to the states does not just reflect the political ideologyof the newly ascendant Republican Party. It is also a by-product ofdemographic factors. The population of the U.S. will age steadily during thenext few decades and cause entitlement spending for the retired to risesharply. The federal government share of GDP will also increase significantlyunless other forms of spending are curtailed. The problem of demography in theU.S. is much less serious than in other industrial countries because of itshigh level of immigration and higher birthrate but aging is still a generalproblem for all the industrial nations. In fact, two thirds of all the peoplewho have ever lived to the age of 65 in the long history of mankind are alivetoday. Such simple facts reveal more about the forces driving public spendingin the modern world than all the political science journals which debate thephilosophical implications of public spending choices. Secondly, the Congress wants to shift from open ended matching grant assistanceto the states to block grants. Under the new system, the states would receivea fixed sum of money and be given more flexibility in how they chose to spendit. But in contrast to the current system, their aid would not increaseautomatically in response to some economic shock, such as a recession. The newsystem of financing would represent a sharp break with the pattern of financingwhich has prevailed during most of the modern era under both Democratic andRepublican administrations. During the Bush administration, for example,federal aid to the states rose from $124 billion to $194 billion. Much of theincrease resulted from the impact of the 1990-1991 recession on social serviceprograms. But part of it also resulted from the states shifting Medicaid coststo the federal government as well as increases in matching grants from otherfederally mandated programs. As a result of the growth of federal spendingduring the Bush years, aid to the states is currently equal to about 3.2% ofGDP compared to a post war peak of 3.6% of GDP in 1973, 1.9% in 1965, and 0.9%in 1940. Thirdly, despite the sharp drop in the U.S. inflation rate, the federal budgetis projecting that Medicaid spending will continue to rise at a 8% annual rate.In the federal budget, Medicaid expenditures will grow from $168 billion to$267 billion. As the states account for about 43% of Medicaid spending, theiroutlays will also expand. Some states are trying to control costs by forcingtheir recipients to use HMO's, but in many states there is so much publichostility to HMO's that legislatures are enacting laws which require them to beless severe in rationing their services. Fourthly, the population of school age children is once again expanding. It isprojected to grow from 47 million in 1991 to 56 million in 2004, surpassing theold 1971 peak of 51 million. The GAO says that the U.S. needs to spend $112billion on new school construction compared to recent outlays of $3 billion perannum. Meanwhile, the U.S. electorate remains hostile to the idea of tax increases.Almost none were enacted by state legislatures during the past two years whilethe Congress itself flirted with the idea of reducing federal gasoline taxes afew months ago. There is also growing public opposition to the spread of gambling. Lotterieswill probably continue to generate revenue equal to about 2.5% of state taxreceipts, but there will be far more restrictions on the introduction of newcasinos. It appears that only three states will permit the establishment ofsignificant casino industries. They are Nevada, New Jersey and Mississippi. The good news is that state governments are in better fiscal shape to confrontthese challenges then at any other time during the past decade. The economy has enjoyed five years of steady growth, so the state and localgovernment sector enjoys a healthy budget surplus. There also have been farfewer regional disparities in the national economy's performance during thecurrent expansion than was the case during the 1970's and 1980's. In the 1970's, the U.S. economy's growth leaders were states producing oil andother commodities enjoying sharply higher prices. In the 1980's, there werebooms on both coasts while the middle west suffered from the overvalued dollarand the western states were crippled by collapsing commodity prices and bankincrisis. In the early 1990's, new England and California experienced severeslumps but both have recovered during recent years while other regions havecontinued to enjoy steady growth. As a result of the length and breadth of the national expansion, the state andlocal government sector currently enjoys a budget surplus of $40 billionexcluding pension funds compared to $11 billion five years ago. The surplus asa share of GDP is only about 0.6% or well below the 1.2% peak of the 1980'sbusiness cycle but it is a respectable number for an expansion which has beencharacterized by such low inflation. The U.S. economy's current cyclical environment is exceptionally benign for thesixth year of a business cycle. The unemployment rate has dropped to 5.3% butinflation is still only about 3.0% excluding food and fuel. The growth rateof real output is likely to average about 2.6% this year compared to 2.0% lastyear and 3.5% during 1994. The economy's outstanding inflation performance has surprised many analysts andexplains why the business cycle has been so prolonged. The Federal Reserve hashad no incentive to surpress the expansion in order to promote pricestability. There are several factors which explain why the U.S. economy has been able toenjoy such a benign combination of low unemployment and low inflation. First, the current business cycle has enjoyed some very positive supply sidecharacteristics. There has been such robust business investment that duringthe past two years the growth rate of manufacturing capacity has accelerated tonearly 4.5% from 2.0% during the early 1990's. Secondly, U.S. firms have been very aggressive in controlling costs andboosting productivity. The restructuring has created social concerns aboutemployment stability, especially in large companies, but the growth of profitshas helped to set the stage for an extraordinary boom in job creation. Totalemployment has expanded by over 10 million spare jobs since 1992 whereas duringthe period 1988-1992 it grew by only about 3.5 million jobs. Thirdly, American firms have been on the cutting edge of developing andintroducing new technology. In the U.S., the ratio of computers to workers isnow at 57 per 100 in the corporate sector compared to 20 in Western Europe, 16in Japan, and 4 in southeast Asia. There are new technology oriented companieson the stock market with capitalizations of $2-3 billion which did not existthree years ago. The Internet firm, Netscape, now has a market capitalizationof $3.9 billion compared to zero two years ago. The capitalization ofMicrosoft has expanded from $24 billion in 1992 to $75 billion recently. IBM'smarket capitalization has even rebounded to $55.5 from $28.5 billion in late1992 but is still far below its peak of over $100 billion in the late 1980's. Fourthly, the Federal Reserve has done an excellent job of managing thebusiness cycle. There was an upsurge of output growth during 1994 whichstrained available inventories and caused commodity prices to rise sharply.This change in the price environment could have set the stage for anacceleration in the inflation rate but the Fed moved quickly to reduce theeconomy's growth rate to the 2.0-2.5% range from 3.5-4.0% in order to restraininflationary pressures As a result, commodity prices corrected and the Fed wasable to ease monetary policy during early 1995. The Fed will face newchallenges in restraining inflation later this year but it enjoys so muchcredibility that the price of restraining inflation will be much less severethan during the business cycles of the 1970's and early 1980's. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020000