WT01-B13-1IA018-000196-B039-199http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/respond1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164130 text/html 10155HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:37:32 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:37:08 GMTContent-length: 9970Content-type: text/html How Will Investors Respond to the U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The U.S. Treasury has announced that it will soon introduce anew government security which will be indexed for inflation. The introduction of the index linked bond represents a potentiallyimportant development both for the future structure of the publicdebt as well as the yield benchmarks which will be used to measureinvestment performance in the fund management industry. Investorshave long used government securities as a proxy for risk freereturns in the financial markets. The introduction of the indexlinked bonds will now offer a proxy for measuring inflation adjustedrisk free return. The U.S. will be the sixth OECD country to introduce index linkedgovernment debt. It already exists in Britain, Sweden, Canada,Australia and New Zealand. The British government introducedthe first index linked bonds in August 1981 and the initial securityoffered a real yield of only 2.0% plus a tax free principal adjustmentfor inflation. At first, the securities were offered only topension funds but the rules were later modified to permit purchasesby individuals. When the UK government introduced its first index linked bond,many institutional investors responded positively because of theirdisastrous experience with inflation during the 1970's. In themid-1970's, conventional British government bonds had lost overhalf of their value in nominal terms because Britain's inflationrate had shot up to 30%. In 1981, investors also had more modestexpectations of potential returns from securities than exist today. Between 1750 and 1950, the average yield on UK government securitieshad been about 3.0% with an all time low of 2.21% in 1897. TheBritish government's credit standing was so high that it was evenable to finance the First World War by selling bonds with a couponyield of 5.0%. While commodity prices had fluctuated in a widerange because of wars and changes in the global economy, the overallBritish price level had been remarkably stable for nearly twohundred years. As a result, many pension funds perceived thata government security which offered a guaranteed real returnof 2.0% was an attractive asset. High income individuals alsowere attracted to the prospect of a bond principal inflation adjustmentwhich was free of income tax. As a result of this investor support,the UK government was able to sell over 6 billion pounds of indexlinked debt during the first two years after their introductioncompared to a conventional debt stock of 150 billion pounds. Between 1981 and 1995, the UK government's index linked securitiesproduced a cumulative nominal return of 154% and a cumulativereal yield of 40%. But as the UK economy entered a period ofsustained disinflation after 1980, the return on index linkedsecurities significantly underperformed other asset classes, suchas equities and conventional government bonds. Between 1981 and1995, the UK stock market rose 5.7 times in nominal terms andby nearly 3 times in real terms. The price of conventional governmentbonds rose by 72% while the real yield on long-term governmentsecurities averaged 3.7%. The real yield on Treasury bills alsoaveraged about 5.3% during the period 1981-1995 compared to 2.9%on the index linked security. But while the index linked securitydid not out perform conventional financial assets, it did producea better return than other traditional inflation hedges such asgold and property. The British property market boomed duringthe mid-1980's because of easy monetary policy but it slumpedso sharply during the early 1990's that index linked securities have out performed property for the period since they were introduced. The nominalyield on British property has averaged just under 9.0% since 1981compared to an average nominal yield of 10% on the index linkedbonds. The gold price peaked at $800 per ounce in 1980 and currentlysells for about $395 per ounce. As a result of Britain's greatly improved inflation performanceunder Mrs. Thatcher, the market for index linked securities neverdeveloped the breadth and liquidity of other asset markets. But the British government has been attempting to improve the market's liquidityby doing about 15% of its recent funding in the index linked securities. As a result, the stock of index linked debt has expanded to 40billion pounds compared to a net government debt stock of 260billion pounds. The introduction of index linked debt has produced major interestcost savings for the British government. The nominal yield onindex linked debt has averaged about 100-200 basis points belowthe yields on other government securities. The only cost to thegovernment has been the lost tax receipts from the inflation adjustmentfor the depreciating real value of bond principal. But the savingsfrom reduced interest payments have been immediate while the taxlosses from indexation will be felt over the long term. Beforethe index linked bond was introduced, the UK government had collectedtax on all interest income but it had exempted bonds from capitalgains taxation if they were held for longer than one year. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand followed Britain's lead byintroducing index linked debt during the 1980's and early 1990's,but their stock of index linked debt is much smaller than Britain'sboth in absolute terms and as a share of their national debt. Canada has about $5.8 billion ($4.4 U.S.) of index linked debt,Australia has about $6 billion ($4.8 U.S.) and New Zealand hasonly about $200 million ($130 U.S.). New Zealand has recentlyincreased its use of index linked debt and investor interest hasbeen strong because of the high yields (5.8%) and the fact thatNew Zealand will soon have an election under a new system of proportionalrepresentation which could weaken political support for non-inflationaryeconomic policies. Canada issued its first index linked bondsduring 1991 when real interest rates on conventional bonds wereat high levels and then reduced the supply as interest rates fell. But the Canadian govenment recently began issuing new index linkedbonds and plans to have quarterly auctions at a rate of $300-500million. Sweden introduced index linked bonds only last yearbut it is promoting them so aggressively that they could be worthabout 10% of Sweden's $100 billion of public debt by early 1997. The bonds have so far suffered from illiquidity because pensionfunds have been hoarding them, but the coming expansion of supplyshould enhance trading. They offer a real yield of over 5.5%as well as an inflation adjustment but, in contrast to Britainand other commonwealth countries, there is no tax exemption forthe inflation indexation component of the return. The U.S. Treasury will soon hold hearings around the country toobtain investor reactions to its proposals for an inflation adjustedbond. At present, the only details which the Treasury has providedabout the new instrument is that it will be available in maturitiesof ten or thirty years and that it will be in denominations of$1,000 per bond. It has not yet decided which price index touse for adjusting the bonds for inflation but is considering avariety of alternatives, including the Consumer Price Index, theGDP deflator, the CPI excluding food and energy and the EmploymentCost Index. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017330 WT01-B13-2IA018-000196-B039-211http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/mutualfundboom1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164138 text/html 7617HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:37:41 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:37:02 GMTContent-length: 7432Content-type: text/html Economic Implications of the Mutual Fund Boom By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The recent growth of the American mutual fund industry has been so dramatic that it is giving the U.S. a very different financial structure than other industrial countries. In the modern era, countries have typically organized their financial system around either a universal banking model encompassing many financial services or a hybrid structure which separates commercial and investment banking. The U.S. is in the midst of creating a whole new financial system, in which the mutual fund sector is increasingly displacing commercial banks as the major repositories of household wealth as well as suppliers of capital to many small and medium sized companies. The U.S. mutual fund industry began during the 1920's and grew steadily during the decades after World War Two but its total assets remained very modest compared to the banking system until recently. In 1960, equity funds had assets of $11.9 billion and bond funds had assets of $5.1 billion but there were not yet any money market funds. The bull market of the 1960's increased the industry's equity assets to $38.5 billion while bond funds grew to $9.1 billion. There was little growth of equity assets during the 1970's because of the severe bear market which resulted from high inflation during the middle years of the decade but the introduction of money market funds produced $76.4 billion of new assets for the industry during the period 1975-1980. Money market funds exploded after 1978 because the Federal Reserve sharply increased money market yields to combat inflation while banks were not permitted to offer market interest rates on their deposits until the early 1980's. As a result, money funds accounted for almost 75% of the mutual fund industry's total assets by 1982. The U.S. mutual fund industry now has $1.3 trillion of equity oriented funds, $811 billion of long-term bond funds, and $753 billion of money market funds. Its collective assets of nearly $3 trillion now greatly exceed the $2.3 trillion of assets in the national banking system but are still smaller than the $4.2 trillion of assets in all of America's 10,000 insured commercial banks. The ownership of mutual funds is not as universal as the ownership of bank accounts. About 30.2% of U.S. households own a mutual fund whereas over 87% of households have a bank account. But the population of mutual fund owners is expanding rapidly. It included 24% of households in 1990, 12% in 1984 and only 6% in 1980. Mutual fund owners also tend to be more affluent than other groups. In 1994, 57% of households with incomes above $75,000 had mutual funds compared to 40% for the $35,000-50,000 income group and 13% for people with incomes below $25,000 per annum. The mutual fund industry will benefit as well from the fact that younger people are more accustomed to using mutual funds as outlets for their savings than older people. At present, 27% of households in the age group 35-45 own mutual funds compared to 33% for people in the age group 44-64 and 21% for people aged 65 and over. The ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP in the U.S. is now at 38% or the highest among the major industrial nations. The country with the second highest ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP is France at 35% but over seventy five percent of French assets are in money market funds and bond funds whereas in the U.S. equities account for 45% of the industry's assets. Germany has the lowest ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP among the major industrial nations. It is only 5.2% and just 25% of mutual fund assets are invested in equities. Other major English speaking nations have ratios of mutual funds assets to GDP in the 14-15% range. In Britain, the ratio is 14.4% and practically all of the assets are in equities because the tax system discourages retail demand for bond funds. In Canada, mutual fund assets are equal to 14.5% of GDP and half of the assets are in equities. The Japanese stock market is so dominated by corporate cross shareholdings that retail investors own only about one fourth of corporate equity. As a result, the ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP is only 9.5% and fixed income funds account for about 67% of industry assets. Ironically, the factor which produced such a dramatic expansion of the mutual fund industry during the 1990's was a monetary policy designed to rescue American banks from a sharp rise in non-performing real estate loans. After 1991, the Federal Reserve reduced nominal short-term interest rates to 3.0% or the lowest level in three decades in order to boost the profits of the U.S. banking system. The positive shape of the yield curve permitted U.S. banks to significantly bolster their lending margins, earn healthy profits from their large portfolios of long term government bonds (U.S. banks had more government bonds than commercial loans in 1993) and boost their equity/asset ratios to the highest level since the 1960's. But low money market yields and a positively sloped yield curve have also encouraged households to shift savings flows from bank deposits into higher yielding instruments, such as bond and equity mutual funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013370 WT01-B13-3IA018-000196-B045-170http://www.kemper.com:80/menu.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170703 text/html 5347HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:03:03 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 16:30:11 GMTContent-length: 5165Content-type: text/html Kemper.com Main Menu Page through our Photo Album of happy retirees and their favorite web sites. We have a page waiting for you! We review the many gifts of 1996. 1009970-B For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from your financialrepresentative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048) or request a prospectus now. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or sendmoney. Remember that there is no assurance that the objective of anymutual fund will be achieved, and mutual fund returns and net assetvalues fluctuate. Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, whichmay be more or less than their original cost. Money market funds seek tomaintain a net asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be noassurance that they will. Mutual fund shares are not insured orguaranteed by the U.S. government. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B13-4IA018-000196-B039-230http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/presidents.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164153 text/html 2455HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:37:56 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 20:48:25 GMTContent-length: 2271Content-type: text/html Presidents And The Stock Market Past performance is no guarantee of future results -- but history can provide yet another way to consider the presidential prospects. In the table below, we've used Towers Data Systems data to review how the stock market performed in each presidential term since 1929. The Standard & Poor's 500, an unmanaged index of common stocks that's generally considered representative of the U.S. stock market, served as our proxy for stock market performance. This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014350 WT01-B13-5IA018-000196-B039-247http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/market_indices.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164216 text/html 5754HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:38:19 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 20:36:56 GMTContent-length: 5569Content-type: text/html Market Indices When assessing the return of your mutual fund investment, you mustconsider it in context of the markets in which the fund strives toperform. The most widely quoted measure of the performance of the financialmarkets is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Unfortunately, "the Dow"may provide very little insight on how your mutual fund investment isprogressing. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is a group of 30 blue chipindustrial stocks. More useful to you will be the performance of the particular index -- anunmanaged group of similar investments -- that your mutual fund uses asa benchmark for its investment objective. Comparing your fund against its index can be enlightening. Note, though,that a fund's return will depend upon its specific investments. Tounderstand why your fund outperformed or underperformed its index, itmay also be helpful to compare the composition of your fund's portfoliowith the composition of the index over the same period of time.Significant performance differences may arise if your fund and the indexwere invested in different companies and industries throughout theperiod. Other factors, such as cash flows in and out of a fund and feesand expenses, may affect the relationship between fund performance andthe index. The Consumer Price Index is generally considered representative of thelevel of inflation. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is an unmanaged index that's generallyconsidered representative of the U.S. stock market. The FT/S&P Actuaries World Index is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies. The Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index is representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backed securities. The Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index is an unmanagedindex that's generally considered representative of intermediate andlong-term government and investment grade corporate debt securities. The Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index includes approximately 15,000 bonds. The Morgan Stanley Capital International EAFE is an unmanaged indexthat's generally considered representative of international markets. The Russell 1000 Growth Index is comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth and represents the universe of stocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select. The Russell 2000 Growth Index is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2,000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell 3000 Index. The Standard & Poor's 500 Stock Index is an unmanaged index that'sgenerally considered representative of the U.S. stock market. The Salomon Brothers World Government Bond Index is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries. The Wilshire Large Company Growth Index is an unmanaged index that'sgenerally considered representative of the market for stocks of largergrowth companies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return onequity and dividend payout). View the returns of each index for the last 10 years and year-to-date (through the most recent quarter end). © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010180 WT01-B13-6IA018-000196-B039-258http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/prepared_volatility.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164225 text/html 6342HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:38:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:04 GMTContent-length: 6158Content-type: text/html Are You Prepared For More Volatility? If investing in the stock market involved one single, uninterruptedclimb in prices, there would be no risk involved. But stock pricescannot be counted on to rise and certainly not in an orderly way. Theysurge and they fall. The range that the stock market covers in a given year - the differencebetween its high and low for the year - is a measure of a year'svolatility. Over the 1978 to 1994 period, "average" volatility of theStandard & Poor's 500 was about 25 percent, according to an analysis byKemper's Quantitative Research Department. (The S&P 500 is an unmanagedindex that's generally considered representative of the domestic stockmarket.) Yet since 1992, markets have been much less volatile. For example, volatility in the stock market, as represented bythe Dow Jones Industrial Average, was at a 95-year low in 1995, according to Barron's. What's the significance of this? Kemper Portfolio Strategist Tom Regnerworries that such low levels of volatility have given investors -especially new investors - unrealistic expectations about the degrees towhich their equity investments can fluctuate. Because the market hashistorically been more volatile than its most recent performance, youmay want to give some thought to its potential for renewed volatilityand the impact volatility could have on your investments. The following are a few suggestions on how you might prepare forheightened stock market volatility: You could diversify. When you're concerned about your exposure in onemarket, exposure to another market can help reduce the impact ofvolatility. Instead of subjecting 100 percent of your portfolio towhat's going on in one market, a portion of your portfolio will movewith influences of a separate market. Two other broad markets to invest in are the fixed-income markets andinternational markets. Obviously, both represent their own risks andpotential rewards - and these markets can be volatile at times, as well.For instance, the international markets present risks associated withcurrency exchange rate fluctuations. However, you can help reduce theriskiness of your investment strategy when you reduce your dependency ona single market. You could try to avoid volatility by moving some or a portion of yourinvestment in the stock market into a cash-type investment that seeks tomaintain the stability of the principal. A money market fund, forexample, is designed for investors who want to avoid the fluctuationsthat are typical of the stock and bond markets. Although there can be noassurance that it will, a money market fund seeks to maintain a stablenet asset value of $1.00 per share. Money market funds are neitherinsured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government. Moving into such an investment can help limit your exposure to thedownside of volatility. The trade-off, however, is that you also will beremoved from benefiting when and if the market's volatility turns in theinvestor's favor. You could welcome volatility. Volatility has the potential to rewardthe regular investor. Investors who prearrange to invest a fixed amountinto a mutual fund every month - regardless of the fund's share price -can benefit from dips. How? When prices are low, your fixed investmentwill buy more shares than could be bought when prices are high. Here'sthe catch, however: The assumption is that the share price will bounceback up and that you will still be invested if it does. A program of regular investment cannot assure a profit or protectagainst a loss in a declining market. Since this strategy (called dollarcost averaging) involves continuing contributions regardless offluctuating share values, you'll need to consider your financial abilityto continue the program through periods of low price levels. For moreinformation on establishing a Kemper automatic investment program, please call Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, please call Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 or request one now. Theprospectus contains more complete information including management feesand expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. This article was excerpted from the Spring/Summer 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009820 WT01-B13-7IA018-000196-B039-268http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/forecast.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164234 text/html 6269HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:38:36 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 27-Aug-96 22:46:05 GMTContent-length: 6086Content-type: text/html A Weather Forecast For International Markets At a time when many investors are looking overseas for their investment returns, some markets offer more promising weather than others. Dennis Ferro, director of international equities for Zurich Investment Management Limited, provides the following forecast for three markets likely to enjoy favorable conditions and three markets that you might want to avoid. (And, at all times, you'll want to follow this advisory: investment in international securities presents special risk considerations including exchange rates, government regulations and differences in liquidity. Be sure to talk to your financial representative for what's appropriate for your circumstances.) One of the smallest foreign markets, Ireland in 1996 has several appeals. Moderate inflation should provide a conducive environment for its good quality, reasonably financed companies to become increasingly competitive on a global scale. Specifically, investors are attracted to its financial services, food processing and specialized manufacturing industries. Ireland's labor force is one of its significant competitive advantages: Workers are well educated and have a good work ethic. While there has been a correlation between the performance of the Irish market and the United Kingdom, Ireland's flexible work force and financial incentives have made it an attractive alternative. The Netherlands is an example of a foreign market whose positive fiscal policy has supported corporate progress. Both inflation and unemployment have been relatively low, and several solid companies have succeeded in building strong international businesses. Dutch companies are especially dominant in commercial publishing, electronics and growing software development and computer applications for European corporate needs. Having suffered a recession for the last five years, Japan should be the comeback story of 1996. The government is addressing its myriad problems (including banking, deregulation and trade), and many corporations have initiated steps to heighten their competitiveness. Increased corporate confidence in the system should result in a resumption of industrial production and capital expenditures - the very events needed for the economy's recovery. The health of Japan, the largest foreign market with a broad base of industries and strong infrastructure, has a direct effect on southeast Asia. Its improvement, then, could help the economies of Malaysia and Singapore. Concerns about inflation have kept German monetary policy tight for years. Consequently, interest rates have not fallen at the same pace that economic activity has. Opportunities in Germany's stock market tend to be large cyclical companies and financial institutions. German companies' ability to compete and expand profit margins is inhibited by relatively high compensation levels. This, combined with a strong deutsche mark, make it difficult for Germany's export industries to compete against products produced by countries with lower average wages. Just a few years ago, Russia represented untold potential. Many practicalities - including the government's taxation and regulation - have frustrated foreign investors, and growth has yet to occur as was predicted. IBM's recent cancellation of a manufacturing facility is just one sign that Russia is a market best avoided by the faint of heart. Dramatic rallies draw investors to Latin American markets - but their volatility can also discourage investment. Brazil is an example of a market that has been strong recently, buoyed by an expanding economy heavily dependent on foreign financial support from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. While the country has a developing manufacturing base and a strong resource sector, it is sensitive to export demand and global commodity prices. The health of Brazil's banking system remains suspect, and difficult political decisions must be made if continued progress is to occur. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014450 WT01-B13-8IA018-000196-B040-7http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/totalreturn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164241 text/html 8839HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:38:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:14:55 GMTContent-length: 8655Content-type: text/html How To Arrive At Total Return A recent Kemper Reports survey found that most shareholders responding to a recent Kemper Pulse survey evaluate the performance of their mutual fund on the basis of total return (for more survey results, see How Kemper Shareholders Evaluate Performance). That's good because total return represents the net effect of everything that happened with your fund over a certain time period (see below for a complete description of total return). To fully understand your fund's performance, it can be helpful to review the components of total return. A fund's total return in one year cannot be used to predict its performance in the next. By considering where your fund's return came from, however, you may have a better idea of what will influence your fund's ability to perform in the future. Let's review the components of total return for three basic fund types. A money market fund's total return will be generated by income earned on its net investments, which is paid to shareholders in the form of income dividends. Short-term capital gains and unrealized appreciation, while possible, are uncommon. Because a money market fund must continually reinvest as its existing short-term securities mature - requiring the proceeds to be reinvested at prevailing rates - the money market fund is especially sensitive to changes in rates. Its earning ability is directly dependent upon short-term interest rates, and its income distributions will fluctuate. At the same time, however, the fund manager strives to avoid NAV fluctuation. A money market fund seeks to maintain a stable net asset value $1.00 per share (although there can be no assurance that it will). There are many types of income funds, and each type has its own investment strategy. But every income fund shares one objective: the generation of current income. These are just a few of the considerations that can affect a fund's ability to earn income: The type of income-producing security that the fund invests in - e.g., because of the greater risk to principal, corporate bonds and mortgages (and mortgage-related securities) will generally yield more than comparable maturity U.S. Treasuries. The length of the fund's investment - funds that are willing to take the risk of investing in securities for a longer period of time will generally be compensated (with a higher rate of return) for assuming such risk. The quality of the investment - in order to appeal to investors, a poorer quality investment generally needs to offer a higher rate of return. Each of these considerations represents a risk - and that risk can be reflected in fluctuations in the price of a fund's shares. Lower-risk income funds - specifically funds whose objective is to maintain preservation of principal - will attempt to provide relative NAV stability. As with other income funds, these funds' ability to generate income depends upon interest rates and the maturities of their securities. However, the range of NAV change - up or down - may not be as great as other funds. High-risk income are willing to take maximum risk to maximize current income. Such a strategy, however, can erode principal. In that case, a positive total return may be the result of strong income dividends offsetting a shrinking net asset value. Capital growth funds, whose potential for total return is the highest among all mutual fund types over time, generally produce their total return from a combination of capital gain, income and price appreciation. Both the dividends and net asset value of your capital growth fund will fluctuate. The level of dividend income earned from stocks owned by the portfolio will fluctuate. Income dividends vary according to many factors, including the number of dividend-paying stocks in a portfolio and the level of dividends paid. No year is the same as the next when it comes to capital gain dividends. The strength of the stock market in 1995, for example, prompted several fund managers to take profits on many holdings, which generated significant capital gains. It is possible for a fund to produce a solid total return without paying significant dividends. In order to do this, the value of the portfolio must appreciate. Within the broad category of capital growth funds are funds that combine capital growth and income. Capital growth and income funds offer the added potential of earning income from fixed-income securities owned by the portfolio. By investing in bonds or other securities that produce income, this fund type helps reduce its reliance on capital growth - and its risk level. Of course, this strategy of attempting to reduce risk is not without a cost: The prospect of building total return through price appreciation is diminished for this type of fund. Total return A measure of the net investment income earned by the fund and any realized and unrealized appreciation or depreciation of the fund's investments for a period. Total return calculations assume that you reinvested your dividends. Income dividends Interest and dividend income earned by a fund's investments, less fund expenses, is net investment income. This is distributed to you in the form of income dividends. Income dividends of taxable funds are taxable. Capital gain dividends Distributions of any net profits realized by a fund when individual securities are sold are capital gain dividends. Such gains, if there are any, are distributed at least annually. Capital gain dividends are taxable. NAV change Any increase (appreciation) or decrease (depreciation) in the value of a fund's investments over time results in appreciation or depreciation of a fund share - its net asset value (NAV). Net asset values fluctuate. As long as you hold your shares, changes in their net asset value are not taxable. This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020600 WT01-B13-9IA018-000196-B040-19http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/investment_basics/diversification.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164251 text/html 8792HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:38:53 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 21:10:37 GMTContent-length: 8610Content-type: text/html The Power of Diversification Let's face it, if there were a place where we could all earn a solid return on our investments with little or no risk, you probably wouldn't be reading this. But, very often, you may have to accept more risk to seek higher potential returns than those offered by guaranteed or insured investments. Do nothing and continue complaining! Go to Las Vegas and place your entire life savings on one hand of black jack. Put your money under your mattress or bury it in the backyard. Put every penny you have into a high flying stock that you heard about on the train the other day. DIVERSIFY: Place a portion of your money in several carefully chosen investments, and keep a portion of your money in more conservative investments. Choice E offers one of the best potentials for gain without incurring undue risk. Scott Jordan is 50 years old. Through hard work and determination, Scott has managed to save $100,000 over the years. Scott wants to retire at age 60, but feels that he needs to earn more on his investments than he is presently earning in order to retire in comfort. His financial advisor has suggested that he put his money in several investments, each with varying degrees of risk, in order to make his retirement nest egg potentially grow faster. Scott asks just one question: "What if I lose money?" To help reassure Scott, his financial advisor illustrates this scenario: a hypothetical total loss of one investment. Let's see what happened to Scott's hypothetical investment in this example. Result: Scott's hypothetical portfolio MORE THAN DOUBLED its original value, from 1-1-86 through 12-31-95. Even with a 100% loss from one of Scott's investment choices, his historical hypothetical investment in the U.S. stock market (represented by the S&P stock index), the international stock market (represented by the EAFE international stock index), the bond market (represented by a bond index) and Treasury bills grew enough over 10 years to offset his loss from 1-1-86 through 12-31-95. By spreading your investment over several choices, you may be able to participate in the return potential of the stock market and reduce your risk. In our example, Scott's historical hypothetical investments included investments in stocks and bonds, represented by indices. Another popular way to diversify is to invest in a mutual fund, which spreads its portfolio holdings across a number of stocks and/or bonds. Not only does this further spread the risk of investing in the stock or bond markets, it allows your money to be managed by professional portfolio managers, trained to recognize both opportunities and risks. Professional management can add a great deal of value to the concept of diversification. Mutual fund shareholders benefit from the years of experience each portfolio management team brings to the table. Ask your financial representative to review your investments in light of your financial goals and your tolerance for risk. Then, ask your representative about the many investment opportunities available through Kemper, one of the largest asset managers, with more than $78 billion currently under management. If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now. Chart Source: Towers Data Systems. This hypothetical example is for illustrative purposes only and is not intended to represent performance of any specific portfolio of investments, but only of the indices shown. Investors cannot make investments directly into these indices. This information is historical and is not representative of future performance of these indices. There is no guarantee that any specific diversification strategy will result in a profit or protect an investor from loss. Performance of Kemper Funds is available from your financial representative or you can go to Kemper Funds Profiles. There are important differences among these investments that should be considered in reviewing this data. Rates of Treasury obligations are fixed at issuance and timely payment of principal and interest is backed by the U.S. Treasury. Market value will fluctuate inversely with interest rates prior to maturity and will equal par at maturity. Investment return and principal value of stocks will fluctuate with changes in the market. The returns and net asset value of mutual funds will fluctuate and shares upon redemption will be worth more or less than original cost. 1. The Standard & Poor's 500 Stock Index is an unmanaged index generally representative of the U.S. stock market. Source: Towers Data Systems. 2. The EAFE Index (Morgan Stanley Capital International Europe, Austral-Asia, Far East Index) is an unmanaged index that is a generally accepted benchmark for major overseas markets. Data is U.S. dollar adjusted. Source: Towers Data Systems. 3. The Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond Index is an unmanaged index generally representative of the performance of intermediate and long-term government and investment-grade corporate debt securities during various market conditions. Source: Towers Data Systems. 4. Towers Data Systems U.S. Treasury bill data is an unmanaged index based on the average monthly yield of 6-month U.S. Treasury bills. Source: Towers Data Systems. 5. A hypothetical investment of $20,000 losing all of its value during a 10-year time frame from 1-1-86 through 12-31-95. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020500 WT01-B13-10IA018-000196-B040-30http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/investment_basics/mistakes.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164305 text/html 16735HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:39:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 21:10:43 GMTContent-length: 16552Content-type: text/html The 13 Most Common Mistakes To Avoid When Investing In Mutual Funds How fast is the mutual fund industry growing? Today, 31% of all American households own shares of at least one mutual fund. Between 1990 and year-end 1995, assets in mutual funds skyrocketed from $567 billion to $2.1 trillion. And, as the chart at right indicates, the number of mutual funds available has also soared, from 1,500 in 1985 to more than 5,700 today. Clearly, American investors are aware of the advantages of mutual funds. Now, we'd like to take that awareness one step further. The following are 13 of the most common and costly mistakes to avoid when investing in mutual funds. After all, one of the surest routes to smart investing is educated investing. Common Mistake #1 Choosing a fund with short-term objectives to address long-term financial goals. If you are investing for your preschooler's college education or a dream retirement home, then a long-term investment perspective is probably more appropriate than a short-term one. Generally speaking, the more long-term your perspective, the greater your tolerance of price fluctuations should be. After all, if you are giving an investment 20 or 25 years to grow, you can probably withstand the price fluctuations that have historically accompanied greater rewards. In short, don't overlook the dual use of many mutual fund investments -- meeting monthly income needs while also taking advantage of long-term growth potential. Common Mistake #2 Always choosing the fund that is advertising the highest yield, rather than looking at total return. Yield is one way of evaluating a fund's performance. A high yield, however, may come at the expense of the fund's net asset value, or share price. Some funds may reduce the underlying value to pay out that high current income. As a result, the market value of your investment may be diminished. The most complete measure of mutual fund performance is total return. Total return takes into account the three components of performance: income dividends, capital gain dividends and changes in the value of your fund's shares. As a result, total return provides a more complete picture of performance than looking only at current income, or yield. Common Mistake #3 Choosing a fund based on incomplete magazine or newspaper information. Some magazine and newspaper rankings are based on yield (current income) rather than on the total value of the investment. Also, look carefully at the reporting period for a fund's performance. Some funds have had high returns for a quarter or two, or maybe one year. If you are making a long-term investment, it's critical that you look at the performance of a fund over a longer period of time -- three, five, or even ten years. Of course, a fund's past performance cannot guarantee its future performance, but it can give you a good idea of a fund's history and whether it has performed consistently over the years. Two of the best-known third-party ranking services are Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. and Morningstar, Inc. Both rank funds by total return over long periods of time. Common Mistake #4 Investing in mutual funds that deduct sales charges from your reinvested dividends. A sales charge compensates the individual who helps you select the right mutual fund. But, after you buy, why should you continue paying? Make sure the fund you select doesn't continue to deduct sales charges on your reinvested dividends. Over the life of your investment, free dividend reinvestment, with full compounding, can be a significant benefit. Kemper Funds offer free reinvestment of dividends at net asset value. That means you do not pay a sales charge for dividend reinvestment. Note: The assumed 8% return in the chart is not indicative of past or future performance of any particular mutual fund. The yield and net asset value of a mutual fund will fluctuate. In the example, total income earned from free reinvestment of dividends compounded monthly over a 10-year period is $22,196.40. Total income earned from reinvestment of dividends with a 4% sales charge over a 10-year period is $21,501.83. So, the additional income earned from free reinvestment of dividends over a 10-year period is $694.57. Common Mistake #5 Not investing in a municipal bond mutual fund when your objective is tax-free income. Given today's potentially higher marginal tax rates, more investors are turning to tax-free investments such as mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds. The income dividends from these funds are exempt from federal income taxes, though they may be subject to state or local taxes. And, if you invest in a state-specific fund, the income can be free from state and local taxes as well. For some investors, a portion of income may be subject to the alternative minimum tax.1 Common Mistake #6 Not having an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) if you are eligible to have one. Despite legislative changes over the years, the IRA continues to offer most investors tremendous opportunities to save and invest for retirement through the deferral of taxes. The powerful effect of tax-deferred compounding over time, and the affordability of the IRA, continue to make this an extremely important component of effective retirement planning. Investing in more than one mutual fund IRA allows you to further reduce risk by diversifying. You should, of course, review the description of the investment objective and policies in the prospectus of a fund before investing to more fully understand the market and credit risk associated with an investment in a particular fund.1 Common Mistake #7 Choosing a fund without understanding all of the fees and expenses. Some investors shop by comparing only sales charges. But, in addition to sales charges, mutual fund shareowners indirectly pay for management fees, general expenses, and, in some cases, distribution and administrative fees. Distribution and administrative fees are used by some funds toward payment of fund marketing and account-servicing. These fees are normally paid to third parties, like brokerage firms and banks, which market and service fund accounts. These charges are either in lieu of, or in addition to, sales charges paid by the investor. Management fees are paid by the fund to the fund's investment manager for expertise in the management of the fund's portfolio. These fees are usually a fixed percent per annum of the funds average net assets. General expenses include other operational expenses that are charged directly to the fund and include transfer agent, custodial and legal fees. Before you invest, study all the fees. It's better to know up-front than to find out later that performance of your fund is being pulled down by high distribution and management fees, or uncontrolled fund expenses. And, be sure to read a fund's prospectus before you invest. Common Mistake #8 Choosing a fund that doesn't have the shareholder privileges you might need or failing to activate those privileges when you open a fund account. To make the management of your account easier, most mutual funds offer investing privileges free of charge. Some funds, however, charge a fee for using them. To avoid headaches and delays later on, be sure to activate your investing privileges -- especially exchange and wire-redemption privileges -- when you open a new account. These privileges include: reinvestment of dividends, exchange privileges, wire redemptions, pre-authorized purchase plans and systematic withdrawal plans. Whatever you decide, make sure that you choose a fund that offers the privileges you need - at no extra charge. These privileges are subject to modification, suspension, or termination by a fund. Common Mistake #9 Failing to reinvest all dividends in order to take advantage of the power of compounding. Reinvesting your dividends can help add substantially to the growth of your investment. The chart to the right (for illustrative purposes only) portrays the beneficial impact of reinvestment income monthly at various interest rates, over a ten-year period. The chart assumes a $10,000 initial investment. The assumed rates are not representative of any yield or return that a particular fund may offer. Common Mistake #10 Failing to get professional advice in selecting the mutual funds that are right for your unique financial situation. Today's marketplace offers more than 5,700 mutual funds with many different investment objectives. In each investment category alone, there can be hundreds of funds from which to choose. How do you decide which fund is best for your personal financial situation and goals? The answer is simple: obtain the advice of a broker, banker or financial planner before you purchase. In today's ever-changing financial and tax environment, the need for professional guidance has never been greater. It's easy to consult a broker, banker or financial planner before you make a mutual fund choice. Common Mistake #11 Choosing a fund that makes redeeming shares like pulling teeth. Make sure the fund you select has simple and convenient redemption procedures. At most fund companies, the quickest and most convenient way is to have redemption proceeds wired to your local bank account. Kemper's wire-redemption privilege, if pre-authorized, makes it possible for you to redeem $1,000 or more with one toll-free phone call. Your money is normally sent via FedWire® to your designated bank account the next business day, free of charge by the fund. Even if you did not choose wire-redemption privileges, you may still redeem up to $50,000* without obtaining a signature guarantee. To redeem $50,000 or less, just call your financial representative. Or, you can send a letter requesting the amount you desire, signed by the owner(s) of the account. A check payable to you will be sent to your address of record within seven days. There is no need to make an extra trip to your bank or broker to get your signature guaranteed. *Redemption requests by individuals and certain designated institutional account holders for over $50,000, and all requests by institutions not so designated, do require a signature guarantee. See the prospectus for details and limitations. Common Mistake #12 Choosing a fund that is not a member of a family of mutual funds. Financial markets are constantly changing in response to economic and environmental factors. As a result, the mutual fund you select today may not be right tomorrow. You need the advantage of being able to conveniently exchange into another fund with different investment objectives. So you should select a fund that is part of a family of funds. Kemper Funds include a wide range of mutual funds to address a lifetime of changing investment objectives. Should your investment needs or market conditions change, you can move your investment within the Fund Family with one toll-free call.* Your Shareholder Services representative will be happy to tell you more about the other Kemper Funds. *The exchange privilege is subject to modification, suspension and termination and to certain limitations described in the prospectus. Common Mistake #13 Choosing a fund that is administered and managed by a firm that is here today, but may be gone tomorrow. When you invest your money in a mutual fund, you want to be sure it is being handled by an experienced, well capitalized firm with an established track record. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $78 billion in assets under management. The company operates with three main business units: retail mutual funds, retirement plans and institutional asset management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries worldwide. 1Consult your accountant or financial representative to discuss whether tax-free mutual funds or an IRA are right for you. For a Kemper Fund prospectus containing more complete information, including management fees and expenses, request one now or contact your financial advisor. If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now. Please read the prospectus before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020490 WT01-B13-11IA018-000196-B040-45http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/investment_basics/dollarcost.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164320 text/html 11321HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:39:21 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 21:10:40 GMTContent-length: 11138Content-type: text/html Dollar Cost Averaging "Buy low, sell high." So easy to say, but not so easy to do. In reality, many investors find it tough to resist the natural temptation to pull out of the market when prices are falling, or to put more money in after a significant rally. And many more investors, concerned that they have to get it right to hit it big, spend so long waiting for the "right time" to get into the market that they never do invest. They let their fears about market fluctuations deny them the outstanding performance opportunities provided by stocks. There is a way to help reduce the risk of investing at the wrong time and actually take advantage of the ups and downs of the stock market. It's a simple strategy that proves timing isn't everything. It's called dollar cost averaging. While dollar cost averaging can help protect you from buying only at the absolute worst time, it cannot guarantee a profit or protect against a loss in a declining market. But if you have the patience to ride out the tough times and stick to your regular investing schedule, there are definite advantages to dollar cost averaging. With dollar cost averaging, you make smaller investments at regular intervals over a period of time, instead of a large, one-time investment. The investment amount and frequency are up to you (for instance, $200 each week, $500 each month, or $1,000 every three months). Successful dollar cost averaging requires that you stick to your plan, regardless of what the market does. Make sure you select an amount that is consistent with your financial means, so that you can continue to purchase shares even through periods of low share prices. It's simpler than you might expect. Since you invest the same dollar amount each period, you automatically purchase more shares when prices are low and fewer shares when prices are high. This means that, over the entire purchase period, your average cost per share will be lower than the investment's average price per share. And you have used market fluctuations to your investment advantage. You've decided to invest $5,000 in a stock mutual fund, in $1,000 monthly investments over a five-month period. Let's see how three typical market trends-rising, declining, and fluctuating (up and down)-affect your total investment. Note: The hypothetical share prices used are for illustrative purposes only and are not intended to represent the actual prices of any Kemper Fund. In an up market, the best possible time to buy is obviously at the very beginning-the ground floor. But how can you tell exactly when the upswing will start? The truth is, no one can. The beauty of dollar cost averaging is that you don't need a crystal ball to guide your investment plan. When the share price drops, you should resist profit-taking -- selling your shares -- and continue your regular $1,000 investments.   Regular   Share  Shares Investment Price Acquired   $1,000      $ 5      200   $1,000      $ 6      167   $1,000      $ 7      143   $1,000      $ 6      167   $1,000      $ 9      111  ___________________________  $5,000     $33    788 How did you do? With dollar cost averaging, you ended up with 788 shares worth $7,092. That's a 42% gain on your original $5,000 investment. Average Share Cost: $6.35 ($5,000/788 shares) Average Share Price: $6.60 ($33/5 purchases) And even with continually rising prices, your average cost per share is lower than the average price paid. * Cumulative total of share prices used to compute average price. Let's look at how dollar cost averaging can help protect you from buying at the worst time -- the highest price -- during a period of generally declining prices. While dollar cost averaging cannot protect against a loss in a declining market, you purchase more shares at lower prices with each investment. If you had committed your entire $5,000 the first month, you'd have received only 1,000 shares worth just $1,000 after 5 months. The price would have to rebound all the way to $5 just to break even...   Regular   Share  Shares Investment Price Acquired   $1,000      $ 5      200   $1,000      $ 3      333   $1,000      $ 3      333   $1,000      $ 2      500   $1,000      $ 1     1000  ___________________________  $5,000    $14*   2,366 ...But your five monthly $1,000 investments purchased a total of 2,366 shares that, at the final price, are worth $2,366. Average Share Cost: $2.11 ($5,000/2,366 shares) Average Share Price: $2.80 ($14/5 purchases) By dollar cost averaging you automatically bought more shares at attractive low prices. And any recovery beyond your average share cost -- $2.11 -- puts you back in the black and in great shape to benefit from future appreciation opportunities. * Cumulative total of share prices used to compute average price. During an up-and-down market, you purchase shares when prices are high, low, and in between. Can dollar cost averaging still work? With dollar cost averaging, you can use market fluctuations to your own investment advantage, even when share prices go up and down. By dollar cost averaging your investment, you always bought fewer shares when the price was high and more shares when the price was low.   Regular   Share  Shares Investment Price Acquired   $1,000      $ 5      200   $1,000      $ 7      143   $1,000      $ 5      200   $1,000      $ 3      333   $1,000      $ 5      200  ___________________________  $5,000    $25*   1,076 Thanks to dollar cost averaging, you stayed invested during an uncertain market, ending up with more than 1,000 shares. Average Share Cost: $4.65 ($5,000/1,076 shares) Average Share Price: $5.00 ($25/5 purchases) And even in a fluctuating market, dollar cost averaging results in an average share cost less than your average share price. * Cumulative total of share prices used to compute average price. You want to ease into the stock market. You are retiring or changing jobs and want to roll over or transfer your benefit distribution. You recently sold a home or other large asset and want to consolidate your proceeds. You received a sizable gift, bonus, inheritance, or other large payment. If you have a significant sum to invest, consider starting a dollar cost averaging program with an investment in a money market or other conservative fixed income fund.* Then periodically -- and consistently -- exchange (transfer) a set amount into an equity or other higher potential fund. Ask your financial advisor about starting a Kemper Systematic Exchange Plan, a feature that can handle these regular transfers for you automatically.** If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now. If you don't have a lot of money to invest, you may sign up for one of Kemper's other automatic investing options: Payroll and Government Direct Deposit or Bank Direct Deposit, a feature that lets you invest automatically from your checking or savings account at an Automated Clearing House member bank, savings and loan, or credit union. * An investment in a money market mutual fund is neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government. There can be no assurance that the fund will be able to maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00 per share. ** The exchange privilege is subject to modification, suspension, or termination and to limitations described in the prospectus. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020480 WT01-B13-12IA018-000196-B040-57http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/taxable.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164332 text/html 5136HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:39:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:43 GMTContent-length: 4952Content-type: text/html Taxable Or Tax-Exempt? Depending on your tax bracket, you may be better off - and enjoy a yieldadvantage - in an investment that is exempt from federal income taxes. The primary intention of tax-exempt investments is to generate incomethat is not subject to federal income taxes. (Income may be subject tostate and local taxes, and a portion of income may be subject to thealternative minimum tax for certain investors.) When you consider the federal taxes you would owe on the income you receivefrom a taxable investment, you may find that you will retain more incomewith a tax-exempt investment. In general, the higher your tax bracket,the more advantageous a tax-exempt investment can be - as you will note inthe tables below. (Both tables are based on 1996 federal rates.) *This table assumes a decrease of $3.75 of itemized deductions for each $100of adjusted gross income over $117,950. For a married couple with adjustedgross income between $176,950 and $299,450 (single between $117,950 and$240,450), add 0.7% to the above marginal federal tax rate for each personal and dependencyexemption. The taxable equivalent yield is the tax-exempt yield dividedby 100% minus the adjusted tax rate. For example: if the table tax rate is37.1% and you are married with no dependents, the adjusted tax rate is38.5% (37.1% + 0.7%+0.7%). For a tax-exempt yield of 6%, the taxableequivalent yield is about 9.76% (6% ÷ (100%-38.5%). As shown in the tables, you would have to earn significantly higher yieldson ataxable investment to offset the effect of the federal tax you would oweonyour income. You would not be liable to pay federal income tax on the interest dividend incomeyou receive from the tax-exempt investment. However, for all tax exempt mutual funds, distribution of capital gains are considered taxable income to the shareholder. Please remember thata portion of the interest dividend may be considered a tax preference item for purposes of the alternative minimum tax. (Of course, the yields inthetables are for purposes of illustration only and do not reflect theyield ofa specific investment.) Even though most investors prefer to avoid taxes, the tax advantage andlower tax-exempt yields available from tax-exempt investments are notthebest choice for all investors. For your own circumstances, be sure toworkthrough the calculations shown above or consult your financialrepresentative. Investors are required to disclose on their federal income tax returnstheamount of tax-exempt interest earned during the year. In addition,individuals whose modified income, which includes adjusted gross income,tax-exempt interest and 50 percent of their Social Security benefits,exceeds a base amount will be subject to federal income tax on as muchas 85percent of their Social Security benefits. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009830 WT01-B13-13IA018-000196-B040-70http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/evaluate_perform.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164343 text/html 4961HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:39:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:48 GMTContent-length: 4777Content-type: text/html How Kemper Shareholders EvaluatePerformance The ultimate measure of your mutual fund iswhether it enables you toachieve your investment goal - the purchase of ahome, the financing ofyour child's education or the attainment of acomfortable retirement.But how do you evaluate your mutual fund'speriodic progress? Whatencourages you about your fund's performance andwhat discourages you?Which of the many performance measures aremeaningful and which do youdismiss as investment world static? These are the questions that we sought to answerwhen we recently askedseveral hundred thousand Kemper mutual fundshareholders in four equityand three income funds to complete a Kemper Pulsesurvey mailed alongwith their issues of Kemper Reports. Response tothe survey was high,and the results are believed to be statisticallysignificant anddemographically sound. Highlights of the surveyfindings follow. "On their own, survey results can't and shouldn'tdictate investmentphilosophy," says Stephen B. Timbers, presidentof Kemper Funds."But they can improve our understanding ofshareholders' expectations oftheir funds, and they can help frame ourcommunications to investors." The performance of a mutual fund can be measuredavariety of ways. What's most important to youabout your fund? Total return is widely considered to be the bestyardstick of mutualfund performance because it takes into accountthe three components ofperformance: income dividends, capital gaindividends and changes inthe value of the fund's shares. Question #2 on the survey varied, depending onwhether it was mailedto an income or equity fund shareholder. Equity Funds- Individual investors have varying expectations oftheir mutual funds. For example, how many yearsare you prepared to give your equity fund toappreciate in value? Income Funds- Individual investors have varying expectations oftheir mutual funds. For example, to what extentdo you rely on your fund's dividends for yourmonthly income? Investors in equities are wise to give theirinvestment more thanfive years to appreciate. The fortunes of everycompany depend tosome extent upon the health of the U.S. economy.Giving an equityinvestment just one or two years to perform maybe insufficient time toexpose it to the most productive points in aneconomic cycle. An income fund's ability to provide currentincome is one of its primaryappeals. However, a mutual fund's earnings areinfluenced by interestrates and other variables that can fluctuatesignificantly. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009840 WT01-B13-14IA018-000196-B040-76http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/funds_vs_dividends.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164351 text/html 3641HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:39:54 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:11 GMTContent-length: 3457Content-type: text/html The Difference Between Mutual Fund And Stock Dividends Many mutual fund shareholders mistakenly believe that a mutual funddividend is similar to a dividend declared by a corporation.Corporations that pay dividends are returning a share of their profitsto their shareholders, an interim means of rewarding shareholders fortheir investment. Investors have reason to be encouraged when a companydeclares consecutive dividends or dividend increases. Conversely, a cutin dividends often suggests that something is amiss. A change in the dividend paid by a mutual fund is normally much lessmeaningful. The dividend level represents the income that the fund hasearned on its investments - interest on the bonds held in an income fundportfolio or dividends on stocks in an equity fund portfolio. Becauseinterest rates and the financial markets tend to move in cycles, you canalways expect some fluctuation in the income earned by your fund.Regardless of these fluctuations, mutual funds distribute substantiallyall of their income annually in order to avoid paying income tax ontheir earnings. When interest rates rise and a fund can earn more on its underlyinginvestments, the dividends it pays may be expected to rise. By the sametoken, a drop in interest rates over an extended period of time willresult in a reduction in the interest income earned by a fund. Thisdecline in income earned may result in the fund being forced to cut thedividends paid to shareholders. Dividend income is only one way that your investment in a mutual fundcan grow. You also have the opportunity to receive capital gainsdistributions, which are distributions of any profits that your fundearns when it sells securities. Another possibility is the capital gain(or loss) you experience when you sell your shares at a higher (orlower) share price than your cost per share. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009850 WT01-B13-15IA018-000196-B040-86http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/whats_yield.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164400 text/html 6337HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:40:03 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:52:14 GMTContent-length: 6153Content-type: text/html What's In A Yield? How much income will your investment yield? That is a difficult questionto answer - although some investments promise a fixed return over aspecific period of time, mutual funds do not, and you cannot considerpast yield of a mutual fund a reliable predictor of future results. But if only for the purpose of comparing one investment choice withanother, it makes sense to pay attention to the stated yield of aninvestment. Mutual fund companies and depository institutions followboth regulation and convention in describing an investment's yield.Below we take a closer look at the various yields that you may seementioned in sales literature or advertisements. Annual percentage yield (APY): Income earned on a bank deposit (acertificate of deposit or money market deposit account, for example) isdescribed as an annual percentage yield. The yield reflects the totalamount of interest paid on a deposit account, based on the interest rateand the frequency of compounding for a 365-day period. Current yield: You will see a current - or seven-day - yield mentioned inmoney market fund advertising. This yield represents one week's incomeannualized as of a specific date. It does not include realized orunrealized gains and losses. Effective yield: Effective yield, in the context of fixed-priceinvestments such as money market funds or certificates of deposit,includes the effect of compounding net investment income. That's why aneffective yield will be higher than a quoted yield. To understand thedifference between the yield quoted on an investment and its effectiveyield, find out how frequently the income is assumed to be compounded.You'll note a greater difference when income is compounded weekly thanquarterly or semiannually. And, remember that effective yieldpresupposes that you reinvest all your income and that interest ratesremain constant. Current distribution rate: Current distribution rate is simply a measureof the level of dividends distributed by a mutual fund for a specifiedperiod. It may sometimes be greater than the fund's yield because, forinstance, it may include gains from the sale of short-term investmentsand possibly long-term gains (which may be non-recurring). SEC yield: The Securities and Exchange Commission requires all incomemutual funds to calculate a yield using the same standardized formula.According to the formula (which is included in Kemper funds' "Statement of Additional Information" or Part B), the SEC yield is netinvestment income per share earned over a specific month, expressed asan annualized percentage of the fund's maximum offering price (thefund's per share net asset value plus the maximum applicable salescharge) on the last day of that month. Taxable-equivalent yield: You'll find a taxable-equivalent yield cited inmaterial that accompanies investments in municipal bonds and mutualfunds that seek to earn income exempt from federal taxes. The stated orcoupon yield of these investments will likely be lower than the yield ofinvestments that are taxable. However, it's possible to calculate atax-equivalent yield that represents the yield that you would have toearn on a fully taxable investment before taxes to match the yield on atax-free investment. The marketing materials will tell you the federal(and state, if applicable) tax rates used as a basis for calculating thetaxable-equivalent yield. This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. Although yield will give you an idea of the income being generated byyour investment, total return is considered one of the best measures of the overallperformance of most mutual fund investments. (Because money market fundsseek to maintain a constant $1.00 share price, yield is the usualmeasure of their performance.) Total return is a measure of the income earned by the fund'sinvestments, plus the effect of any realized and unrealized appreciationor depreciation of the investments, during a stated period of time,assuming the reinvestment of all dividends. While yield measures onlythe income component of your fund shares, total return considers threecomponents: income dividends, capital gain dividends and changes in thevalue of your shares. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009860 WT01-B13-16IA018-000196-B040-97http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/miss_prospectus.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164415 text/html 2894HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:40:11 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:37 GMTContent-length: 2710Content-type: text/html What You Might Miss If You Don't Read The Prospectus Every mutual fund shareholder has been provided with a prospectus at onetime or another. Ah, but have you read the prospectus? Mutual fund prospectuses may look drearily alike but each fund companyuses the prospectus to describe its own investment policies andpractices. Most practices are reasonable and easy to understand - evenso, you'll be better off knowing them sooner rather than later. Here's a short list of what you might miss if you don't read theprospectus: Some fund companies assess a fee every time you reinvest yourdividends. Some fund companies assess a fee if you redeem your shares before aprescribed time period. Some fund companies impose a 30-day or longer waiting period beforethey'll exchange your shares from one fund into another. Some funds insist on the right to pay your redemption proceeds in"marketable securities" instead of cash in the case of largeredemptions. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1994 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009880 WT01-B13-17IA018-000196-B040-105http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/autoinvesting.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164425 text/html 7249HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:40:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:13 GMTContent-length: 7065Content-type: text/html The Benefits Of Automatic Investing Some of the best things you can do for yourself - eating vegetables,flossing your teeth and investing regularly - are the most difficulthabits to develop. None provides immediate gratification, and some aredownright disagreeable. There's no sugar surge from vegetables. Flossingcan be irritating. And when you invest a portion of your income, thatmoney is not available for you to spend. What, then, is the incentive toadopt these good habits? The payback for a lifetime of eating peas (and Brussels sprouts andasparagus and broccoli) is good health. Wedging that floss in and out ofyour teeth can spare you the expense and discomfort of repeatedvisits to the dentist. And people who invest regularly find theirmotivation by in the potential for positive long-term results.Although you can be given no guarantees, the decision to adopt a regularinvestment plan can be the beginning of yet another habit that can begood for you. Where do your investment dollars come from? Really, there are only twopossibilities. You might have a sizable amount of money (which we'll call a lump sum)that you want to put to work toward a short-term goal, such as thepurchase of a home, or a long-term goal, such as your retirement. Lumpsums can drop into your lap for any number of reasons - possibly youhave earned a bonus, received an inheritance or settled an insuranceclaim. No matter how it gets there, a lump sum distribution is anoccasion that requires an investment decision. But lump sum payments are infrequent occurrences. If you're like mostpeople, any money that you have to invest must come from your currentincome. You may use your income for other obligations and expenses, butif you're going to invest for your future, you're going to have do soout of today's income. Here's where you need discipline to develop the goodhabit to invest regularly. It's the enviable person who can sit down, pay his bills, buy what hewants and still have money left. It's the admirable person who followsthrough by taking the money that's left and investing it. It's the rareperson, indeed, who follows this regime every pay period. The rest of us need the discipline of an automatic investment program.Simply, an automatic investment program requires you to make thedecision to invest once. Once you've decided that you want to startinvesting now - as opposed to waiting for that day some point in thefuture when you get your lump sum - the automatic investment program cantake care of the rest. Where does your income come from? Whether it's from a paycheck, agovernment payment or a bank account, you can establish a regularprogram that will directly and automatically transfer a certain amountinto a mutual fund account. All you need to do is provide instructionsabout how much should be moved and into which fund account on what date. A program of automatic investing is easy to initiate, and this goodhabit can start with a relatively small sacrifice on your part. (AtKemper, the minimum monthly investment is $50.) In addition, a regular plan helps you develop a certain nonchalance.Once you've arranged to invest a fixed amount every paycheck or everymonth, you don't need to worry whether it's a "good" or "bad" time to bemaking an investment. When prices are high, your fixed investment willbuy fewer shares of your fund than when prices are low. Of course, whenthe price of your fund shares is low, you'll be able to accumulate moreshares. Market fluctuations shouldn't concern a regular investor with along-term investment horizon. You should realize, however, that an automatic investment program cannotassure a profit or protect against loss in a declining market. Sincethis type of program involves continuous investment regardless offluctuating share values, you'll need to consider your financial abilityto continue the program through periods of low price levels. As a Kemper shareholder, you have your choice of three automatic investment programs.* All are free of charge. You can arrange to have all or a portion of your paycheck investeddirectly into a Kemper fund. You can automatically invest directly from your checking account.Justselect the day each month that your money should be transferred to yourmutual fund account from your checking or savings account at any bank,savings institution or credit union.** If you receive Social Security checks or other regular paymentsfromthe U.S. government or any of its agencies, you can automatically investall or a portion of your government check directly into a Kemper fund. *Investments may be subject to a sales charge. Please consult yourprospectus for additional information. **In order for you to establish a Bank Direct Deposit plan, yourfinancial institution must be a member of the Automated Clearing HouseAssociation. Note that mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteedas bank products are, and mutual funds present a greater risk tocapital. For more information, talk to your financial representative or callKemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009900 WT01-B13-18IA018-000196-B040-113http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/track_investment.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164432 text/html 4670HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:40:35 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:47 GMTContent-length: 4486Content-type: text/html Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment To keep an eye on the progress of your investment, you can turn to many sourcesof information. Here's a quick review of what Kemper provides: Your quarterly statement. You'll find your fund's year-to-datetotal return through the end of the previous month and its averageannualtotal returns as of the closing date of the previous quarter shown inthe fund summary of your quarterly statement. Total return and average annual total return are a measure of netinvestment income and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments,assuming that dividends are reinvested. While total returns are notadjusted, average annual total returns are adjusted for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at theend of the period. Average annual total return reflects annualizedchange while total return reflects aggregate change. Our goal is to mail your statement as close to the end of the quarter aspossible, which restricts our ability to print your fund's returns as ofthe date of the close of that quarter. KemperACCESS. For up-to-date Kemper fund and account information 24hours a day, seven days a week, call our automated telephone responsesystem. By calling 1-800-972-3060 on a touch-tone telephone, you canreceive the following information: Account balance Most recent transactions Dividend earnings Current yields and returns Current net asset values Selected account transactions also are available. Are you a first-time caller? Don't be stumped when asked to enter yourPersonal Identification Number (PIN) - your PIN is the last four digitsof your Social Security number. (You can change your PIN by followingKemperACCESS instructions.) Instant Profiles. This quarterly publication presents performancedata about each fund in the Kemper family of funds. Asset size,portfoliocomposition and applicable duration and maturity information also arereported. Annual and semiannual shareholder reports. A comprehensive reportof your fund's six-month performance is mailed to you twice a year. Inityou will find an economic overview from Kemper's chief investmentofficer, a question-and-answer with the fund's portfolio manager anddetailed performance and financial data. Reminder: Please remember that the performance of your individualinvestment may differ from the total return reported by your fund. Thetotal return on your investment will depend on when you purchased yourshares, at what price and how you handle dividends and otherdistributions. Your financial representative is the best source you canturn to for help in reviewing your Kemper investment. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009920 WT01-B13-19IA018-000196-B040-121http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/sig_guarantee.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164439 text/html 3307HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:40:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:36 GMTContent-length: 3123Content-type: text/html What's A Signature Guarantee? As a precaution against those who have no right to your investeddollars, there are many circumstances when Kemper will require you toprovide a signature guarantee. A signature guarantee is a certification that attests to the genuinenessof your signature. The financial institution that you obtain theguarantee from - which could be a commercial bank, trust company,federal savings bank, savings institution, member of a nationalsecurities exchange or other type of eligible financial institution -warrants that you as the signer are an "appropriate" person and that youhave "legal capacity" to sign. This certification goes beyond what a notary public provides. A notaryattests only to the fact that he or she witnessed an individual sign adocument. Because a notary public does not guarantee that the individualwho signed the document truly is who he or she says he is, Kemper doesnot accept a notarized document where a signature guarantee is required. These are a few examples of when you'll be asked to provide a signatureguarantee: When you request any change in the registration of your mutual fundaccount. When you add certain privileges to an existing account. When you redeem more than $50,000 from your account or when you redeemany amount and request that the check be mailed to a different addressthan is shown on the account's registration. When you redeem an account and request that the check be mailed to anaddress that has been changed within the previous 30 days. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009930 WT01-B13-20IA018-000196-B040-132http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/waiveexp.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164449 text/html 4882HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:40:50 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:52:05 GMTContent-length: 4698Content-type: text/html Why Mutual Funds Waive Expenses Mutual funds pursuing the same investment objective can be compared on the basis of any number of characteristics. A significant difference between their returns, however, may be a sign that a fund is either having its operating expenses absorbed or management fees waived by its investment advisor. Although they're often offered on equity funds, you're most likely to notice the effect of an absorption or waiver in the yields of a bond or money market mutual fund. Their presence can explain how a fund is able to provide a relatively higher return to shareholders. A look at the fund's Summary of Expenses, which is included near the front of every mutual fund prospectus, usually will reveal whether expenses are being absorbed or fees are being waived. A footnote to the summary should disclose the existence and effects of an absorption or a waiver. The Financial Highlights of a fund, included in both the prospectus and fund financial statements, also show what the expense ratio and net investment income ratio would be with and without the waivers. This information will give you some idea of how the waivers affect performance. Investment advisors are most likely to absorb out-of-pocket expenses or to waive management fees when they have just introduced a fund. Although every fund is capitalized with seed money from the investment advisor, one of its goals is to grow as soon as possible. Every fund needs to attain a certain size in order to initiate investments, diversify and properly pursue its investment strategy. One of the best ways of attracting new assets is by lowering shareholder expenses and fees. The decision of how much to absorb and/or waive -- and for how long -- is more art than science. The difference must be enough to serve as an incentive. A new income fund whose fees and/or expenses are being waived may offer a 40 to 80 basis point (0.40 percent to .80 percent) yield advantage, for example. This tends to be sufficient to attract new shareholders. Waivers typically remain in place for a limited time, after which the investment advisor will gradually reinstate the waived costs and fees to the fund. It is hoped that the fund will be large enough to better absorb the waived fees by the time they are added back. Such waivers are common with fund introductions. Some investment advisors also make a practice of waiving the expenses and fees of a more mature fund. When this is done and the fund is thereby able to produce a higher yield, the investment advisor is making a marketing decision to incur the fund's expenses and forgo fee income in favor of asset growth for the fund. The reason for this strategy is that a larger fund will provide certain economies of scale that should lead to reduced ongoing costs. You should know, though, that an investment advisor typically reserves the right to stop the practice and reinstate the fund's true expenses and fees at any time. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014270 WT01-B13-21IA018-000196-B040-139http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/rainy_day.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164458 text/html 6131HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:41:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:13 GMTContent-length: 5947Content-type: text/html Do You Need A Rainy Day Fund? By definition, an emergency - an automobile accident, a sudden illness,the loss of a job - is something that's not planned. You can plan howyou're going to finance your child's education and you can prepare foryour eventual retirement, but how do you know how much money you mightneed in the case of an emergency? It's impossible to know. Yet the inability to predict exactly how much you may need should nothave the effect of discouraging your planning - sooner or later a littlerain is going to fall in everyone's life. When you experience the suddenoccurrence of an event that requires significant financial resources,you're going to want a rainy day fund. What's a rainy day fund? It's a sum of money that you set aside to beavailable when you need it. The rain may fall at any point, and yourfund should help bail you out. Once you decide to establish a rainy dayfund, the next two questions are: How much do you need to set aside andwhere will you keep it? As a general rule, some experts recommend that you keep the equivalentof your net income for three to six months in a readily availablesource. If you lose your job, for example, the rainy day fund shouldshield you from the elements until you can find a new one. (You may needto increase the amount of your reserve if you think that it will takelonger than six months to get a new job.) Projecting the amount of income you'd expect to have to replace willgive you one measure of how much you should have set aside. Analternative is to estimate the total expenses you'd need to meet whileyou were out of work or in the midst of any other financial crisis. Where will you keep your rainy day money? These are a few points toconsider when evaluating the suitability of a money market fund and anaccount at a financial institution: Stability. Remember that the purpose of this rainy day moneyis togive you peace of mind at a time when you're likely to be experiencingstress. An emergency is no time to find out that the dollars you'recounting on using have dwindled. Given their potential for price fluctuation, certain types of mutualfundsmay not be appropriate investments for an emergency fund. Money marketfunds, however, can be an alternative to financial institution accounts. Money market funds are neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S.government and there can be no assurance that a stable net asset valueof $1 per share will be maintained. Money market shares represent agreater risk to capital than certificates of deposit or savingsaccounts.While principal and interest in a savings account with a financialinstitution is guaranteed, and the account is generally insured by theFederal Deposit InsuranceCorporation. Access. The checkwriting privilege available with moneymarket fundsassures you immediate access to your rainy day fund no matter what timethe rain falls. Access to savings accounts will vary from financialinstitution to financial institution. If you keep invest your money in acertificate of deposit, however, remember that you may be subject to apenalty for early withdrawal. Yield. Unlike other investments you have, the earningability of yourrainy day fund may be of less concern to you. However, there areimportant differences between mutual fund and financial institutionaccounts. Money market funds, such as those offered by Kemper, seek to maximizecurrent income while maintaining the stability of the principal. Moneymarket fund yields generally fluctuate daily, responding to changes inprevailing interest rates. Mutual funds are required to distributesubstantially all of their income. Bank products offer fixed or variableyields that are set by the financial institution and changed at itsdiscretion. To obtain a Kemper Money Fundsprospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009780 WT01-B13-22IA018-000196-B040-148http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/dontdaydream.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164505 text/html 5489HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:41:08 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:31 GMTContent-length: 5305Content-type: text/html Do's And Don'ts For Daydreamers It's Saturday morning and you're indulging in a little daydreaming.While your financial advisors would prefer to think that you're dreamingabout financing your retirement, your dream this morning is about how toget that new car...or how to swing a week or two in the islands...or howto achieve just about any number of short-term investment goals. At one point or another, we all have to make some decisions about how toinvest for the short term. In the case of a bonus or inheritance or lumpsum distribution, you may have a plan for how you're going to use moneythat suddenly becomes available - yet you don't want it sitting idle inthe interim. On the other hand, you may want to set aside funds toward acertain goal you expect to reach in the not-so-distant future, such as anew car or vacation, and you want them to be earning until you need toaccess it. What do you do? Whatever you do (and you'll want to consult yourfinancial representative for specific advice), be sure to recognize thatyour approach to investing for the short-term will vary somewhat fromwhat you'd do as a long-term investor. These are just a few points that you'll want to keep in mind: In all likelihood, you are counting on a specific dollar amount toachieve your goal. The stability of your principal, then, will have tobe more important to you than its return. Remember that the pursuit ofhigher returns implies a higher level of risk. Because of your imminentneed for your money, you may not be able to withstand the degree ofvolatility that would be acceptable to someone who has committed his orher funds for the long term. You'll need an investment whose objectiveis preservation of capital. Access may be more important to you as a short-term investor. You'llwant to avoid investments that restrict (and these restrictions could bein the form of penalties on withdrawals or limited service hours) yourability to withdraw funds at any time. Pay attention to the fees that accompany investments. The feestructure of some investments assumes that you have an extendedinvestment horizon and expect to remain invested for years. That's true, for example, of mutual fund shares purchased in Class A andClass B of Kemper mutual funds. Class C shares of Kemper funds may bemost appropriate for investors who anticipate a relatively shortinvestment period. Investors in Class A shares pay an upfront sales charge, and investorsin Class B shares purchase their shares with the understanding thatredemptions during the first six years may be subject to a contingentdeferred sales charge. Class B shares also pay an annual distributionservices fee of 0.75 percent for six years. Class C provides analternative for those who want to be able to redeem their shares at anytime without charge. In lieu of a sales charge, an annual distributionservices charge of 0.75 percent is assessed on Class C shares. (Thesesomewhat higher expenses will result in lower income and capital gaindistributions on a per share basis than are earned on Class A shares,and the distribution fee for Class C shares remains in place regardlessof how long a shareholder owns the shares.) To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009790 WT01-B13-23IA018-000196-B040-160http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/downpayment.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164530 text/html 2737HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:41:21 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:43 GMTContent-length: 2553Content-type: text/html The Down Payment Just Gets You In The Door If you're saving to buy a home, the down payment on your purchase willmost likely be your first and largest hurdle. But, if you're like mosthome buyers, the spending doesn't stop once you've crossed the thresholdto your new home. Then you'll need funds for furnishings (furniture, householddecorations, kitchen housewares and floor and window coverings) andimprovements such as landscaping and the building of patios, fences anddriveways. According to calculations by the National Association of Home Builders,in the first three months after their purchase, new homeowners spend 25 to35 percent more of their income each month than non-moving homeownersdo. This burst of spending, which continues but at a slower pace for thenext several months, totals an estimated $6,475 in the first full yearafter the purchase. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1994 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009800 WT01-B13-24IA018-000196-B040-177http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/purchasing_car.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164541 text/html 3389HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:41:42 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:12 GMTContent-length: 3205Content-type: text/html Purchasing A New Car? The American dream of taking the wheel of a brand new automobile andheading down the highway has become a dream less available to the middleclass. According to Zurich Kemper Investments Economist David Hale, auto prices haverisen so sharply during recent years that today's new auto buyer has anaverage income that's about 40 percent above the national medianhousehold income. Ten years ago, new auto buyers had a household incomethat was about 20 percent above the national median, according to Hale. For the would-be car buyer, these higher auto prices may require a moreplanned, longer term investment strategy. To the economy and to automanufacturers, Hale says, "This compression in the share of populationnow able to qualify for new auto purchases has greatly increased thesensitivity of auto sales to factors that influence the income orconfidence of people in the top income quintile of the population." The1995 income tax hike, for example, hurt upper-income Americans andresulted in an auto slump, Hale says. The graph below tracks the U.S. average new car transaction price as apercentage of disposable income per household. As you can see, today'snew car buyer commits about as much of his or her disposable income asthe new car buyer in 1960. Over the last 35 years, 1973 was the lowpoint, when a new car purchase consumed the smallest amount of the buyer'sdisposable income. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009810 WT01-B13-25IA018-000196-B040-189http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/mmfbalan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164549 text/html 5413HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:41:51 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:42 GMTContent-length: 5229Content-type: text/html Money Market Funds Balance Income, Stability Many people know that a money market mutual fund strives to maintain a $1.00 net asset value per share. But how is this accomplished? Understanding how a money market mutual fund "works" requires some consideration of its investments. A money market fund typically has two objectives: to generate income and to preserve principal, which is represented by net asset value (NAV). The desire to preserve principal guides the fund manager's selection of income-producing investments -- a money fund invests in high quality, short-term securities. The high quality is intended to help guard the fund against credit risk while short maturities are intended to help reduce exposure to interest rate risk. These are a few of the possible investments that a money market fund might include in its portfolio: Obligations of or guaranteed by the U.S. government, its agencies or instrumentalities. Short-term government obligations are considered to be the safest short-term investments. (Of course, any U.S. government guarantee of the securities owned by the portfolio does not guarantee the net asset value of its shares.) Commercial paper obligations with very high ratings. This is a form of unsecured debt issued by corporations -- their good name and financial strength is the investor's security. Commercial paper can range in maturity from 1 to 270 days, with the interest rate generally rising with the time to maturity. Bank certificates of deposit (CDs). A money market mutual fund will often purchase large denomination ($100,000-plus) bank CDs. The rate of return on a CD is commensurate with its size and length of term to maturity. Repurchase agreements. In a repurchase agreement (also called a repo), the money fund will buy primarily U.S. government or agency obligations from a dealer on the condition that the dealer will repurchase the security back at a mutually agreed upon time and price. Such an agreement enables the manager to "lock in" a maturity and yield. The short-term nature of the investments in the portfolio requires continual monitoring of events. Fiscal policy (such as federal taxation and spending plans), monetary policy (particularly the Federal Reserve Board's action on interest rates) and legislative policy also can influence how a money fund manager will invest. If a manager expects interest rates to rise, the fund might have a much shorter average maturity -- so when assets are sold, the proceeds can be invested at the higher rates. On the other hand, if the forecast calls for a decline in interest rates, the manager might want to invest in longer maturity investments to benefit from higher interest rates as long as possible. Again, all investment decisions are based within the framework of preserving principal. To obtain a Kemper Money Funds prospectus in addition to those you already have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now. The prospectus contains more complete information including management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. An investment in a money market fund is neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government, and there can be no assurance that the fund will be able to maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00 per share. This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1996 issue of Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014280 WT01-B13-26IA018-000196-B040-200http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/encourageinv.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164557 text/html 3550HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:42:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:47 GMTContent-length: 3366Content-type: text/html Encourage The Habit of Investing What's one of the best gifts you can give your child? Parents who teachtheir children "that money you put away is not gone forever" havesignificantly influenced their children's retirement savings habits,according to B. Douglas Bernheim, an academic economist at StanfordUniversity. Bernheim says his research has demonstrated a strong link betweenchildhood experiences and adult behavior. Specifically, individuals whowere encouraged to maintain a bank account as a child saved 108 percentmore for their retirement when they became adults than those who did nothave a childhood bank account. Children who received allowances saved 36percent more as adults, according to Bernheim. If you'd like to use a mutual fund to reinforce the importance ofinvesting for tomorrow, it is possible to establish an account in thechild's name. The account will be set up according to the rules of theUniform Gift to Minors Act (UGMA) or Uniform Transfer to Minors Act(UTMA). The custodian you select when establishing the gift account willhave exclusive control of the investment until the child comes of age(age 18 or 21 depending upon your state of residence). However,duplicate copies of the quarterly statement can be mailed to the child.And, of course, the child can participate by monitoring the progress ofhis or her investment every day in the newspaper, on financialtelevision programs or via on-line computer services. To obtain a Kemper Mutual Fund prospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009710 WT01-B13-27IA018-000196-B040-211http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/collegeplan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164606 text/html 3385HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:42:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:17 GMTContent-length: 3201Content-type: text/html College Planning Junior year. Years ago it was considered the best year in high school -those gawky years were all but forgotten but it was still too soon tofret about college. Unfortunately, that's not the case today - at leastnot for the parents of a high school junior. In fact, some financialplanning should take place when the student is a sophomore. The year before a student heads for college is the pivotal year used bymany financial aid officers to determine financial aid eligibility. Yourincome and assets will be reviewed each year but the so-called firstbase income year is the one that sets the precedent. The base yearstarts on January 1 of the student's junior year to December 31 of thatyear (when, if all has gone well, the student is halfway through senioryear). The following are a few tips from the Detroit News-Free Press on how toimprove your chances for qualifying for aid: Cash in U.S. savings bonds earmarked for college before the baseincome year begins. Once the cash is in the bank, it's considered anasset, not income. Financial aid offices expect parents to devote asmuch as 47 percent of their income to college but only 5.65 percent oftheir assets. If you usually get large income tax refunds, reduce your withholdingthe year before the base income year. Refunds show up as income thefollowing year for taxpayers who itemize. Try to have bonuses paid in a year other than the base income year.Avoid all pension or IRA distributions. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1994 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009720 WT01-B13-28IA018-000196-B041-9http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/how_kempergift.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164627 text/html 3277HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:42:19 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 20:31:29 GMTContent-length: 3093Content-type: text/html How To Give The Gift Of A Kemper Mutual Fund There are many gifts you can give a special youngster, but very few havethe potential to appreciate over time. A Kemper fund investmentprovides the opportunity to grow with a child - without getting lost,broken or forgotten as the child matures. Whether your gift will help finance college or other future needs, amutual fund can be one of the most significant gifts a child can receivebecause the more time it has to grow, the greater value a mutual fundcan potentially provide. Kemper offers several mutual funds that could be well suited for achild's portfolio because of their long-term investment objectives. And,according to the Uniform Gift to Minors Act (UGMA) or Uniform Transferto Minors Act (UTMA), a mutual fund gift to a child can provide certaintax benefits, based on current law in most states. For more information about giving the gift of a Kemper fund, please call your financial representative or Kemper Shareholder Services 1-800-621-1048. We'll be happy to send you a gift kit, including prospectuses containing more complete details about custodial accounts and an attractive gift card and envelope. The Kemper Funds teddy bear is a perfect companion to the gift of a Kemper Funds account to a child. Click here to order it - or other gift items - from our Kemper Funds Logo Wear catalog. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010100-B WT01-B13-29IA018-000196-B041-24http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/how_comparefund.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164641 text/html 8138HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:42:43 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:35:50 GMTContent-length: 7953Content-type: text/html How The Gift Of A Mutual Fund Compares With The Gift Of A U.S. Savings Bond Many parents, grandparents, aunts and uncles have traditionally givenU.S. savings bonds to children. U.S. savings bonds can be given directlyor transferred according to the rules of the Uniform Gift to Minors Act(UGMA) or Uniform Transfer to Minors Act (UTMA). The only way to give aKemper fund gift to a child is to establish an UGMA/UTMA account.Here's how the gift of a U.S. savings bond compares to the gift of aKemper fund account. (Series EE with May 1, 1995, or later issue dates) Establishing an UGMA/UTMA requires $1,000 or $50 a month according tothe terms of an automatic monthly investment program. Savings bonds are available in denominations ranging from $50 to$10,000. Kemper offers a range of funds with varying objectives. At one end of the risk/return spectrum are funds whose primary objective is the growth of capital (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, Kemper Technology Fund and Kemper Asian Growth Fund). At the other end of the risk/return spectrum are Kemper money market funds whose objective is maximum current income consistent with the stability of principal. Mutual funds are neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government and present greater risk to capital than U.S. savings bonds. Returns and net asset value will fluctuate. Money market funds seek to maintain a stable $1 share value, although there can be no assurance that they will. Investment by Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund and Kemper Technology Fund in smaller companies presents greater risk than an investment in larger, more established companies. Also, investment in international securities presents special risk considerations including exchange rates, government regulations and differences in liquidity. A savings bond is purchased at half its face value or denomination andit is guaranteed to accrue interest until it equals its face value. Previously, a guaranteed minimum interest rate enabled investors toproject how long they'd need to hold the bond before it reached itsvalue. Starting May 1, 1995, the U.S. Treasury abandoned its practice ofoffering a guaranteed minimum rate in favor of "market-based rates" thatwill be set on May 1 and November 1 of every year. On savings bonds less than five years old, the U.S. Treasury pays 85 percentof the average of six-month Treasury security yields or 4.56 percentas of November 1, 1996. Rates paid on savings bonds that are five years or older are85% of the average of five-year Treasury security yields or 5.53 percentas of November 1, 1996. If a savings bond earning market rates has not reached face value after17 years, the government will make a one-time adjustment to make theredemption value at least equal to the face amount. Unless distributed, the earnings of a mutual fund are reflected in thefund's net asset value, which is updated each day the New York StockExchange is open for trading. The redemption price on any given day isbased on the current net asset value. Distributions of any income or capital gains may be taken in cash orreinvested in additional shares at net asset value. Previously, interest on the U.S. savings bond was credited monthly.Starting with savings bonds sold on May 1, 1995, interest is creditedsix months after its issue date and every six months thereafter. Theinvestor who redeems a savings bond between scheduled interest accrualdates will not receive interest for the partial period. The Series EE U.S. savings bond stops earning interest after 30 years. The custodian you select when establishing the gift account will haveexclusive control of the investment until the child comes of age (age 18or 21 depending upon your state of residence). If the savings bond you give is not established as an UGMA/UTMA, a financial institution will generally allow a minor to cash ina savings bond if the child is old enough to understand the transactionand can sign his or her name. If a custodial account is established, thecustodian you select will have exclusive control of the investment untilthe child comes of age (age 18 or 21 depending upon your state ofresidence). U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. The Standard & Poor's 500 U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. Kemper Funds © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010110-B WT01-B13-30IA018-000196-B041-39http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/tax_consgift.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164657 text/html 4427HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:42:59 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:37:08 GMTContent-length: 4242Content-type: text/html What Are The Tax Consequences For Gift-Givers? Both the gift of a mutual fund and the gift of a U.S. savings bondqualify for the $10,000 annual gift tax exclusion. If your spouseconsents and you file IRS Form 709 (this form can be retrieved from the IRS web site), you and your spouse may give up to$20,000 per year tax-free to each child. In addition, the establishment of an UGMA/UTMA for a mutual fund gift(which is the only way an investment in a Kemper fund can begiven to a child) or for a U.S. savings bond provides certain taxbenefits. If you establish an UGMA/UTMA and as long as the child'sincome tax return is filed separately from yours, the first $650 inearnings from your gift is tax-free until the year in which the childturns 14. The second $650 in earnings from the gift is taxed at thechild's income tax rate which, presumably, is the lowest federal taxrate of 15 percent. Any earnings above $1,300 are taxed at the parent'sincome tax rate (subject to annual adjustment for inflation). After the child reaches 14, all income beyond the first $650 in earningsfrom the gift is taxed at his or her income tax rate. These rules applyregardless of who makes the gift. You should note that there are additional tax benefits available to aU.S. savings bondholder, whether the bond is received directly orthrough the UGMA/UTMA. For example, earnings on U.S. savings bonds arefree of state and local taxes. Also, the bondholder can choose todeclare earned interest each year or defer declaring the interest untilthe bond is redeemed or the date interest stops accruing, which is after30 years. There are some mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds (click here to learn about Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds) and offerincome free of federal and, in some cases, state and local taxes. Aportion of the income may be subject to the alternative minimum tax forcertain investors. The appropriateness of investing in such mutual fundsmay depend on the child's income tax rate. For more information about giving the gift of a Kemper fund, send us an e-mail now or call your financial representative or Kemper Shareholder Servicesat (800) 621-1048. We'll be happy to send you a gift kit, including prospectuses containing more complete details about the funds, includingcharges and expenses, additional information about custodial accountsand a convenient gift card and envelope. Please be sure to read theprospectus carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016180-B WT01-B13-31IA018-000196-B041-50http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/twentyyears.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164711 text/html 4291HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:43:13 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:38:02 GMTContent-length: 4106Content-type: text/html U.S. Savings Bonds vs. The Standard & Poor's 500 Hypothetical Illustration Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Public Debt, Hypo® (Hypo® is a registered service mark of Towers Data Systems, Bethesda, Maryland) If you had invested $1,000 in U.S. savings bonds 20 years ago, you wouldhave been guaranteed a steady increase in your investment. No suchassurance was available from the stock market, as you can see from theup and down performance of the Standard & Poor's 500 index. However,the return on $1,000 invested in the stock market, as represented by theS&P 500, would have been more than three times the return on the U.S.savings bonds. The data for both the U.S. savings bonds and the S&P500 track the performance of $1,000 invested from October 1, 1976, throughSeptember 30, 1996. This information is historical and does not represent future performanceof the S&P 500 index or U.S. savings bonds. The S&P 500 is anunmanaged index of common stocks that's generally considered representative of theU.S. stock market. The performance of the index is not intended to be representative of the past or future performance of any Kemper capital growth fund. There are important differences between the S&P 500 stocks and U.S. savings bonds. For example,stocks have fluctuating investment return and principal while a U.S. savings bond has a fixed principal and is guaranteed by the U.S. government to accrue interest until the principal and accrued interest equal the face value of the savings bond. How much is your U.S. savings bond worth today? A calculator available through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York web site will enable you to compute the redemption value of a savings bond. U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. Kemper Funds © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including management fees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from your financial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (800) 621-1048 or request one now. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. 1010140-B WT01-B13-32IA018-000196-B041-60http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/bondsvsfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164718 text/html 4457HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:43:21 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:26:22 GMTContent-length: 4272Content-type: text/html  U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. Kemper Funds If you had invested $1,000 in U.S. savings bonds 20 years ago, you would have been guaranteed a steady increase in your investment. No such assurance was available from investments, which go up and down. (See U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. The Standard & Poor's 500.) Kemper Funds Outperformed U.S. Savings Bonds Each of the six Kemper Funds with a 20-year history also outperformed the 20-year return of the U.S. savings bond. To view a comparison of the 10/1/76 to 9/30/96 performance of $1,000 invested in a U.S. savings bond and one of the six Kemper Funds in existence on 10/1/76, select a Kemper Fund and click on the compare button. Kemper Growth FundKemper Income and Capital Preservation FundKemper Municipal Bond FundKemper Small Capitalization Equity FundKemper Technology FundKemper Total Return Fund Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Public Debt, Hypo® (Hypo® is a registered service mark of Towers Data Systems, Bethesda, Maryland) This information is historical and does not represent future performance of Kemper Funds, the S&P 500 index or U.S. savings bonds. The S&P 500 is an unmanaged index of common stocks that's generally considered representative of the U.S. stock market. There are important differences between these investments. For example, stocks have fluctuating investment return and principal while bonds have both fixed principal and return if held to maturity and their value will vary prior to maturity. A U.S. savings bond has a fixed principal and is guaranteed by the U.S. government to accrue interest until the principal and accrued interest equal the face value of the savings bond. Please note that investments by Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund and Kemper Technology Fund in small companies presents greater risk than investments in larger, more established companies. An investor may not make a direct investment in the S&P 500. How much is your U.S. savings bond worth today? A calculator available through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York web site will enable you to compute the redemption value of a savings bond. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024590 WT01-B13-33IA018-000196-B041-83http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/factscustodial.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164739 text/html 7751HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:43:41 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:41:01 GMTContent-length: 7566Content-type: text/html About Custodial Accounts It's easy to open a gift account at Kemper. And, if the gift isestablished to meet the requirements of your state's Uniform Gift toMinors Act (UGMA) or Uniform Transfer to Minors Act (UTMA), it can enjoyunique tax benefits. According to current Uniform Gift rules, you canopen a mutual fund account in a child's name and designate yourself, aspouse or a friend to administer it until the youngster reaches adultage. It is not necessary that the custodian be a parent. Q: How do I establish a gift account with Kemper? A: Simply obtain the child's Social Security number and appoint acustodian to manage the account. Complete a new account application,making certain to check the box in Section 1, "Gift to a Minor," andenter the names of the custodian and minor where indicated. The minimum investment amount for a custodial account is $1,000 unlessyou establish an automatic investment plan, in which case you can set upan account for as little as $50. If you choose to establish an automaticinvestment plan, be sure to complete Section 12 on the application. Q: What are the responsibilities of the custodian? A: The custodian for the account controls the money - how it isinvestedand spent - until the child legally comes of age. In most cases, thelegal age is 18 or 21 for the purposes of the Uniform Acts. However,some states allow custodianship to extend beyond the age of majority. Here's a tip to bear in mind: As a parent, if you name yourself ascustodian and you die before your child becomes an adult (an adult isoften defined by the statutes as either age 18 or 21), the value of the gift account may beincluded as part of your estate for federal tax purposes. In this case, youmay wish to consult your tax advisor about alternatives such as namingsome person other than yourself as custodian. Or, if you and your spouse make the giftjointly, consider a third-party custodian. Q: What happens when the child reaches the age of majority? A: When the child reaches the adult age designated by the stateforending the custodianship, the assets are his or hers to spend or toinvest in any way. The money you invest on behalf of a child isconsidered an irrevocable gift. The account you've established in onechild's name, for example, cannot be transferred to the name of anotherminor. Q: What Kemper funds may I establish a gift account in? A: Kemper offers a range of funds that could be well suited for achild's portfolio. (Click here to view the Kemper Funds Risk/Return Spectrum.) Your financial representative can help answer yourspecific investing questions. Q: What are the tax benefits of establishing a gift account for achild? A: For children under the age of 14, the Internal Revenue Servicetreatsa child's first $650 of unearned income ("unearned" means notrepresenting compensation for services) as tax-free. The second $650 ofunearned income is taxed at the child's marginal tax rate of 15 percent.Any unearned income over $1,300 is taxed at the parent's top marginaltax rate. (The parent's rate applies even if the gift comes from someoneelse). This means that for an investment earning a hypothetical 8percent* annually, you could have up to $16,250 in the child's name andstill qualify for favorable tax treatment on the $1,300 of income. Forchildren 14 years and older (at the end of the tax year), all earningsafter the first $650 are taxed at the child's tax rate. You can further enhance the potential tax benefits of the gift bychoosing an investment strategy that emphasizes capital appreciationover income. While income dividends are taxed up to the highest marginaltax rate of 39.6 percent, the current maximum tax on capital gains is 28percent. Growth stocks often pay low or no dividends because earningsare needed to finance further growth. That being the case, capital growthfunds may be better from a current tax perspective (especially forchildren under age 14). Keep in mind, however, that capital growth mutualfunds often make an annual distribution of any realized capital gains which would be taxable when distributed. The procedures for calculating the tax for children under age 14 can bevery complex, with the amount of tax dependent upon both the type ofincome (earned versus unearned) and the amount of deductions offsettingthat income. Additional information may be found in the U.S. Savings Bond Investor Information Guide, which is available from the Savings Bond page of the U.S. Treasury web site. You may wish to consult with a tax, legal or other advisorfor more information, particularly if these gifts are to be part of alarger financial plan. Please call Kemper's Shareholder Servicesrepresentatives at (800) 621-1048 for answers to administrativequestions. *This assumed rate is for purposes of the illustration only and is notintended to represent the return of a specific investment, which willfluctuate. Q: Does a Kemper Fund gift account qualify for the gift taxexclusion? A: Yes, an UGMA gift qualifies for the $10,000 annual gift taxexclusion. If your spouse consents and you file IRS Form 709 (this form can be retrieved from the IRS web site), you andyour spouse may give up to $20,000 per year tax-free to each child. This material must be preceded or accompanied by a Kemper Funds prospectus. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus please call Shareholder Services at (800) 621-1048, or request one now. The prospectus contains more complete informationincluding management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully beforeyou invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010130-B WT01-B13-34IA018-000196-B041-105http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/special_planning.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164759 text/html 4175HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:02 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:40 GMTContent-length: 3991Content-type: text/html Pre-Retirees Have Special Planning Pressures Anyone can leap tall buildings in a single bound.Dodging speeding bullets is overrated.But who can plan a retirementwhen theyhave their own job to do,are worried about getting their kids started out right in lifeand are helping their parents age comfortably? If anyone can fill the tights of a superhero, it has to be today's 50- to 64-year-olds. If you're in that age group, you know what the pressures are: Eight out of 10 pre-retirees (those in the 50-plus generation) have adult children, almost one-third of whom live with their parents. Many parents who married "later in life" are paying all or some of their children's college expenses.* In part because their parents married and had their children "early" in their lives, half of all pre-retirees have at least one living parent; 22 percent have two living parents. Considering their in-laws, as well, 70 percent of pre-retirees have a parent for whom they have some financial responsibilities.* Between 16 and 30 percent of the 50-plus generation are estimated to have set aside nothing toward their retirement due, for the most part, to financial difficulties.** Women in this generation often quit full-time employment to spend 18 hours a day or more serving as a home nurse without pay.*** Well, superhero, we'd like you to walk back into that telephone booth and transform yourself into plain old average Clark or Clarkina Kent - who will be retiring in the next 10 to 15 years. We'd like you to contemplate your retirement and how you might prepare for it. (And if it helps at all, you might want to think of your retirement years as one powerful locomotive barreling toward you.) *Source: Concerns of Adults in Their Pre-Retirement Years, conducted for the American Association of Retired Persons by Princeton Survey Research Associates, January 1994. **Source: Retirement Savings in America, The Fifth Annual Merrill Lynch Retirement Planning survey, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc. 1993. ***Source: New Passages: Mapping Your Life Across Time, Gail Sheehy, Random House, New York, 1995. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018650 WT01-B13-35IA018-000196-B041-120http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/get_ready.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164807 text/html 4925HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:09 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:14 GMTContent-length: 4741Content-type: text/html Get Ready To Retire! You're looking good, you're active, maybe you're a top performer at work. The fact remains that it's time to start thinking about a new, imminent responsibility - as a retiree. Are you ready? With a life expectancy longer than any generation before you, you had better be. (Haven't you heard - superheroes live forever!) Of course, you may expect to always be there for your parents, for your children and for your dear friends. But who are you turning to for help? There's no need to make your retirement planning decisions on your own. For a comprehensive overview of the range of investments available and their suitability for your circumstances, call on a financial representative. For your retirement years, you may need about 70 to 80 percent of the salary you made in yourhighest earning years. How much can you count on from Uncle Sam? You can go toSocial Security Online or call 1-800-772-1213 to requestan Earnings and Benefit Statement (SSA-7004) from the Social Security Administration. The statementestimates your future benefits. Are you counting on your employer to provide more than just a gold watch at retirement? Depending on your age and years of service, you may qualify for a full, partial or no pension at all from your employer. You'll want to ask your company pension plan administrator for details about your company's vesting, distribution (lump sum or rollover) and payment options. Of course you would be, when you consider the total sum that you may need to finance a 30-year retirement. One suggestion: Focus on the amount of money that you'll need on a monthly basis, and your financial representative may be able to develop an investment plan capable of meeting your monthly needs. As important as all your other responsibilities may be to you, now is the time for you to make tracks in planning for the retirement that you deserve. The Social Security Administration and your employer can tell you about how much they'll be contributing - the question is: What more can you do? Leaping into action on your personal saving and investing now can help make a big difference 10 years from now. Get ready to retire! This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018640 WT01-B13-36IA018-000196-B041-138http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/early_ira.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164816 text/html 9064HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:45 GMTContent-length: 8880Content-type: text/html How Early IRA Contributions Can Add Up Have you ever stopped to consider what you're missing out on bywaiting until the last possible minute to make your Individual Retirement Account (IRA) contribution? Making a contribution just in the nick of time has become standardpractice for many taxpayers. It's understandable, perhaps, for taxpayerswho qualify for a tax-deductible contribution - they can use alast-minute IRA contribution to reduce the amount of income they'll paytax on. But, because their annual incomes exceed the current IRS limits,many taxpayers cannot qualify for a tax-deductible IRA. The benefit ofan IRA to all taxpayers is the ability to build a retirementaccount whose earnings can grow free from taxes until the account isdistributed, at which time they may be taxed as ordinary income. (Distributions prior to 59 1/2may be subject to a 10 percent penalty.) The opportunity to build an IRA - through an annual contribution of amaximum of $2,000 - becomes available every year, starting on January 1of the tax year. This "window of opportunity" remains open until, inmost years, April 15 of the next year. Are you sneaking through that window on the last possible date? If youare, you're foregoing a maximum of 15 months of potential earnings thatcan compound free from current taxes! We'll show you why it can be toyour advantage to be ready with your IRA contribution when the windowopens rather than when it's closing. Many savvy IRA investors havealready made and/or are making their 1996 tax year contributions now. We can think of at least four other dates when contributing to your IRAmakes more sense. The true benefit of the IRA is its ability to compound earnings that arenot taxed until a distribution is made. The sooner you make yourcontribution, the sooner your investment can start working on a tax-deferred basis for you. Toillustrate, we've selected four dates to show how the earnings of ahypothetical fixed-income investment could grow, in the tax year aloneand over a period of 30 years ending on April 15. And to give you anidea of the value of tax-deferred investing, we also show how much thesame hypothetical investment dollars would earn over the same timeperiod - if their earnings were taxed every year. We assume a 36% incometax rate in this example. To illustrate the powerful effect of tax-deferred income growth, we'vehad to assume a specific fixed growth rate - we've used 8 percent,compounded monthly. This assumed rate is for illustrative purposes onlyand is not intended to represent performance of any specific investment,which will fluctuate. A program of regular investing cannot assume aprofit nor protect against a loss in a declining market. Since this typeof program involves continuous investment regardless of fluctuating sharevalues, you'll need to consider your financial ability to continuethe program through periods of low price levels. More importantthan the absolute numbers, then, is the growth of an investmentinitiated early in the tax year versus the growth of an investmentinitiated on the last possible date each year. Hypothetical Illustration If you made a $2,000 contribution to an IRA on the last possible date(April 15) every year for 30 years How much you'd have accumulated in an IRA in a 30-year period ending onApril 15 How much you'd have accumulated if the earnings on your investment had been subject to current taxes The value of the tax-deferral over 30 years $259,289 $145,791 $113,498 Hypothetical Illustration Now let's take a look at what you would have accumulated if youinvested earlier for each tax year Investment Date By the tax filing date of April 15, your investment would have already grown to Investing on the same early date every year for 30 years would haveincreased your IRA to How much you'd have accumulated if the earnings on your investment hadbeen subject to current taxes The value of the tax-deferral over 30 years On New Year's Day Start the year out right by taking full advantage of an IRA. $2,210 $290,713 $159,563 $131,150 On April 15 As long as you're in the habit of making a contribution on this date -the difference is that you'll be gaining a full year's worth ofcompounding. $2,166 $282,976 $155,538 $127,438 On June 21 Summer solstice is the longest day of the year - surely you'll be ableto find some time to set aside funds for your future. $2,138 $279,240 $154,219 $125,021 On Labor Day* Do you want to work for the rest of your life? An investment on this daywill help your retirement plans. $2,095 $273,729 $152,262 $121,467 *Our calculations used September 4 of each year. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009910 WT01-B13-37IA018-000196-B041-151http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/dontretdist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164833 text/html 6349HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:32 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:43 GMTContent-length: 6165Content-type: text/html Don't Touch Your Retirement Plan Distribution! So, congratulations are in order. You've just gotten a new job and wellwishes abound. You're feeling on top of the world when you hear from arepresentative of your (soon-to-be-former) company's retirement plan:What are your plans for the sum that's been accumulating in your name? Of course, you're going to be tempted. (It's how much?) But this is morethan a left side of the brain/right side of the brain problemconfronting you. From a tax perspective, deciding whether to take yourdistribution in cash or whether to roll it over is a struggle betweenright and wrong. What should you do with your retirement plan distribution? This is oneof very few topics on which investment advisors are in completeagreement. Conventional Wisdom The "right" answer to the question, "What should I do with myretirement plan distribution?" is based on a few assumptions: Because your contribution to your retirement plan is deducted fromyour pay even before you see it (matched in some cases by employercontributions), retirement plans are among the easiest ways to plan fora comfortable future. Time has a value of its own. You can never recover the time you'vealready spent building a tax-deferred retirement plan. Investments that compound on a tax-deferred basis (without theircurrent balances being reduced by the need to pay taxes every year) havehigher earning potential. By virtue of their tax-deferred status, retirement plans areendorsedby the federal government - conversely, the government penalizes mostpremature (before the age of 59 1/2) distributions fromretirementplans. Most investors go out of their way to minimize the amount they payinfederal income tax. Your decision You are 30 years old and your plan payout totals $20,000. You have three choices: 1. You can take your distribution in cash. Do that and, assuming you're in the 28 percent tax bracket, you will owethe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 28 percent of $20,000 or $5,600 incurrent income taxes. Plus, as a general rule, you'll have to pay a 10percent penalty, or $2,000 more, for taking the distribution beforereaching age 59 1/2. You'll have $12,400 left from your plan. 2. You can take your distribution in cash and move it into anIndividualRetirement Account (IRA) or you may be able to move the cash into aqualified retirement plan of your new company within 60 days ofreceiving the check. Your employer is required by the IRS to withhold 20 percent of yourdistribution ($4,000) as a prepayment of your potential tax liability.You won't owe current income taxes on the remaining amount - $16,000 -as long as you roll it over within 60 days. Even if you roll over the $16,000 cash distribution within 60 days,you'll owe current income taxes (28 percent of $4,000 or $1,120) andapplicable early withdrawal penalties (10 percent of $4,000 or $400) onthe $4,000 your employer paid to the IRS. The difference between the$4,000 prepayment and the $1,520 in income taxes due represents a taxcredit, which the IRS will refund to you (less any additional incometaxes you may owe) after you file your tax return. 3. You could request your employer to transfer your distributiondirectly into an IRA or possibly into a qualified retirement plan ofyour new company. Where should your distribution be invested? Yourfinancial representative can review the possibilities with you. Selecting this option would keep all $20,000 of your plan assets workingfor you and you'd continue todefer taxes until you withdraw money from your account. The hypothetical examples in the above graph assume a 28 percent incometax bracket and an 8 percent return, compounded monthly. This assumedrate of return is for illustrative purposes only and is not intended torepresent performance of any specific investment, which may fluctuate.IRA and qualified retirement plan assets will be subject to currentincome taxes at the time of withdrawal, under current tax law.Calculations assume a 28 percent annual income tax liability on theamount invested in a taxable investment. Please consult your financial representative or tax advisorconcerningthe full effect of taxes and distributions. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1995 issue ofKemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009730 WT01-B13-38IA018-000196-B041-165http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/ret_online.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164841 text/html 2456HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:28 GMTContent-length: 2272Content-type: text/html Retirement Planner Online The Kemper Retirement Dream Planner is a slide-rule calculator thatguides you through a few simple calculations designed to help youestimate how much money you'll need to realize your retirement dreams.When you adjust the calculator according to your age, annual salary andcurrent investment and savings balances, the calculator can help youplan how much more you'll need to invest each month - assuming threehypothetical rates of return - to generate your desired level ofretirement income. Ask your financial representative for a Kemper Retirement DreamPlanner or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009740 WT01-B13-39IA018-000196-B041-176http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/nat_council.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164848 text/html 3117HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:51 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:53:01 GMTContent-length: 2933Content-type: text/html National Council On The Aging In advertisements and newspaper articles and from your financialrepresentative directly, you'll be hearing a lot about retirementplanning from Kemper Funds in 1996. Retirement planning is a processthat can never be started too soon and should continue throughout one'sretirement years. As a means of demonstrating our commitment to retirees and enhancing ourunderstanding of older adults, Kemper has become a corporate member ofthe National Council on the Aging (NCOA). The NCOA is a 35-year-oldprivate nonprofit organization whose educational programs andpublications are designed to "make life better for older Americans andtheir families." We at Kemper are proud of the NCOA's approval of several of ourretirement planning brochures, and we look forward to its counsel as weundertake additional projects designed to address the needs of an agingAmerica. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009750-A WT01-B13-40IA018-000196-B041-186http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/price_retdream.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164856 text/html 6779HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:44:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:11 GMTContent-length: 6595Content-type: text/html The Price Of Your Retirement Dream It's easy for us to put a price tag on what your retirement dream coststoday. Much more difficult is your job - you need to project what itwill take to realize that dream tomorrow, six months or 30 years fromnow. What do you want to do in your retirement and what financial resourcesdo you need to accomplish those dreams? These are the two questions that both retirees and those not yet retiredmust ask and answer as they plan for an unknown future. Whether we like it or not, money is a means to an end, and that'sparticularly true when it comes to retirement. Indeed, your financialstate can dictate your retirement age. Today, according to research by Georgetown University, 63 is the medianretirement age for both men and women. Many of those who continue towork beyond age 63 are those who feel their financial resources areinsufficient. Americans' retirement income comes from four basic sources - SocialSecurity, asset income, pensions and earnings. The percentagecontributed by each has been shifting over the years, with the declinein Social Security income being the most notable change. How much total income is needed to finance the retirement you've dreamedabout? You must consider the income and growth potential of your assetsagainst your retirement objectives. Be forewarned: This will be ananalysis chocked with imponderables - prevailing inflation rates, yourage at retirement, how long you live after you retire, the size of yourSocial Security and employee benefits, your post-retirement obligationsand your plans. Establishing and following through on an investment plan that can takeyou to retirement and beyond can be a daunting task. To keep yourselfmotivated, we suggest that you visualize your dream and work toward it.Every individual has his or her own vision of retirement, of course.Generally, though, as a retiree you ought to be able to... After years of meeting a work schedule, you're free to go whenever andwherever you please. Your dream may be to travel to see new sights and or stroll downdifferent streets. For a permanent change of scenery or climate, you maywant to relocate. Then again, you may not want to go anywhere. In a 1992 AmericanAssociation of Retired Persons survey, more than eight out of 10 peopleaged 55 and older said they'd like to stay in their current homes. Ifthat's your decision, your retirement income should provide for you tocover your maintenance expenses. Let someone else mow the lawn or shovelthe snow. You may want to invest in some modifications that enable youto stay in your home as long as you want. Kemper estimates that the typical retiree needs at least 75 percent ofhis or her pre-retirement income to live comfortably. Some expenses -such as those related to transportation or clothes for work - decline atretirement. But health care and certain other expenses tend to rise. It's been said that in retirement, time no longer equals money. That canbe good and bad. The "spending" of time can be directed on what may nothave been possible to do before - line dancing at a country westernclub, whiling away hours in a fine art gallery or serving a church. Yet many retirees become nervous at the thought that instead of devotingthe majority of their time to an income-generating occupation, they aredoing nothing but consuming. Retirees are acutely aware that everythinghas a price, and that their spending depletes the assets they workedyears to build. To enjoy the freedom that you have at retirement, your financial assetsmust continue to work for you after you've stopped working. The biggest threat to your doing what you want to do and going where youwant to go - and the source of many retirees' financial problems - isthe effect of inflation on the financial resources you accumulate byretirement age. Inflation raises the specter that what you accumulatemay not be sufficient over the long term. At least one retiree expense is especially inflationary. At a time whenthe annual inflation rate has been averaging 3.5 percent, prescriptionsand medical care in general has increased by 15 percent to 20 percentper year, according to the Older Americans Almanac. Both retirees and people not yet retired need to take proactive steps toaccount for inflation. Your success in planning a worry-free retirement,in fact, can turn on an investment program that anticipates inflation'seffect on your future purchasing power and standard of living. Beatinginflation is your best bet for realizing your retirement dream. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1994 issue ofKemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009760 WT01-B13-41IA018-000196-B041-197http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/rely_savings.html 198.152.185.42 19970106164907 text/html 4870HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:45:06 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:51:14 GMTContent-length: 4686Content-type: text/html Can You Rely On A Savings Account? By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. As an economist, I am alarmed by the results of the recent Kemper-RoperRetirement Monitor, a survey conducted to report on American attitudesand expectations regarding retirement. Specifically, the finding that aregular savings account was the most popular individual investment(after the company-sponsored 401(k)) for retirement - across all agegroups - is very sad. When you consider the language that Americans use when talking aboutretirement, this should not be surprising. When we talk about planning,for example, we talk about "saving" for retirement. We don't often hearabout investing for retirement. It's a "nest egg" that we try to build,not an income-generating machine. Why is this sad? I wonder how many people who are "saving" forretirement today are considering the risk they're taking that theirsavings account will tragically fail to provide for the length andquality of the retirement they can expect - not to mention expensivehealth care. While the principal and interest of a savings account isgenerally insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, therisk is that the retiree will outlive his or her income from it. These survey results demonstrate that Americans clearly want safety fortheir retirement funds. We are not about to overlook the potential fordefault, which was a lesson learned well from the 1930s Depression era.Yet there is another lesson that history can teach us - and it is thatinflation has the potential to erode the real value of our retirementfunds. In the 1970s, returns on savings accounts failed to keep up withinflation. In the 1980s, savings accounts failed to keep up witheconomic growth. It is precisely because rates paid on savings accountsare not pegged to economic growth or inflation that they fail to keep upwith either. By contrast, other investments have historically provided returns abovethe rate of inflation. For appropriate investment guidelines today, we need to look forward notbackward. In the past, Social Security benefits made up the shortfallbetween desired income needs and the returns provided by regular savingsaccounts. That won't continue, as reduced real benefit levels and highertaxes are the future for Social Security. Perceptions of risk and required return drive retirement planning. Thepopularity of savings accounts as a retirement vehicle suggests thatAmericans have a high aversion to risk for their retirement funds but avery low estimated need for a return. In a world of 3 percent or moreinflation and federal budget cutbacks on Social Security and Medicare,Americans should recognize that reliance on regular savings accounts isnot a strategy without a risk of its own. Dr. John Silvia Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009770 WT01-B13-42IA018-000196-B043-208http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/elkington.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165810 text/html 2889HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:54:12 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:05 GMTContent-length: 2705Content-type: text/html  Steve Elkington Winner, 1995 PGA Championship Birthdate: December 8, 1962 Birthplace: Inverell, Australia College: University of Houston (1985, Recreation) Residence: Sydney, Australia and Houston, TX Family: Wife, Lisa; Annie Elizabeth (3/24/95) Special interests: Character drawing, fishing, hunting, gardening Turned professional: 1985 Q school: Fall 1986 Career earnings: $4,548,089 - 31 Tour victories (6): 1990 Kmart Greater Greensboro Open, 1991 THE PLAYERS Championship, 1992 Infiniti Tournament of Champions, 1994 Buick Southern Open, 1995 Mercedes Championship, PGA Championship International victories (1): 1992 Australian Open 1996 PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017890 WT01-B13-43IA018-000196-B043-216http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/cook.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165825 text/html 2784HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:54:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:04 GMTContent-length: 2600Content-type: text/html  John Cook 37th on 1994 Money List Birthdate: October 2, 1957 Birthplace: Toledo, OH Residence: Rancho Mirage, CA Family: Wife, Jan; Kristin (7/20/81), Courtney (4/11/84), Jason (1/10/86) College: Ohio State University Special interests: Auto racing, skiing, all sports Turned professional: 1979 Q school: Fall 1979 Tour victories (6): 1981 Bing Crosby National Pro-Am, 1983 Canadia Open, 1987 The International, 1992 Bob Hope Chrysler Classic, United Airlines Hawaiian Open, Las Vegas Invitational International victories (2): 1982 Sao Paulo-Brazilian Open, 1995 Mexican Open 1996 PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017880 WT01-B13-44IA018-000196-B043-230http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/simpson.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165833 text/html 2953HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:54:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:08 GMTContent-length: 2769Content-type: text/html  Scott Simpson Winner, 1987 U.S. Open Birthdate: September 17, 1955 Birthplace: San Diego, CA Residence: San Diego, CA ; Plays out of Makaha Valley, Oahu, HI Family: Wife, Cheryl; Brea Yoshiko (10/10/82), Sean Tokuzo (10/14/86) College: University of Southern California (1978, Business Administration) Special interests: Ocean sports, Bible study, family activities, jogging Turned professional: 1977 Q school: Fall 1978 Tour victories (6): 1980 Western Open, 1984 Manufacturers Hanover Westchester Classic, 1987 Greater Greensboro Open, U.S. Open, 1989 BellSouth Atlanta Classic, 1993 GTE Byron Nelson Classic International victories (3): 1984 Chunichi Crowns(Japan), Dunlop Phoenix(Japan), 1990 Perrier Invitational(Eur) 1996 PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017930 WT01-B13-45IA018-000196-B043-246http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/lyle.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165844 text/html 3151HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:54:44 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:08 GMTContent-length: 2967Content-type: text/html  Sandy Lyle Winner, 1988 Masters Tournament Birthplace: Shrewsbury, England Residence: West Canton - Scotland Family: Wife, Jolande; Stuart ('83), James ('86), Alexandra ('93) Special interests: Motorcycles, cars, airplanes Turned professional: 1977 Tour victories(5): 1986 Greater Greensboro Open, 1987 Tournament Players Championship, 1988 Phoenix Open, Kmart Greater Greensboro Open, Masters Tournament International victories (20): 1979 Jersey Open, Scandinavian Enterprise Open, European Open, Scottish Pro Championship, 1980 Coral Class, World Cup (indiv.), 1981 Paco Rabanne French Open, Lawrence Batley International, 1982 Lawrence Batley International, 1983 Cepsa Madrid Open, 1984 Italian Open, Lancome Trophy 1985 British Open, Benson & Hedges International Open, 1987 German Masters, 1988 Dunhill British Masters, Suntory World Play Championship, 1991 BMW International Open, 1992 Lancia-Martini Italian Open, Volvo Masters (with exception of 1980 World Cup, all Europe) 1996 PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017920 WT01-B13-46IA018-000196-B043-258http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/henke.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165851 text/html 2555HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:54:55 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:07 GMTContent-length: 2371Content-type: text/html  Nolan Henke 1993 Tournament Winner Birthdate: November 25, 1964 Birthplace: Battle Creek, MI Residence: Fort Myers, FL; plays out of Vines CC Family: Wife, Marcy College: Florida State University Special interests: Jet ski, tennis Turned professional: 1987 Q school: Fall 1988, 1989 Tour victories(3): 1990 B.C. Open, 1991 Phoenix Open, 1993 BellSouth Classic 1996 PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017910 WT01-B13-47IA018-000196-B043-273http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/weiskopf.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165902 text/html 2699HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:55:05 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:20 GMTContent-length: 2515Content-type: text/html  Tom Weiskopf Top 31 on 1995 Senior TOUR Money List Birthdate: November 9, 1942 Birthplace: Massillon, OH Residence: Paradise Valley, AZ Family: Wife, Jeannie; Heidi (3/20/71); Eric (1/10/73) College: Ohio State University Special interests: Golf course architecture, hunting, fishing, sports Turned professional: 1964 Joined PGA Tour: 1965 Joined Senior Tour: 1992 Senior PGA Tour victories(3): 1994 Franklin Quest Championship, 1995 U.S. Senior Open, 1996 The Dominion 1996 Senior PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017940 WT01-B13-48IA018-000196-B043-284http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/geiberger.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165916 text/html 2923HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:55:14 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:06 GMTContent-length: 2739Content-type: text/html  Al Geiberger Top 31 on All-Time Money List Birthdate: September 1, 1937 Birthplace: Red Bluff, CA Residence: Solvang, CA Family: Wife, Carolyn; Lee Ann (9/14/63); John (5/20/68); Brent (5/22/68); Bryan (9/28/76); Al, Jr. (1/2/88); Kathleen Marie (1/11/91) College: Southern California Turned professional: 1959 Joined PGA Tour: 1960 Joined Senior Tour: 1987 Senior PGA Tour victories (9): 1987 Vantage Championship Hilton Head Seniors International, Las Vegas Senior Classic, 1988 Pointe/Del E. Webb Arizona Classic, 1989 GTE Northwest Classic, 1991 Kroger Senior Classic, 1992 Infiniti Senior Tournament of Champions, 1993 Infiniti Senior Tournament of Champions, GTE West Classic 1996 Senior PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017900 WT01-B13-49IA018-000196-B043-294http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/96pgatour.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165927 text/html 5936HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:55:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:01 GMTContent-length: 5752Content-type: text/html  1996 PGA Tour Schedule         May 30-June 2    Memorial Tournament      Muirfield Village Golf Club, Dublin, OH (ABC)        June 6-9         Buick Classic            Westchester Country Club, Rye, NY (CBS)           Steve Elkington finishes 2nd!        June 13-16       U.S. Open (USGA)         Oakland Hills C.C., Birmingham, MI (NBC)        June 20-23       FedEx St. Jude Classic   TPC@Southwind, Memphis, TN (CBS)           John Cook wins!        June 27-30       Canon Greater Hartford   TPC@River Highlands, Cromwell, CT (CBS)                         Open        July 4-7         Motorola Western Open    Cog Hill Golf & C.C., Lemont, IL (CBS)        July 11-14       Michelob                 Kingsmill Golf Club, Williamsburg, VA                         Championship@Kingsmill   (ESPN)        July 18-21       Deposit Guaranty Golf    Annandale Golf Club, Madison, MS (TGC)                         Classic        July 18-21       British Open             Royal Lytham & St. Annes, England (ABC)        July 25-28       CVS Charity Classic      Pleasant Valley C.C., Sutton, MA (TGC)        Aug. 1-4         Buick Open               Warwick Hills Golf & C.C., Grand Blanc, MI (CBS)        Aug. 8-11        PGA Championship         Valhalla Golf Club, Louisville, KY (CBS)        Aug. 15-18       The Sprint               Castle Pines G.C., Castle Rock, CO                         International            (CBS)        Aug. 22-25       NEC World Series of      Firestone C.C., Akron, OH (CBS)                         Golf        Aug. 22-25       Greater Vancouver Open   Northview Golf & C.C., Surrey, B.C. (TBD)        Aug. 29-Sept. 1  Greater Milwaukee Open   Brown Deer Golf Course, Milwaukee, WI (ABC)        Sept. 5-8        Bell Canadian Open       Glen Abbey Golf Club, Oakville, Ont. (ESPN)        Sept. 12-15      The Presidents Cup       Robert Trent Jones G.C., Lake Manassas, VA (CBS)        Sept. 12-15      Quad City Classic        Oakwood C.C., Coal Valley, IL (TGC)         Sept. 19-22      B.C. Open                En-Joie G.C., Endicott, NY (TGC)        Sept. 26-29      Buick Challenge          Callaway Gardens Resort, Pine Mnt., GA (ESPN)        Oct. 2-6         Las Vegas Invitational   TPC@Summerlin/Desert Inn, Las Vegas, NV (ESPN)        Oct. 10-13       LaCantera Texas Open     LaCantera G.C., San Antonio, TX (TGC)        Oct. 17-20       Walt Disney World /      Lake Buena Vista G.C., Lake Buena Vista, FL (TGC)                         Oldsmobile Golf Classic         Oct. 24-27       The Tour Championship    Southern Hills C.C., Tulsa, OK (ABC)        Oct. 31-Nov. 3   Sarazen World Open       Legends of Chateau Elan, Braselton, GA (TBA)                         Championship                     Nov. 7-10        Lincoln-Mercury Kapalua  Plantation & Bay Courses@Kapalua, Maui, HI (ABC)                         Int'l                            Nov. 12-13       MasterCard PGA Grand     Poipu Bay Resort GC, Koloa, Kauai, HI                         Slam of Golf        Nov. 14-17       Franklin Templeton       Sherwood C.C., Thousand Oaks, CA (CBS)                         Shark Shootout        Nov. 21-24       The World Cup of Golf    Erinvale Golf Club, Somerset West,                                                  South Africa (NBC)        Nov. 28-Dec. 1   Skins Game               Rancho La Quinta Country Club, La                                                  Quinta, CA (ABC)        Dec. 5-8         JCPenny Classic          Innisbrook Hilton Resort, Palm Harbor, FL (ABC)        Dec. 12-15       Diners Club Matches      PGA West Jack Nicklaus Resort Course,                                                  La Quinta, CA (ABC)        Jan. 4-5 '97     Andersen Consulting      Grayhawk GC, Scottsdale, AZ (ESPN/ABC)                         WCOG 1996 Senior PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017860 WT01-B13-50IA018-000196-B043-306http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/teamkemper/96srpgatour.html 198.152.185.42 19970106165935 text/html 4528HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:55:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:59:03 GMTContent-length: 4344Content-type: text/html  1996 Senior PGA Tour Schedule  May 20-26       BellSouth Senior Classic  Springhouse G.C., Nashville, TN (NBC) May 27-6/2      Bruno's Memorial Classic  Greystone, G.C., Birmingham, AL June 3-9        Pittsburgh Senior Classic Quicksilver G.C., Midway, PA  Tom Weiskopf wins! June 10-16      du Maurier Champions      Hamilton Golf & C.C.,Ancaster, Ontario June 17-23      Bell Atlantic Classic     Chester Valley G.C., Malvern, PA (ESPN) June 24-30      Kroger Senior Classic     Golf Center @Kings Island, Mason, OH (ESPN) July 1-7        U.S. Senior Open          Canterbury G.C., Beachwood, OH (NBC) July 8-14       Ford Senior Players       TPC of Michigan, Dearborn, MI (ABC)                 Champ.                     July 15-21      Burnet Senior Classic     Bunker Hills G.C., Coon Rapids, MN (ESPN) July 22-28      Ameritech Snr. Open       Kemper Lakes, Long Grove, IL (CBS) July 29-Aug. 4  VFW Senior Championship   Loch Lloyd C.C., Belton, MO (ESPN) Aug. 5-11       First of America Classic  Egypt Valley C.C., Ada, MI Aug. 12-18      Northville Long Island    Meadow Brook Club, Jericho, NY (ESPN)                 Classic                    Aug. 19-25      Bank of Boston Snr.       Nashawtuc C.C., Concord, MA (ESPN)                 Classic Aug. 26-Sept. 1 Franklin Quest            Park Meadows, Park City, UT                 Championship Sept. 2-8       Boone Valley Classic      Boone Valley G.C., St. Louis, MO Sept. 9-15      Bank One Classic          Kearney Hill Links, Lexington, KY Sept. 16-22     Brickyard Crossing        Brickyard Crossing, Indianapolis, IN                 Championship               Sept. 23-29     Vantage Championship      Tanglewood Park, Clemmons, NC (ESPN) Sept. 30-Oct. 6 Ralphs Senior Classic     Wilshire C.C., Los Angeles, CA Oct. 7-13       The Transamerica          Silverado C.C., Napa, CA (ESPN) Oct. 14-20      Raley's Gold Rush Classic Serrano C.C. El Dorado Hills, CA Oct. 21-27      Hyatt Regency Maui        Kaanapali G.C., Lahaina, HI (ESPN)                 Kaanapali Classic          Oct. 28-Nov. 3  Emerald Coast Classic      The Moors Golf Club, Million, FL Nov. 4-10       Energizer Senior TOUR     The Dunes Golf & Beach Club,                 Championship              Myrtle Beach, SC (ESPN) Dec. 9-15       Diners Club Matches       PGA West, LaQuinta, CA (ABC) Dec. 16-22      Lexus Challenge hosted by Citrus Course, La Quinta, CA (NBC)                 Ray Floyd                 1996 PGA Tour Schedule © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017870 WT01-B13-51IA018-000196-B044-150http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/leadanal.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170203 text/html 3480HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:57:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 22:34:47 GMTContent-length: 3298Content-type: text/html  Opportunities Position: LEAD ANALYST Dreman Value Advisors Posted: 10/9/96 Salary: $75,000 - $95,000 Majors: Computer Science Job Description: Project analysis, design and implementation activities on complexautomation projects developing feasibility studies, interfacingwith client areas, interface with other systems personnel). Installationof accounting package. Project control activities (planning andorganizing the work load of tasks, establish project objectivesand milestones, coordinate projects with other related groups,assign tasks to other team members). Consulting and technicalsupport activities (interface with users, provide technical supportto other team members, provide technical design expertise). Superviseactivities performed. Education/Experience: BS/BA in Computer Science or related field. Successful experiencein installing an accounting package (Axys would be best, or anyportfolio accounting package, or any style of accounting package). Strong financial accounting experience (knows about performance-basedaccounting, familiar with AIMR rules, familiar with institutionalinvesting). Project team lead experience. Strong client/serverand PC skills. Some mainframe would be helpful. Leadership skills;self-starter. Respond To: Liz DeMovic Dreman Value Advisors 280 Park Avenue, 40th Floor New York, NY 10017 Tel: (212)883-4537 Fax: (212)883-4552 E-mail: ldemovic@kemper.com Application For Employment WT01-B13-52IA018-000196-B044-166http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/techad.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170213 text/html 3144HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:58:15 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 25-Nov-96 20:17:54 GMTContent-length: 2962Content-type: text/html  Opportunities Position: DATABASE TECHNICIAN Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Salary: To be discussed Experience: Advanced level Majors: Computer Science Job Description: Software support of several mainframe and client server database management systems, developing and reviewing database operational standards and procedures, application development and technical support in a complex systems environment involving client server, Internet and mainframe applications. We utilize IBM Risc processors running Unix, Sybase System 10 and 11, Sybase middleware and client software including Visual Basic, 3rd party VBX's and C. We are looking for a professional who enjoys a team environment and offers 5+ years experience working with a relational Database, preferably Sybase and/or DB2. ORACLE experience is also applicable. Technical competence in software installation, maintenance and problem resolution is expected as well as assisting in the development of database strategic directions and implementation of supporting infra-structures. Respond To: Human Resources Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 120 S. LaSalle Street Chicago, IL 60603 Tel: (312) 499-1524 Fax: (312) 499-8545 E-mail: job@kemper.com Application For Employment WT01-B13-53IA018-000196-B044-174http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/about/job_wholesaler01.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170220 text/html 3166HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:58:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 25-Nov-96 20:18:34 GMTContent-length: 2984Content-type: text/html  Opportunities Position: INSIDE WHOLESALER Kemper Distributors, Inc. Salary: Base range between $25,000 to $35,000, plus quarterly bonus, plus commission Experience: Advanced level Majors: Finance or economics preferred Job Description: Develops accounts in assigned territory(ies) that compliment the sales activities within Kemper Distributors. Contacts Financial Representatives at Broker/Dealers to promote sales of Kemper Funds, Money Funds and Annuity Products within an assigned territory. Places outbound telephone sales calls to established and prospective Financial Representatives. Focus of calls will frequently be to mid and low level producers in remote locations that the field sales force is unable to visit to facilitate full sales territory coverage. Plans, writes and prepares sales presentations for use with Financial Representatives. Approximately two to three years of financial sales or customer service work experience necessary. Series 7 (General Securities Registered Rep) and Series 63 (Blue Sky) licenses, as well as Insurance licenses are desirable. Respond To: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 120 S. LaSalle Street Chicago, IL 60603 Tel: (312) 499-1524 Fax: (312) 499-8545 E-mail: job@kemper.com Application For Employment WT01-B13-54IA018-000196-B044-190http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/cash_reserves.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170228 text/html 10375HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:58:28 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 02-Jan-97 18:26:13 GMTContent-length: 10190Content-type: text/html Kemper Cash Reserves Fund Seeks to provide maximum current income to the extent consistentwith stability of principal by investing in high quality money market instruments. Comercial paper first tier 91%, U.S. Treasuries 2%, Domestic CDs/BAs 7% $208,000,000                                    Class A     Class B     Class C                               ---------------------------------------            Initial Offering      1/10/92      2/6/84     5/31/94                                                        YTD Total Return        3.36%       2.66%       2.84% Unadjusted for Sales Charge                                                           YTD Total Return        3.34%      -1.36%       1.82%   Adjusted for Sales Charge##                                            Average Annual Total Returns##                      1 year        4.64%       0.72%       3.91%                                                                  5 year        0.00%       2.59%         -                                                             Life of class        3.65%       4.71%       3.90% 	Current 7-Day Yield        	 Week Ending 12/31/96       4.39%       3.44%       3.73%                                                        	Compound 7-Day Yield        	 Week Ending 12/31/96       4.49%       3.50%       3.80%           #Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 3.50% for Kemper Cash Reserves Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014970-B WT01-B13-55IA018-000196-B044-204http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/david_hale.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170241 text/html 4490HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:58:40 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 13-Sep-96 19:58:57 GMTContent-length: 4308Content-type: text/html David Hale Biography By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. David D. Hale is the global economic strategist for Zurich Group and Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. In this position, he advises the group's domestic and global fund management operations on the economic outlook and a wide range of public policy issues. Mr. Hale, who joined Kemper in 1977, holds a B.Sc. degree in international economic affairs from the Georgetown University School of Foreign Service and a M.Sc. degree in economics from the London School of Economics. Mr. Hale is a member of the National Association of Business Economists and the New York Society of Security Analysts. He writes on a broad range of economic subjects and his articles have appeared in the Wall Street Journal, The Far Eastern Economic Review, The Financial Times of London, The New York Times, The Nihon Kezai Shimbun, The Financial Analyst Journal, The Harvard Business Review, Foreign Policy and other publications. In 1978, he was appointed a member of the Financial Accounting Standards Board TaskForce on the Conceptual Framework (for accounting standards) because of articles he wrote on inflation accounting. He has frequently testified before Congressional committees on domestic and international economic policy issues and done briefings for senior officials in the executive branch, including President Bush. Since 1990, he also has been a consultant to the U.S. Department of Defense on how changes in the global economy are affecting U.S. security relationships. In September, 1990, the New York chapter of the National Association of Business Economists conferred upon Mr. Hale the William F. Butler Award. This award is conferred annually by the society upon a business economist who has made an outstanding contribution to the field. Other recipients have included Paul Volcker, Geoffrey Moore, Lawrence Klein, Alan Greenspan, and Otto Eckstein. In addition to his responsibilities at Kemper, Mr. Hale is a member of the Financial Instruments Steering Committee of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the Academic Advisory Board of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and a variety of government and private sector economic policy research groups in Washington, Tokyo, and Bonn. Mr. Hale also maintains close ties to his native state of Vermont and has served on advisory boards in its state government, including the Governor's Commission on Property Tax Reform (1988-89) and the Governor's Council ofEconomic Advisors (1991-92). © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014850 WT01-B13-56IA018-000196-B044-215http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/wklyreport.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170249 text/html 3901HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:58:50 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 30-Oct-96 15:16:22 GMTContent-length: 3716Content-type: text/html The Weekly Money Report by David D. Hale By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Are World Financial Markets Underpricing Political Risk? (October 21, 1996) How Long Can the Federal Reserve Delay Tightening? (September 26, 1996) Will Rising Bond Yields Force The Fed To Tighten? (September 2, 1996) Is Wall Street Experiencing A Greenspan Or Gephart Correction? (July 29, 1996) Will Delayed Fed Tightening Set The Stage For An October StockMarket Crash? (June 21, 1996) Significance Of The Estonian-Russian Interest Rate Differential (June 20, 1996) Will The Fed Tighten In July Or August? (May 29, 1996) Will Bond Market Perceptions Alter Economic And Political Reality? (May 6, 1996) Will U.S. Output Growth Exceed 3.0% During The Second Quarter? (March 25, 1996) Investing Social Security In Mutual Funds (March 14, 1996) Is The U.S. Yield Curve Discounting Increased Political Risk? (February 29, 1996) Has The Dollar Peaked? (January 31, 1996) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015690 WT01-B13-57IA018-000196-B044-230http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/benefit1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170256 text/html 7726HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:58:57 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 11-Oct-96 15:24:01 GMTContent-length: 7544Content-type: text/html Will Investors Or The Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The President has confirmed that the U.S. Treasury will beginto issue inflation adjusted bonds in January of 1997. The introductionof the index linked bond represents a potentially important developmentboth for the future structure of the public debt as well as theyield benchmarks which will be used to measure investment performancein the fund management industry. Investors have long used governmentsecurities as a proxy for risk free returns in the financial markets. The introduction of the index linked bonds will now offer a proxyfor measuring inflation adjusted risk free return. The U.S. will be the seventh OECD country to introduce index linkedgovernment debt. It already exists in Britain, Sweden, Canada,Australia, New Zealand and Iceland. Some Latin American nationsalso have offered inflation adjusted securities in the past butthey were designed to help their populations cope with hyper-inflation,not moderate G-7 style inflation. The British government introducedthe first G-7 index linked bonds in August 1981 and the initialsecurity offered a real yield of only 2.0% plus a tax free principaladjustment for inflation. At first, the securities were offeredonly to pension funds but the rules were later modified to permitpurchases by individuals. When the UK government introduced its first index linked bond,many institutional investors responded positively because of theirdisastrous experience with inflation during the 1970's. In themid-1970's, conventional British government bonds had lost overhalf of their value in nominal terms because Britain's inflationrate had shot up to 30%. In 1981, investors also had more modestexpectations of potential returns from securities than exist today. Between 1750 and 1950, the average yield on UK government securitieshad been about 3.0% with an all time low of 2.21% in 1897. TheBritish government's credit standing was so high that it was evenable to finance the First World War by selling bonds with a couponyield of 5.0%. While commodity prices had fluctuated in a widerange because of wars and changes in the global economy, the overallBritish price level had been remarkably stable for nearly twohundred years. As a result, many pension funds perceived thata government security which offered a guaranteed real returnof 2.0% was an attractive asset. High income individuals alsowere attracted to the prospect of a bond principal inflation adjustmentwhich was free of income tax. As a result of this investor support,the UK government was able to sell over 6 billion pounds of indexlinked debt during the first two years after their introductioncompared to a conventional debt stock of 150 billion pounds. Between 1981 and 1995, the UK government's index linked securitiesproduced a cumulative nominal return of 154% and a cumulativereal yield of 40%. But as the UK economy entered a period ofsustained disinflation after 1980, the return on index linkedsecurities significantly underperformed other asset classes, suchas equities and conventional government bonds. Between 1981 and1995, the UK stock market rose 5.7 times in nominal terms andby nearly 3 times in real terms. The price of conventional governmentbonds rose by 72% while the real yield on long-term governmentsecurities averaged 3.7%. The real yield on Treasury bills alsoaveraged about 5.3% during the period 1981-1995 compared to 2.9%on the index linked security. But while the index linked securitydid not out perform conventional financial assets, it did producea better return than other traditional inflation hedges such asgold and property. The British property market boomed duringthe mid-1980's because of easy monetary policy but it slumpedso sharply during the early 1990's that index linked securities have out performed property for the period since they were introduced. The nominalyield on British property has averaged just under 9.0% since 1981compared to an average nominal yield of 10% on the index linkedbonds. The gold price peaked at $800 per ounce in 1980 and currentlysells for about $380 per ounce. As a result of Britain's greatly improved inflation performanceunder Mrs. Thatcher, the market for index linked securities neverdeveloped the breadth and liquidity of other asset markets. But the British government has been attempting to improve the market's liquidityby doing about 15% of its recent funding in the index linked securities. As a result, the stock of index linked debt has expanded to 40billion pounds compared to a net government debt stock of 260billion pounds. The introduction of index linked debt has produced major interestcost savings for the British government. The nominal yield onindex linked debt has averaged about 100-200 basis points belowthe yields on other government securities. The only cost to thegovernment has been the lost tax receipts from the inflation adjustmentfor the depreciating real value of bond principal. But the savingsfrom reduced interest payments have been immediate while the taxlosses from indexation will be felt over the long term. Beforethe index linked bond was introduced, the UK government had collectedtax on all interest income but it had exempted bonds from capitalgains taxation if they were held for longer than one year. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023170 WT01-B13-58IA018-000196-B044-243http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/doleboost1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170303 text/html 9204HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:59:04 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 21:35:24 GMTContent-length: 9020Content-type: text/html Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. August 26, 1996 Several Wall Street newsletters are now suggesting that a victory for the Dole-Kemp ticket in the presidential election would boost equity prices by lowering capital gains taxes while increasing long-term bond yields because of investor concerns about a return to large federal budget deficits. While it is natural for investors to be concerned about the budgetary affects of Republican promises to reduce taxes, the history of the past ten years should have demonstrated that it is the nation's savings and investment balance, not just budget deficits, which determine interest rates. As a result the impact of the Dole economic program on bond yields will depend upon how it influences the country's private savings behavior and demand for capital, not just the federal government's deficit. Several factors suggest that the Dole program will have a less damaging impact on either the federal deficit or interest rates than many Wall Street pundits now fear. First, under current law, no administration can enact a tax cut unless there are offsetting spending cuts. This law was enacted in order to force the Congress to adhere to long-term targets for deficit reduction and it is doubtful that a president as cautious about fiscal policy as Mr. Dole would repeal it. Indeed, the threat of a bond market collapse would probably constrain Congress from repealing the law even if the Dole-Kemp administration decided to revert to high deficit fiscal policy. As the ratio of federal debt to GDP is now about 55% compared to 28% when Ronald Reagan became president, the markets will be far less tolerant of large scale fiscal stimulus than they were during the early 1980's Secondly, the Dole administration has a broad based economic growth agenda of which personal tax cuts are only one part. The Dole program is also committed to reducing the cost of government regulation and the legal system on U.S. business, slashing capital gains taxes and slowing the growth of Federal spending. Regulatory cost push has played such a major role in driving up business costs during the past three decades that there is a stronger statistical relationship between the number of pages in the federal register and interest rates than between federal deficits and interest rates. The register peaked at nearly 90,000 pages during the high inflation era of the late 1970's and fell steadily to a trough of 49,000 during the late 1980's. The Clinton administration has pushed it back to 70,000, so if a Dole White House could reduce it back to Reagan era levels there would be potential benefits for both inflation and interest rates. If the Dole program encourages corporations to invest more aggressively, interest rates could rise because of strong demand for capital in the private sector, not increased government borrowing. But, as the Dole program has far more modest tax incentives for investment than the Reagan program of 1981, it will probably only have a modest impact on private capital demands and interest rates. The Reagan program directly subsidized investment through large increases in depreciation allowances whereas the Dole program is focused on capital gains relief and regulatory reform. The overall scope of the Dole fiscal program is also very modest compared to the tax changes which occurred during the Reagan years. The Dole program would reduce the top marginal tax rate to 34% whereas during the Reagan years it declined to 28%. If Congress enacted every tax change proposed by the Dole-Kemp platform without cutting spending, the net fiscal stimulus to the economy would be only $58 billion during 1998 compared to a nominal GDP of $8 trillion. It is also quite likely that the capital gains tax cut would produce such a huge revenue windfall that the federal deficit would shrink during the twelve to twenty four months after the enactment of the Dole tax program. As a result of the equity bull market since 1991, the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP in the U.S. is now 95% compared to a previous all time peak of 82% in 1929 and a sixty year moving average of 48%. If the household sector could realize capital gains with a tax rate of only 14%, there would be a realignment of portfolios on a scale so large that the Treasury would experience a massive revenue windfall. Thirdly, the presidential campaign cannot be viewed in isolation from the congressional election campaign. Under the influence of consultant Richard Morris, the President recast himself as a conservative on many social and economic issues during the first half of 1996 but the Democratic Party in the Congress remains far to the left of the President. During most of the 20th Century, the Congressional Democratic Party was well balanced between membership from the rural south and the urban northeast and middle west. During the 1990's, though, the Democratic Party has lost most of its congressional membership in the south and became heavily dependent upon the urban centers of the Northeast, the middle west, and California. In the House, for example, the Republicans now have 78 of the 125 seats in the old southern confederacy compared to only 6 in 1960. As a result of the pending retirement of many long-term Democratic incumbents, the Republican share of southern seats could easily rise to 90-100 this autumn even if the party loses seats elsewhere in the country. If the Democratic Party regains control of the House with only 20-30 southern seats, many of their most influential committee chairmen will be far to the left not just of current Republican chairmen but also of previous Democratic chairmen. The contrast between a house speaker Richard Gephardt and the old Democratic house speaker, Tom Foley, would also be very striking. After flirting with so-called "new Democrat" themes in the mid-1980's, Rep. Gephardt has devoted most of the past decade to promoting protectionist trade policies and new forms of federal intervention in the economy. President Clinton has so far resisted most of the congressional Democrats' economic proposals, but as a result of his apparent flexibility on many issues, the financial markets are uncertain about how he would manage a more left wing Democratic Congress if he is reelected to a second term. The great fear haunting the U.S. bond market today is not a Dole-Kemp victory in the Presidential election and the enactment of a modest Republican tax cut program. It is what would happen to government spending, the cost of federal regulation, and trade policy in the event that the Democrats made a sweep of both the White House and the Congress. Such a sweep would probably encourage an immediate wave of selling by foreign investors in the U.S. bond market and a slump in the stock markets of emerging market economies sensitive to U.S. trade policy. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1021750 WT01-B13-59IA018-000196-B044-255http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/feddev1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170312 text/html 12094HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:59:11 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:37:49 GMTContent-length: 11908Content-type: text/html Will Federal Devolution Set the Stage for a State and LocalPrivatization Boom in the Next U.S. Recession? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. An address given to the National Conference of State Legislatures, St. Louis, July 28, 1996 America's system of federalism will face unique challenges during thelate 1990's and early years of the 21st century. The Congress wants to devolve more responsibilities to the states at the sametime that the costs of funding traditional services, such as Medicare andeducation, are projected to rise sharply. As a result of the long expansionwhich the U.S. economy has enjoyed since 1991, most states are currently ingood fiscal shape but the late 1990's could produce great financial stressesfor them if their increased responsibilities coincide with a recession.Indeed, it would not be an exaggeration to suggest that devolution against abackground of recession could set the stage for other radical policy changes,such as the privatization of many state owned enterprises and services. The fiscal challenge which will confront American states during the late 1990'shas several dimensions. First, the Congress wants to reduce the aid which it provides to Americanstates as well as to alter the formulas through which it is distributed. Inthe budget debate, six months ago, the Congress wanted to reduce federalassistance to the states by 26%. It is doubtful that future cuts will be thatlarge but it is not difficult to imagine cuts of 15-20% if Congress continuesto push for a balanced federal budget by the year 2000. The pressure toreduce federal laid to the states does not just reflect the political ideologyof the newly ascendant Republican Party. It is also a by-product ofdemographic factors. The population of the U.S. will age steadily during thenext few decades and cause entitlement spending for the retired to risesharply. The federal government share of GDP will also increase significantlyunless other forms of spending are curtailed. The problem of demography in theU.S. is much less serious than in other industrial countries because of itshigh level of immigration and higher birthrate but aging is still a generalproblem for all the industrial nations. In fact, two thirds of all the peoplewho have ever lived to the age of 65 in the long history of mankind are alivetoday. Such simple facts reveal more about the forces driving public spendingin the modern world than all the political science journals which debate thephilosophical implications of public spending choices. Secondly, the Congress wants to shift from open ended matching grant assistanceto the states to block grants. Under the new system, the states would receivea fixed sum of money and be given more flexibility in how they chose to spendit. But in contrast to the current system, their aid would not increaseautomatically in response to some economic shock, such as a recession. The newsystem of financing would represent a sharp break with the pattern of financingwhich has prevailed during most of the modern era under both Democratic andRepublican administrations. During the Bush administration, for example,federal aid to the states rose from $124 billion to $194 billion. Much of theincrease resulted from the impact of the 1990-1991 recession on social serviceprograms. But part of it also resulted from the states shifting Medicaid coststo the federal government as well as increases in matching grants from otherfederally mandated programs. As a result of the growth of federal spendingduring the Bush years, aid to the states is currently equal to about 3.2% ofGDP compared to a post war peak of 3.6% of GDP in 1973, 1.9% in 1965, and 0.9%in 1940. Thirdly, despite the sharp drop in the U.S. inflation rate, the federal budgetis projecting that Medicaid spending will continue to rise at a 8% annual rate.In the federal budget, Medicaid expenditures will grow from $168 billion to$267 billion. As the states account for about 43% of Medicaid spending, theiroutlays will also expand. Some states are trying to control costs by forcingtheir recipients to use HMO's, but in many states there is so much publichostility to HMO's that legislatures are enacting laws which require them to beless severe in rationing their services. Fourthly, the population of school age children is once again expanding. It isprojected to grow from 47 million in 1991 to 56 million in 2004, surpassing theold 1971 peak of 51 million. The GAO says that the U.S. needs to spend $112billion on new school construction compared to recent outlays of $3 billion perannum. Meanwhile, the U.S. electorate remains hostile to the idea of tax increases.Almost none were enacted by state legislatures during the past two years whilethe Congress itself flirted with the idea of reducing federal gasoline taxes afew months ago. There is also growing public opposition to the spread of gambling. Lotterieswill probably continue to generate revenue equal to about 2.5% of state taxreceipts, but there will be far more restrictions on the introduction of newcasinos. It appears that only three states will permit the establishment ofsignificant casino industries. They are Nevada, New Jersey and Mississippi. The good news is that state governments are in better fiscal shape to confrontthese challenges then at any other time during the past decade. The economy has enjoyed five years of steady growth, so the state and localgovernment sector enjoys a healthy budget surplus. There also have been farfewer regional disparities in the national economy's performance during thecurrent expansion than was the case during the 1970's and 1980's. In the 1970's, the U.S. economy's growth leaders were states producing oil andother commodities enjoying sharply higher prices. In the 1980's, there werebooms on both coasts while the middle west suffered from the overvalued dollarand the western states were crippled by collapsing commodity prices and bankincrisis. In the early 1990's, new England and California experienced severeslumps but both have recovered during recent years while other regions havecontinued to enjoy steady growth. As a result of the length and breadth of the national expansion, the state andlocal government sector currently enjoys a budget surplus of $40 billionexcluding pension funds compared to $11 billion five years ago. The surplus asa share of GDP is only about 0.6% or well below the 1.2% peak of the 1980'sbusiness cycle but it is a respectable number for an expansion which has beencharacterized by such low inflation. The U.S. economy's current cyclical environment is exceptionally benign for thesixth year of a business cycle. The unemployment rate has dropped to 5.3% butinflation is still only about 3.0% excluding food and fuel. The growth rateof real output is likely to average about 2.6% this year compared to 2.0% lastyear and 3.5% during 1994. The economy's outstanding inflation performance has surprised many analysts andexplains why the business cycle has been so prolonged. The Federal Reserve hashad no incentive to surpress the expansion in order to promote pricestability. There are several factors which explain why the U.S. economy has been able toenjoy such a benign combination of low unemployment and low inflation. First, the current business cycle has enjoyed some very positive supply sidecharacteristics. There has been such robust business investment that duringthe past two years the growth rate of manufacturing capacity has accelerated tonearly 4.5% from 2.0% during the early 1990's. Secondly, U.S. firms have been very aggressive in controlling costs andboosting productivity. The restructuring has created social concerns aboutemployment stability, especially in large companies, but the growth of profitshas helped to set the stage for an extraordinary boom in job creation. Totalemployment has expanded by over 10 million spare jobs since 1992 whereas duringthe period 1988-1992 it grew by only about 3.5 million jobs. Thirdly, American firms have been on the cutting edge of developing andintroducing new technology. In the U.S., the ratio of computers to workers isnow at 57 per 100 in the corporate sector compared to 20 in Western Europe, 16in Japan, and 4 in southeast Asia. There are new technology oriented companieson the stock market with capitalizations of $2-3 billion which did not existthree years ago. The Internet firm, Netscape, now has a market capitalizationof $3.9 billion compared to zero two years ago. The capitalization ofMicrosoft has expanded from $24 billion in 1992 to $75 billion recently. IBM'smarket capitalization has even rebounded to $55.5 from $28.5 billion in late1992 but is still far below its peak of over $100 billion in the late 1980's. Fourthly, the Federal Reserve has done an excellent job of managing thebusiness cycle. There was an upsurge of output growth during 1994 whichstrained available inventories and caused commodity prices to rise sharply.This change in the price environment could have set the stage for anacceleration in the inflation rate but the Fed moved quickly to reduce theeconomy's growth rate to the 2.0-2.5% range from 3.5-4.0% in order to restraininflationary pressures As a result, commodity prices corrected and the Fed wasable to ease monetary policy during early 1995. The Fed will face newchallenges in restraining inflation later this year but it enjoys so muchcredibility that the price of restraining inflation will be much less severethan during the business cycles of the 1970's and early 1980's. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020000 WT01-B13-60IA018-000196-B044-270http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/respond1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170326 text/html 10014HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:59:21 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:37:56 GMTContent-length: 9829Content-type: text/html How Will Investors Respond to the U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The U.S. Treasury has announced that it will soon introduce anew government security which will be indexed for inflation. The introduction of the index linked bond represents a potentiallyimportant development both for the future structure of the publicdebt as well as the yield benchmarks which will be used to measureinvestment performance in the fund management industry. Investorshave long used government securities as a proxy for risk freereturns in the financial markets. The introduction of the indexlinked bonds will now offer a proxy for measuring inflation adjustedrisk free return. The U.S. will be the sixth OECD country to introduce index linkedgovernment debt. It already exists in Britain, Sweden, Canada,Australia and New Zealand. The British government introducedthe first index linked bonds in August 1981 and the initial securityoffered a real yield of only 2.0% plus a tax free principal adjustmentfor inflation. At first, the securities were offered only topension funds but the rules were later modified to permit purchasesby individuals. When the UK government introduced its first index linked bond,many institutional investors responded positively because of theirdisastrous experience with inflation during the 1970's. In themid-1970's, conventional British government bonds had lost overhalf of their value in nominal terms because Britain's inflationrate had shot up to 30%. In 1981, investors also had more modestexpectations of potential returns from securities than exist today. Between 1750 and 1950, the average yield on UK government securitieshad been about 3.0% with an all time low of 2.21% in 1897. TheBritish government's credit standing was so high that it was evenable to finance the First World War by selling bonds with a couponyield of 5.0%. While commodity prices had fluctuated in a widerange because of wars and changes in the global economy, the overallBritish price level had been remarkably stable for nearly twohundred years. As a result, many pension funds perceived thata government security which offered a guaranteed real returnof 2.0% was an attractive asset. High income individuals alsowere attracted to the prospect of a bond principal inflation adjustmentwhich was free of income tax. As a result of this investor support,the UK government was able to sell over 6 billion pounds of indexlinked debt during the first two years after their introductioncompared to a conventional debt stock of 150 billion pounds. Between 1981 and 1995, the UK government's index linked securitiesproduced a cumulative nominal return of 154% and a cumulativereal yield of 40%. But as the UK economy entered a period ofsustained disinflation after 1980, the return on index linkedsecurities significantly underperformed other asset classes, suchas equities and conventional government bonds. Between 1981 and1995, the UK stock market rose 5.7 times in nominal terms andby nearly 3 times in real terms. The price of conventional governmentbonds rose by 72% while the real yield on long-term governmentsecurities averaged 3.7%. The real yield on Treasury bills alsoaveraged about 5.3% during the period 1981-1995 compared to 2.9%on the index linked security. But while the index linked securitydid not out perform conventional financial assets, it did producea better return than other traditional inflation hedges such asgold and property. The British property market boomed duringthe mid-1980's because of easy monetary policy but it slumpedso sharply during the early 1990's that index linked securities have out performed property for the period since they were introduced. The nominalyield on British property has averaged just under 9.0% since 1981compared to an average nominal yield of 10% on the index linkedbonds. The gold price peaked at $800 per ounce in 1980 and currentlysells for about $395 per ounce. As a result of Britain's greatly improved inflation performanceunder Mrs. Thatcher, the market for index linked securities neverdeveloped the breadth and liquidity of other asset markets. But the British government has been attempting to improve the market's liquidityby doing about 15% of its recent funding in the index linked securities. As a result, the stock of index linked debt has expanded to 40billion pounds compared to a net government debt stock of 260billion pounds. The introduction of index linked debt has produced major interestcost savings for the British government. The nominal yield onindex linked debt has averaged about 100-200 basis points belowthe yields on other government securities. The only cost to thegovernment has been the lost tax receipts from the inflation adjustmentfor the depreciating real value of bond principal. But the savingsfrom reduced interest payments have been immediate while the taxlosses from indexation will be felt over the long term. Beforethe index linked bond was introduced, the UK government had collectedtax on all interest income but it had exempted bonds from capitalgains taxation if they were held for longer than one year. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand followed Britain's lead byintroducing index linked debt during the 1980's and early 1990's,but their stock of index linked debt is much smaller than Britain'sboth in absolute terms and as a share of their national debt. Canada has about $5.8 billion ($4.4 U.S.) of index linked debt,Australia has about $6 billion ($4.8 U.S.) and New Zealand hasonly about $200 million ($130 U.S.). New Zealand has recentlyincreased its use of index linked debt and investor interest hasbeen strong because of the high yields (5.8%) and the fact thatNew Zealand will soon have an election under a new system of proportionalrepresentation which could weaken political support for non-inflationaryeconomic policies. Canada issued its first index linked bondsduring 1991 when real interest rates on conventional bonds wereat high levels and then reduced the supply as interest rates fell. But the Canadian govenment recently began issuing new index linkedbonds and plans to have quarterly auctions at a rate of $300-500million. Sweden introduced index linked bonds only last yearbut it is promoting them so aggressively that they could be worthabout 10% of Sweden's $100 billion of public debt by early 1997. The bonds have so far suffered from illiquidity because pensionfunds have been hoarding them, but the coming expansion of supplyshould enhance trading. They offer a real yield of over 5.5%as well as an inflation adjustment but, in contrast to Britainand other commonwealth countries, there is no tax exemption forthe inflation indexation component of the return. The U.S. Treasury will soon hold hearings around the country toobtain investor reactions to its proposals for an inflation adjustedbond. At present, the only details which the Treasury has providedabout the new instrument is that it will be available in maturitiesof ten or thirty years and that it will be in denominations of$1,000 per bond. It has not yet decided which price index touse for adjusting the bonds for inflation but is considering avariety of alternatives, including the Consumer Price Index, theGDP deflator, the CPI excluding food and energy and the EmploymentCost Index. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017330 WT01-B13-61IA018-000196-B044-291http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/mutualfundboom1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170341 text/html 7475HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:59:35 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:37:52 GMTContent-length: 7290Content-type: text/html Economic Implications of the Mutual Fund Boom By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The recent growth of the American mutual fund industry has been so dramatic that it is giving the U.S. a very different financial structure than other industrial countries. In the modern era, countries have typically organized their financial system around either a universal banking model encompassing many financial services or a hybrid structure which separates commercial and investment banking. The U.S. is in the midst of creating a whole new financial system, in which the mutual fund sector is increasingly displacing commercial banks as the major repositories of household wealth as well as suppliers of capital to many small and medium sized companies. The U.S. mutual fund industry began during the 1920's and grew steadily during the decades after World War Two but its total assets remained very modest compared to the banking system until recently. In 1960, equity funds had assets of $11.9 billion and bond funds had assets of $5.1 billion but there were not yet any money market funds. The bull market of the 1960's increased the industry's equity assets to $38.5 billion while bond funds grew to $9.1 billion. There was little growth of equity assets during the 1970's because of the severe bear market which resulted from high inflation during the middle years of the decade but the introduction of money market funds produced $76.4 billion of new assets for the industry during the period 1975-1980. Money market funds exploded after 1978 because the Federal Reserve sharply increased money market yields to combat inflation while banks were not permitted to offer market interest rates on their deposits until the early 1980's. As a result, money funds accounted for almost 75% of the mutual fund industry's total assets by 1982. The U.S. mutual fund industry now has $1.3 trillion of equity oriented funds, $811 billion of long-term bond funds, and $753 billion of money market funds. Its collective assets of nearly $3 trillion now greatly exceed the $2.3 trillion of assets in the national banking system but are still smaller than the $4.2 trillion of assets in all of America's 10,000 insured commercial banks. The ownership of mutual funds is not as universal as the ownership of bank accounts. About 30.2% of U.S. households own a mutual fund whereas over 87% of households have a bank account. But the population of mutual fund owners is expanding rapidly. It included 24% of households in 1990, 12% in 1984 and only 6% in 1980. Mutual fund owners also tend to be more affluent than other groups. In 1994, 57% of households with incomes above $75,000 had mutual funds compared to 40% for the $35,000-50,000 income group and 13% for people with incomes below $25,000 per annum. The mutual fund industry will benefit as well from the fact that younger people are more accustomed to using mutual funds as outlets for their savings than older people. At present, 27% of households in the age group 35-45 own mutual funds compared to 33% for people in the age group 44-64 and 21% for people aged 65 and over. The ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP in the U.S. is now at 38% or the highest among the major industrial nations. The country with the second highest ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP is France at 35% but over seventy five percent of French assets are in money market funds and bond funds whereas in the U.S. equities account for 45% of the industry's assets. Germany has the lowest ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP among the major industrial nations. It is only 5.2% and just 25% of mutual fund assets are invested in equities. Other major English speaking nations have ratios of mutual funds assets to GDP in the 14-15% range. In Britain, the ratio is 14.4% and practically all of the assets are in equities because the tax system discourages retail demand for bond funds. In Canada, mutual fund assets are equal to 14.5% of GDP and half of the assets are in equities. The Japanese stock market is so dominated by corporate cross shareholdings that retail investors own only about one fourth of corporate equity. As a result, the ratio of mutual fund assets to GDP is only 9.5% and fixed income funds account for about 67% of industry assets. Ironically, the factor which produced such a dramatic expansion of the mutual fund industry during the 1990's was a monetary policy designed to rescue American banks from a sharp rise in non-performing real estate loans. After 1991, the Federal Reserve reduced nominal short-term interest rates to 3.0% or the lowest level in three decades in order to boost the profits of the U.S. banking system. The positive shape of the yield curve permitted U.S. banks to significantly bolster their lending margins, earn healthy profits from their large portfolios of long term government bonds (U.S. banks had more government bonds than commercial loans in 1993) and boost their equity/asset ratios to the highest level since the 1960's. But low money market yields and a positively sloped yield curve have also encouraged households to shift savings flows from bank deposits into higher yielding instruments, such as bond and equity mutual funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013370 WT01-B13-62IA018-000196-B044-310http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_spain.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170352 text/html 4483HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 16:59:51 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:30 GMTContent-length: 4301Content-type: text/html The Growth Fund of Spain, Inc. (GSP) November 19, 1996, Chicago, Illinois -- The Growth Fund of Spain,Inc., as of October 31, 1996, had 92% of its portfolio investedin Spanish equities, 6% in Spanish peseta time deposits and 2%in U.S. cash equivalents. The following is a comparison of the sector weightings of thefund's 92% equity component and the official sector weightingsof the Madrid Stock Exchange (MSE) General Index, as of October31, 1996:                        Fund Percentage     MSE General     Sector              of Equities    Index Percentage     Banks                31.02%             31.06%     Communications       10.32              11.83     Construction          5.53               5.25     Food                  1.26               2.94     Investment            0.00               2.74     Metals / Machinery    7.87               2.93     Miscellaneous        11.45               7.09     Oil / Chemicals       5.06               9.68     Utilities            27.49              26.48     Total               100.00%            100.00% Activity Summary: The Growth Fund of Spain, Inc. gained 3.31%on a net asset value basis and 3.19% in market price during October,both in U.S. dollars. The Spanish stock market continued to performwell, backed by the strength of the telecommunications sector,the banking sector and the electric utilities sector which allcontinue to benefit from deregulation and a lower interest-rateenvironment. The food sector suffered the biggest losses withthe recent tax hike on cigarettes starting to affect the profitmargins of tobacco producer Tabacalera. Going forward, the managersdo not rule out a minor correction in the near term, but theyanticipate that the effects will be short lived. The following is current as of October 31, 1996. Ten Largest Holdings and Weightings:(as a percentage of the portfolio's 92% equity holdings)Banco Bilbao Vizcaya   		9.19%Banco Popular Espanol 	 	8.69Endesa                 		8.44Iberdrolas       		5.53Telefonica de Espana		5.49Bankinter 			5.37Repsol				5.06Pryca Centros Comm. 		4.65Vallehermoso 			3.43Union Electrica Fenosa		3.24 Number of Equity Issues: 38 Market Price: $12.125 Net Asset Value: $14.96 Premium/(Discount): (18.95%) Current Net Assets: $251,981,000 Total Shares Outstanding: 16,843,593 Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago StockExchange. Since the inception of the fund, it has repurchased and retired1,065,400 of its shares. All performance information is historical and does not representfuture performance. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025040 WT01-B13-63IA018-000196-B044-326http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_highincome.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170401 text/html 3658HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:00:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:21 GMTContent-length: 3476Content-type: text/html Kemper High Income Trust (KHI) Declares Dividend November 19, 1996 Chicago, Illinois -- Kemper High Income Trustdeclared a monthly dividend on October 31, 1996, of $0.075 pershare, payable November 29, 1996, to shareholders of record onNovember 15, 1996. This is unchanged from the previous monthlydividend. Activity Summary: High yield bonds posted positive returns inOctober but were inhibited somewhat by economic data that showeda slow down in economic growth. Kemper High Income Trustgained 3.40% in market value and 0.72% in net asset value. Bycomparison, the Salomon Brothers Extended High Yield Market Indexgained 1.16%. Fund Objective: To provide the highest current income obtainable,consistent with reasonable risk with capital gains secondary.Investment by the fund in lower rated bonds presents special riskconsiderations. The following is current as of October 31, 1996. Portfolio Composition:High yield bonds            95%Cash and equivalents         4Preferred and common stock   1Five Largest Holdings:Trump Atlantic CityTelewest CommunicationsMGM Grand Hotel Finance Corp.Rogers CantelBell CablemediaSecurities ratings*:BB       22B        69Other     9*Based upon the higher of Standard & Poor'sCorporation or Moody's Investors Service, Inc. Market Price: $9.875 Net Asset Value: $9.11 Premium/(Discount): 8.40% Annualized Dividend: $0.90 Average Maturity: 8.2 years; 7.5 years excluding the effectsof leveraging Duration: 6.0 years; 5.5 years excluding the effects of leveraging Current Net Assets: $212,221,000 Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago Stock Exchange All performance information is historical and does not represent future results. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025020 WT01-B13-64IA018-000196-B044-340http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_ingovt.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170408 text/html 3530HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:00:09 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:13 GMTContent-length: 3348Content-type: text/html Kemper Intermediate Government Trust (KGT) Declares Distribution November 19, 1996, Chicago, Illinois -- Kemper Intermediate GovernmentTrust declared a monthly distribution on October 31, 1996, of$0.055 per share, payable November 29, 1996, to shareholders ofrecord on November 15, 1996. This is unchanged from the previousmonthly dividend. It is anticipated that, in the current interestrate environment, a portion of the monthly distribution may constitutea return of capital. Activity Summary: Reports of slower economic growth and a rallyin the Treasury market supported strong returns in the governmentbond market in October. Kemper Intermediate Government Trustgained 1.72% in net asset value and 0.75% in market value. Treasuriesoutperformed mortgages and were favored by the fund's portfoliomanagers. The fund benefited as yields declined due to its modestlyextended duration. Fund Objective: To provide high current income consistent withpreservation of capital by investing in U.S. Government securitiesand foreign government securities. The fund's shares are notguaranteed by the U.S. Government. The following is current as of October 31, 1996. Largest Sector Holdings:Mortgages                      45%Intermediate-term governments  24Short-term governments         31 Market Price: $7.375 Net Asset Value: $7.97 Premium/(Discount): (7.47%) Annualized Dividend: $0.66 Average Maturity: 5.9 years Duration: 3.5 years Current Net Assets: $270,870,000 Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago Stock Exchange All performance information is historical and does not represent future performance. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025030 WT01-B13-65IA018-000196-B044-357http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_multimarket.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170415 text/html 4096HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:00:16 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:05 GMTContent-length: 3914Content-type: text/html Kemper Multi-Market Income Trust (KMM) Declares Dividend November 19, 1996, Chicago, Illinois -- Kemper Multi-Market IncomeTrust declared a monthly dividend on October 31, 1996, of $0.0825per share, payable November 29, 1996, to shareholders of recordon November 15, 1996. This amount is unchanged from the previousmonthly dividend. Activity Summary: Kemper Multi-Market Income Trust, gained 1.14%in net asset value and 1.99% in market price in October. The fund'sperformance was inhibited by an underperformance of high yieldsingle B credits and media/cable related issues. The fund's exposureto high yield bonds was reduced to 35% from 40% in anticipationof an underperformance of the high yield market as a whole. Thisreduction enabled the managers to increase the fund's positionin Treasuries and foreign non-dollar bonds. Fund Objective: High current income consistent with prudent totalreturn asset management by investing assets in a broad range ofincome producing securities. Investment by the fund in lower ratedbonds and foreign securities presents special risk considerations. The following is current as of October 31, 1996. Portfolio Composition:High yield corporates                          35%Foreign currency bonds                         25Treasury notes and bonds                       14Mortgages                                      13Emerging markets                                6(U.S. dollar denominated, Argentina 2%,Brazil 2%, Mexico 1% and Poland,Venezuela less than 1%)High grade corporates                           1Cash and cash equivalents   Treasuries (1-3 years)                       6Securities ratings*:AAA      56%AA        2A         4BB       13B        23Other     2*Based upon the higher of Standard & Poor'sCorporation or Moody's Investors Service, Inc. Market Price: $10.625 Net Asset Value: $10.83 Premium/(Discount): (1.89%) Annualized Dividend: $0.99 Average Maturity: 8.2 years Duration: 4.9 years Current Net Assets: $217,234,000 Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago Stock Exchange All performance information is historical and does not represent future results. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025010 WT01-B13-66IA018-000196-B044-367http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_muniincome.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170422 text/html 4270HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:00:24 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:10:56 GMTContent-length: 4088Content-type: text/html Kemper Municipal Income Trust (KTF) Declares Dividend November 19, 1996, Chicago, Illinois -- Kemper Municipal IncomeTrust declared a monthly dividend on October 31, 1996, of $0.0725per common share, payable November 29, 1996, to shareholders ofrecord on November 15, 1996. This is unchanged from the previousmonthly dividend. Activity Summary: Kemper Municipal Income Trust gained 1.10% innet asset value, while slipping 0.42% in market value in October. The municipal market was volatile in October as investors debatedthe outcome of the congressional elections and whether or notthe Federal Reserve Board would tighten rates. Supply wasmoderately heavy ($14.8 billion) and was met with relatively modestdemand. The Bond Buyer 25-Bond Revenue Index, began themonth at 6.01% (9/26/96), dropped to 5.95% (10/3/96), then fell to5.94% (10/31/96). The municipal to Treasury yield ratio rose to89% from 87% during the month. Portfolio Manager Chris Mier looksfor rates to remain stable with a bias to move lower. He anticipatesmoderate supply. Fund Objective: To provide a high level of current income exemptfrom Federal income taxes by investing in a diversified portfolioof investment grade tax-exempt municipal securities. Incomemay be subject to state and local taxes and a portion may be subjectto the alternative minimum tax for some investors. The following is current as of October 31, 1996 Largest Sector Holdings:U.S. government backed refunded bonds  15%Electricity bonds                      14Airport bonds                          14State single family housing bonds      12Waste disposal bonds                    9Securities ratings*:AAA          48%AA           17A            13BBB          15Not rated     7*Based upon the higher of Standard & Poor'sCorporation or Moody's Investors Service, Inc. Market Price: $12.50 Net Asset Value: $12.19 Premium/(Discount): 2.54% Annualized Dividend: $0.87 Average Maturity: 21.1 years excluding the effects of leveraging Duration: 5.0 years excluding the effects of leveraging Current Net Assets: $676,320,000 AMT (% of portfolio): 53.1% Prerefunded Bonds (% of portfolio): 15% Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago Stock Exchange Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1024990 WT01-B13-67IA018-000196-B044-383http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_stratincome.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170430 text/html 4045HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:00:31 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:10:49 GMTContent-length: 3863Content-type: text/html Kemper Strategic Income Fund (KST) Declares Dividend November 19, 1996, Chicago, Illinois -- Kemper Strategic IncomeFund declared a monthly dividend on October 31, 1996, of $0.147per share, payable November 29, 1996, to shareholders of recordon November 15, 1996. This amount is unchanged from the previousmonthly dividend. Activity Summary: After several strong months of performance,Kemper Strategic Income Fund decelerated somewhat in October. The fund returned 0.99% in net asset value (NAV), underperformingthe 1.61% average return of its Lipper peer group. A 5.38% gainin market price, however, boosted the fund's premium to 18% overNAV. The weaker NAV performance was the result of holdings in Brazil,which impaired performance in the emerging markets allocation. Fund Objective: To provide high current income by investing itsassets in a combination of (1) lower-rated corporate fixed-incomesecurities, (2) fixed-income securities of emerging market andother foreign issuers and (3) fixed-income securities of the U.S.Government and its agencies and instrumentalities and privatemortgage-backed issuers. Investment by the fund in lower ratedbonds and in foreign securities presents special risk considerations. The following is current as of October 31, 1996. Portfolio Composition:Mortgage securities                  33%Emerging markets (Argentina 19%,Brazil 14%, Panama 3%, Mexico 2% and Venezuela 1%)                   39High yield corporates                27Other securities                      1Securities ratings*:AAA     35%A        6BBB      0BB      23B       35Other    1*Based upon the higher of Standard & Poor's Corporation or Moody's Investors Service, Inc. Market Price: $17.50 Net Asset Value: $14.83 Premium/(Discount): 18.00% Annualized Dividend: $1.764 Average Maturity: 13.4 years; 9.2 years excluding the effects of leveraging Duration: 6.2 years; 4.3 years excluding the effects of leveraging Current Net Assets: $51,146,000 Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago Stock Exchange Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1025000 WT01-B13-68IA018-000196-B044-395http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/pr_stratmuni.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170437 text/html 4304HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:00:38 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:10:40 GMTContent-length: 4122Content-type: text/html Kemper Strategic Municipal Income Trust (KSM) Declares Dividend November 19, 1996, Chicago, Illinois -- Kemper Strategic MunicipalIncome Trust declared a monthly dividend on October 31, 1996 of$0.068 per share, payable November 29, 1996, to shareholders ofrecord on November 15, 1996. This is unchanged from the previousmonthly dividend. Activity Summary: Kemper Strategic Municipal Income Trust advanced0.82% in net asset value and 1.60% in market value in October. The municipal market was volatile in October as investors debatedthe outcome of the congressional elections and whether or notthe Federal Reserve Board would tighten rates. Supply wasmoderately heavy ($14.8 billion) and was met with relatively modestdemand. The Bond Buyer 25-Bond Revenue Index, began themonth at 6.01% (9/26/96), dropped to 5.95% (10/3/96), then fell to5.94% (10/31/96). The municipal to Treasury yield ratio rose to89% from 87% during the month. Portfolio Manager Chris Mier looksfor rates to remain stable with a bias to move lower. He anticipatesmoderate supply. Fund Objective: To provide a high level of current income exemptfrom Federal income taxes by investing in a diversified portfolioof tax-exempt municipal securities. Income may be subject to stateand local taxes and a portion may be subject to the alternativeminimum tax for some investors. The following is current as of October 31, 1996. Largest Sector Holdings:U.S. government backed refunded bonds  17%Senior care bonds                      14Non-senior care bonds                  11State single family housing bonds       8Industrial Revenue Bonds		7Securities ratings*:AAA           4%AA            7A             3BBB          25B             2Not rated**  59 *Based upon the higher of Standard & Poor's   Corporation or Moody's Investors Service, Inc.**Deemed comparable to 14% AAA, 5% A, 4% BBB,  31% BB and 5% B by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Market Price: $12.25 Net Asset Value: $12.06 Premium/(Discount): 1.58% Annualized Dividend: $0.816 Average Maturity: 16.9 years Duration: 4.7 years Current Net Assets: $127,295,000 AMT (% of portfolio): 26.7% Prerefunded Bonds (% of portfolio): 17.1% Principal Exchanges: New York Stock Exchange and Chicago Stock Exchange Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1024980 WT01-B13-69IA018-000196-B045-8http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/wsj/growth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170503 text/html 9073HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:01:04 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 13-Nov-96 20:54:21 GMTContent-length: 8888Content-type: text/html  The GROWTH Investing Strategy: Riding the Surge of Hard-Charging Companies Growth style equity investors earn their spurs by roping in hot-performing companies and riding their rising earnings for as long as they can. For the growth stockpicker, the game plan is simple: Earnings drive stock prices, so invest in those companies that are outearning the market. "We focus on the fastest growing sectors of the market or economy and invest in leading companies that have historically delivered consistent earnings growth. Most importantly, we look for growth stocks selling at a reasonable price," says Patrick Adams, portfolio manager of the $2.7 billion Kemper Growth Fund (as of 9/30/96). Growth stock followers scan the investment horizon, hoping to catch a glimpse of that rarest of breeds -- successful companies with the potential to sustain growth over the long term. Industry heavyweights like Microsoft, Disney, and Home Depot come to mind. In searching for these stocks, analysts look for the indicators that point to a sunny earnings forecast. They pursue firms with healthy profits, rising sales, and rock-solid balance sheets. They dig beyond the numbers to unearth market leaders with strong management teams, superior products, and minimal competition. They scour the corporate landscape in search of innovative technologies. High-flying earnings potential, however, is only part of the Kemper growth equation. To avoid being saddled with unnecessary risks, you also have to factor in the price of your growth. "The key is to reap the potential rewards of growth stock investing without overpaying for that growth," says Tom Regner, equity strategist for Zurich Kemper Investments. "It's a philosophy we at Kemper Funds call 'growth at the right price,' or 'GARP.'" It's also a philosophy that calls for even deeper levels of research, a strong suit of the Zurich Kemper Investment organization. A company's earnings must not only be accurately projected, they must also be measured against its stock price to determine whether the anticipated growth is underpriced, overvalued, or priced fairly. "Look for opportunities where all the good news is not yet reflected in the stock's price," explains Mr. Regner. "If you can find a company that's 20% more expensive than the market but growing 40% faster, buy it." But when to sell? Like any good investment style, the growth philosophy is ruled by clear-cut buy and sell disciplines. The time to end the ride is when the stock reaches its fair market value or a decline in earnings is anticipated. Average annual total returns for one-, five-, and 10-year periods ended 9/30/96 are 12.75%, 9.84%, and 14.15%, respectively. Source: Towers Data Systems. The hypothetical $10,000 investment is from 10/1/86 to 9/30/96. This investment and the average annual returns above reflect reinvestment of all dividends and adjustment for the maximum sales charge of 5.75%. Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returns and net asset value fluctuate. Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or less than original cost. All performance is for class A shares. The Fund offers different classes of shares. Performance of other classes will vary from that shown because of differences in sales charges and fees paid by shareholders investing in different share classes. Kemper's growth philosophy focuses on stocks that don't depend on the economy for their success. "We follow a bottom-up approach where company fundamentals, not the economy, steer us toward great companies at attractive prices," says Mr. Adams. As an example of this "growth at the right price" philosophy, he points to the stocks in the Kemper Growth Fund, which have enjoyed an 18% long-term growth rate (as of 9/30/96). While the fortunes of some growth stocks may not be tied to the economy, certain industries fare better in different cycles. When the economy cools, for instance, growth managers tend to look toward health care and financial stocks. Their attention may shift, however, to technology and consumer products as the economy heats up. Much of the results of a growth portfolio will typically come in the form of capital appreciation. As a general rule, growth companies pay low dividend yields, choosing instead to reinvest their earnings for continuing expansion. While growth stocks share several key characteristics, they come in many shapes and sizes. In the Kemper Blue Chip Fund, you'll find household names, such as Eli Lilly and B.F. Goodrich. The Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund features emerging companies like Tellabs. And the long-standing Kemper Technology Fund holds today's leading innovators, including 3Com and U.S. Robotics. (Keep in mind that portfolio composition and holdings are subject to change, and investments in smaller companies present greater risk than investments in larger, more established companies.) When compared to the value school, growth provides a more conventional, mainstream approach. And so, it appeals to droves of investors who are naturally lured by the sparkle of the brightest corporate lights, the promise of the market's latest trendsetters, and the prestige of some of Wall Street's best-known names -- companies that often change the way we live, work, and play. "We focus on the fastest growing sectors of the market or economy and invest in leading companies that have historically delivered consistent earnings growth. Most importantly, we look for growth stocks selling at a reasonable price." Patrick Adams Portfolio Manager Zurich Kemper Investments GROWTH INVESTING Growth. Growth. Growth. Patrick Adams believes that growth stocks are the most exciting and rewarding companies to invest in. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023560 WT01-B13-70IA018-000196-B045-22http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/wsj/value.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170515 text/html 10157HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:01:13 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 13-Nov-96 20:54:31 GMTContent-length: 9972Content-type: text/html  The VALUE Investing Strategy: Bravely Entering The Arena Of Contrarian Stocks Like the courageous matador, the value investor stands firm in the face of lowered expectations surrounding a stock. Value represents a contrarian style, finding beautiful swans where the rest of the market sees ugly ducklings. It pursues the downtrodden and overlooked -- stocks of viable companies that are currently out-of-favor and on sale at bargain prices. "We look for stocks that are unloved for the wrong reason," says David Dreman, chairman of Dreman Value Advisors and a leading champion of value investing. "We believe there will be enough positive earnings surprises or opinion changes, so that these companies will outperform the market over time." Regarded as a pioneer among contrarians, Mr. Dreman currently manages the Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund, ranked by Lipper as the number one mutual fund in the equity-income category over the one-year, five-year, and life-of-fund time periods as of 9/30/96.* (One yr. - 1/147; five yr. - 1/57; life - 1/37) * Based upon changes in class A shares net asset value with dividends reinvested and without sales charges which, if included, may have resulted in less favorable results. Inception date of 3/18/88. Past performance does not represent future performance. In the topsy-turvy arena of investing, value disciples count on one predictable outcome: investor over-reaction to bad news, which inevitably sends short-term stock prices tumbling to levels much lower than their earnings would suggest. Bad news can come in many forms -- a disappointing earnings quarter, concerns over the economy in general, disturbing news out of the White House. Investors were seeing red, for example, during the 1993 debate over health care reform. Health care stocks nosedived, and value investors picked up some quality companies usually found only in the growth sector. Since then, talk of revamping the medical system has quieted, while many of those health care stocks have rebounded nicely. What does a Kemper-Dreman value stock look like? Its most distinguishing characteristic is a low price-to-earnings ratio, the holy grail pursued by most value investors. In addition to a small price tag, however, value stocks must show signs of financial strength, along with above-average dividend yields and historical growth of earnings and dividends -- qualities found today in companies such as Fannie Mae, Banc One, and Philip Morris. Value investing appeals to the bargain hunter in all of us. It's the same force that compels us to buy our swimwear and lawn furniture in the dead of winter. But value also attracts the patient and disciplined investor. It takes time for out-of-favor companies to achieve the turnaround that value investors bank on. And it takes discipline to follow the strict principles of the Kemper-Dreman strategy, which means selling stocks when P/E ratios approach the market average, regardless of how favorable their prospects appear. While some critics maintain that value is a riskier proposition, supporters maintain just the opposite. The stock's prices and expectations are already low, they argue, so additional downturns can't do much damage. "Put it this way. You will probably get hurt worse falling from a high ladder than from a small step stool," observes Mr. Dreman. Many recent academic studies suggest that contrarians may be onto something with their strategy of pursuing stocks with low price-to-earnings ratios. Source: Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. The chart is a historical comparison of average annual returns of stocks of the 1,500 largest companies on the Compustat database. The returns do not reflect future performance of these market segments or of any specific investment. Mr. Dreman has devoted his life's work to studying the performance of low-priced stocks. His much-published analysis of 1,500 large companies has shown that low P/E stocks outperformed high P/Es over a 20-year period (see chart at right). In fact, the cheapest stocks in the study topped the market average for annual returns by a margin of 17.2% to 14.7%. The most expensive stocks, on the other hand, posted average annual returns of just 11.2%. Mr. Dreman's research looks at total return, including both appreciation and dividends. Because value stocks pay higher-than-average dividends, they tend to weather down markets better than growth stocks. When times are tough, it's often those dividend returns that help to prop up stock prices and provide a measure of capital protection. Other research shows that low-priced stocks performed better than big-ticket stocks among companies of all sizes. As a result, the Kemper-Dreman team has applied their contrarian school of thought to their entire line of value portfolios. The Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund, for example, pursues large cap companies such as General Electric and Mobil. At the other end of the spectrum, the Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund consists of smaller companies, like Bally Entertainment. And the Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund focuses mostly on larger companies, which currently include Amoco and Humana. As noted earlier, portfolio composition and holdings are subject to change. Average annual total returns for one-year, five-year, and life-of-fund periods ended 9/30/96 are 23.08%, 17.27%, and 16.92%, respectively. Source: Towers Data Systems. The hypothetical $10,000 investment is from 3/18/88 to 9/30/96. This investment and the average annual returns above reflect reinvestment of all dividends and adjustment for the maximum sales charge of 5.75%. Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returns and net asset value fluctuate. Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or less than original cost. All performance is for class A shares. The Fund offers different classes of shares. Performance of other classes will vary from that shown because of differences in sales charges and fees paid by shareholders investing in different share classes. The sector concentration strategy of the Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund presents greater risk than a more diversified fund. The S&P 500 is an unmanaged index generally representative of the U.S. stock market. "We look for stocks that are unloved for the wrong reason. We believe there will be enough positive earnings surprises or opinion changes, so that these companies will outperform the market over time." David Dreman Chairman Dreman Value Advisors VALUE INVESTING Value. Value. Value. David Dreman has developed a successful investment technique -- buying low P/E stocks. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023560 WT01-B13-71IA018-000196-B045-40http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/wsj/growth_and_value.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170531 text/html 9327HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:01:32 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 13-Nov-96 20:54:27 GMTContent-length: 9142Content-type: text/html  The GROWTH and VALUE Strategy: Working In Tandem For A Smoother Ride By now, you've seen that growth and value are vastly different styles of equity investing. Growth pursues fashionable companies in the penthouse, while value roots around for buried treasures in the bargain basement. Value likes underpriced stocks; growth likes oversized earnings. So the question may still linger: Growth or value? Which style is best suited to you as a long-term investor looking to help reduce risks? Both. Like cowboy boots and the matador's slippers, investment styles work best in pairs. For the savvy investor, the issue is not one of growth or value, but rather growth and value. Why? In a word, diversification. Every investment professional preaches the value of diversification. Don't put all your eggs in one basket, they advise. Spread your investments across several instruments as a way of helping lower risk. Good advice, but many investors fail to realize that real diversification occurs when investments are also spread across the two styles of growth and value. Yes, the two disciplines are radically different approaches to stock investing, but investors must come to view them as complementary, not competing. There's plenty of room for both in a well-rounded investment portfolio. "Using only one investment style is like rowing a boat with only one oar," says Steve Reynolds, chief investment officer of equities for Zurich Kemper Investments. "You may eventually reach your destination, but it's going to be a tougher trip." Source: Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. for the period from 3/31/88 to 9/30/96. Risk is measured by the volatility of returns (standard deviation). Of course, this information is historical and does not represent future performance. Also, there is no guarantee that any particular portfolio strategy will reduce risk or result in a profit. Despite their many differences, growth and value actually share some significant common threads. Both techniques pursue financially strong, quality companies with steady track records of growth. And, in the case of Kemper's "growth at the right price" philosophy, both also seek mispriced stocks that are selling below their real, or intrinsic, value. For the ambidextrous investor who's equally adept at growth and value, a blended portfolio of both styles may produce better results than a "one-handed" approach. And then there's risk to think about. If the diversification preachers are right, a portfolio of growth and value should carry lower risks than an all-growth or all-value strategy. And that's exactly what happens. An analysis (see chart at right) reveals that a portfolio containing equal investments in the two styles would have had lower volatility than either style alone. Growth and value are both governed by sets of strict, uncompromising principles about the buying and selling of stocks. That's why both disciplines work so well over time. But in the short term, depending on the temperature of the economy, one style usually outshines the other. Annualized returns based on year-end data from S&P 500 stock groupings. The chart shows performance of the S&P/Barra Growth and Value Indexes. These unmanaged indexes are generally representative of U.S. growth stocks and U.S. value stocks, respectively. The indexes assume reinvestment of distributions and do not reflect the effects of sales charges or brokerage commissions. Fund holdings and performance will differ. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Growth and value tend to be counter-cyclical, with one style usually outperforming the other (seetable at left). This year, both styles are up, with growth surpassing value by a fairly healthy margin. Through the first nine months of 1996, the S&P/Barra Growth Index was up 15.6%, compared to 13.5% for the S&P 500 and 11.4% for the S&P/Barra Value Index. The tendency of growth and value to flip-flop positions as top performer can be both a blessing and a curse. For the wise investor who steadfastly commits to both schools, it means better diversification. For the impetuous investor, however, the temptation may be to switch back and forth between growth and value, pledging allegiance to whichever style happens to be in vogue at the time. Unfortunately, most of these chameleons tend to jump ship just when their abandoned style is about to set sail. "Style switching is one of the main reasons investors and fund managers underperform the market," says Mr. Reynolds. "Style switchers almost never win. That's why it's so important to know that your fund managers are dedicated to their investment style." A portfolio of growth and value also provides an additional benefit -- less duplication of stocks. A mutual fund investor, for instance, may choose three different growth funds that each invest in the same industries, maybe even the same companies. While there may be occasional overlaps between growth and value, the two styles generally cast their lines in entirely different waters. In the end, the smart investor will resist the urge to time the market and remain faithful to the proven styles of growth and value. "Without a strong commitment to your investment styles, the market usually takes advantage of you instead of you taking advantage of the market," notes Mr. Reynolds. So commit to an investment style. Better yet, commit to two. Armed with the cowboy's lasso in one hand and the matador's cape in the other, you'll be fully equipped to take the bull by the horns when you take on your investment challenges. Please note that there is no guarantee that a particular management style will be successful and that the past performance of a particular style is not representative of future results. "At Zurich Kemper Investments, our unique growth and value styles are different enough to offer broad diversification, yet similar enough to ensure consistency. Our growth managers look first for high growth companies and second for reasonable stock prices. Our value managers begin with low-priced stocks and then seek out attractive growth opportunities. Both styles pursue stocks selling at the right price." Steve Reynolds Chief Investment Officer of Equities Zurich Kemper Investments © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023560 WT01-B13-72IA018-000196-B045-49http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/wsj/diversified.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170539 text/html 5493HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:01:40 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 13-Nov-96 20:54:19 GMTContent-length: 5308Content-type: text/html  Building A Diversified Portfolio: Two Styles Sharing One Spotlight Astute investors don't buy individual mutual funds; they build diversified portfolios of funds -- some growth and some value, some small cap and some large cap. The challenge is often not in the diversifying, but in finding one company that can provide such a variety of investment options. Zurich Kemper Investments is the nation's only mutual fund complex where growth and value are managed independently by separate organizations with their own headquarters, management teams, portfolio managers, analysts, and even two chief investment officers. Zurich Kemper Investments, located in Chicago, manages the firm's growth portfolios, while New York-based Dreman Value Advisors, Inc., founded by contrarian pioneer David Dreman, directs the value side. Today, Zurich Kemper Investments continues to add new members to its worldwide organization, bringing in experienced experts who are well-versed and fully committed to the Kemper Funds' styles of growth and value investing, as well as their renowned fixed-income and international portfolios. Zurich Kemper Investments' trademark since 1948 has been research. Both disciplines rely heavily on accurate primary research to identify quality stocks at affordable prices. Says Steve Reynolds, chief investment officer of equities: "The cornerstone of the Kemper Funds investment process is solid research, both quantitative and qualitative. It's research that enables our portfolio managers to recognize stocks that are selling at bargain prices in the growth and value sectors and are likely to experience significant price appreciation." Contact your financial advisor to begin building your portfolio with the growth and value funds managed by Zurich Kemper Investments. If you know his or her e-mail address, send an e-mail now. Today's investors are smarter than ever. More patient, more disciplined. And wiser about the important role played by their financial representatives. They know that the best way to help build wealth is to build well-rounded portfolios. They understand that chasing financial dreams no longer means chasing the latest fad in the marketplace. And they've learned that investing success depends on expert investment advice. At Zurich Kemper Investments, we share your desire for a civilized, practical approach to wealth building. That's why we offer the building blocks to help you construct a diversified portfolio -- one designed around your goals and assembled with the guidance of your financial representative. Take the Next Steps To learn more about the benefits of diversification: Seek Advice Talk to your financial representative to discuss the merits of growth and value investing. Call Us Call Zurich Kemper Investments toll-free at 1-888-KEMPER7 for help in finding a financial representative in your area or to obtain a prospectus which contains more complete information, including management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023560 WT01-B13-73IA018-000196-B047-71http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/funds/salescharges.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171206 text/html 2369HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:08:06 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:11:24 GMTContent-length: 2185Content-type: text/html Sales Charges Prospectuses And Important Information The maximum initial sales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Blue ChipFund, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund, Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, Kemper Horizon Fund, Kemper Europe Fund, Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund,Kemper International Fund, KemperGrowth Fund, Kemper Technology Fund, Kemper Small Capitalization EquityFund, Kemper Total Return Fund and Kemper Value+Growth Fund. The maximuminitial sales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Income Funds (3.5%for Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund and KemperShort-Intermediate Government Fund) and 5.0% for Kemper Target EquityFunds. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditionsas described in the funds' prospectuses. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015380 WT01-B13-74IA018-000196-B045-61http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/john_silvia.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170552 text/html 3723HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:01:52 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:50:30 GMTContent-length: 3539Content-type: text/html Dr. John E. Silvia Biography Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Dr. John E. Silvia is senior vice president and chief economist at Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. He serves on economic advisory committees to the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Public Securities Association. His primary responsibilities include analysis, modeling and forecasting of economic developments and Federal Reserve activity that affect financial markets, especially interest rate trends. This effort includes close collaboration with both fixed income and equity mutual fund managers and pension fund managers. John is also a member of the Investment Policy and Strategy Committee at Kemper. Previous publications include work in the applied, empirical evaluation of money, nominal GNP and interest rate relationships. John's research has appeared in several professional journals, along with The Wall Street Journal, Investor's Business Daily, Barron's, Bondweek, Bankers's Monthly and Trader's Magazine. John holds a bachelor of arts and Ph.D. degree in Economics from Northeastern University in Boston and has a master's degree in Economics from Brown University in Providence. Prior to his career at Kemper, he was with the Harris Bank and also taught at Indiana University. He is a member of the American Economics Association and served on the Board of Directors for the National Association of Business Economists. Dr. Silvia was formerly president of the Chicago Association of Business Economists. He is currently a member of the Blue Chip Survey of Financial Forecasters and the Business Advisory Council of the U.S. Department of Labor. John is a member of the Board of Economic Education for Clergy, Inc. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014840 WT01-B13-75IA018-000196-B045-85http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/curious.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170606 text/html 4169HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 21:31:34 GMTContent-length: 3987Content-type: text/html For The Curious Investor Where is my money? Why is it there? How is it doing? These are thequestions that every investor needs to ask. But it's a broader curiositythat leads an individual investor to want to know more about whathappens when investment dollars are put to work. There are few subjects that are as engrossing as investing can be. Forthose who like to measure change and plot performance progress, theinvestment world offers plenty of analytical tools. Yet others developan interest in investing as a means to an end. These curious investorsapply what they know about investing as they pursue lifetime goals:financing a child's education, acquiring a vacation home or providingfor a carefree retirement. Whatever the source of your curiosity, we hope to pique it in Snapshots,quick glimpses of the state of the U.S. economy and financial markets,and The Longer View, a series of articles on general investing topics. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010040 WT01-B13-76IA018-000196-B045-133http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/economy.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170641 text/html 2972HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 16-Sep-96 14:38:49 GMTContent-length: 2790Content-type: text/html The Economy Should you care about your fellow consumer's confidence? Why is inflation the big, bad boogieman? These commentaries from John Silvia, chief economist for Kemper Funds' management, and others can give you a basic foundation for interpreting current economic developments. Inflation: Tamed! Understanding Consumer Psychology The Game Of Federal Funding The Long And Short Of Interest Rates The Risks Of Investing Health Care Debate Will Shift the Burden Only in America: Income Mobility What's So Special About 6 Percent? 1010160 WT01-B13-77IA018-000196-B045-147http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/markets.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170648 text/html 3214HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:49 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 20:57:34 GMTContent-length: 3030Content-type: text/html The Markets The economy provides an environment, but the markets are whereinvestments perform. Securities are bought and sold in many types andsizes of markets. There are money markets for short-term investors, U.S.and foreign markets for equities investors and a wide range of U.S. andforeign government and corporate markets for income investors. Anynumber of variables - corporate earnings, government stability,interest rate movements, just to name a few - influence these marketsand, by extension, your success as an investor. Presidents And The Stock Market How The Markets React Market Indices Are You Prepared For More Volatility? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010170 WT01-B13-78IA018-000196-B045-157http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/outlook.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170655 text/html 8115HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:02:56 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 18-Dec-96 20:11:02 GMTContent-length: 7930Content-type: text/html Our Outlook December 10, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer As we approach the close of 1996, it's remarkable how eventful the year has been and yet, economically, we are essentially where we were one year ago. The fundamentals of the economy are remarkably similar today to what they were in 1995. Long-term interest rates are approximately 6.5% compared to 6.3% in November 1995. The economy is growing at a rate of approximately 2.2%. Inflation continues to be well under control, at about 3.0%. One significant difference between today and one year ago is that stock prices are on average up 20%. While price movements were more volatile in 1996 than in the past few years, the patient investor was amply rewarded. The prime element sending the stock market higher was strong positive cash flows. Such liquidity in an environment of modestly increasing corporate profits and relatively stable interest rates pushed stocks higher for most of the year. This higher stock market has caused many market observers to worry. While we cannot ignore what has happened, we find no reason to be bearish over the long term. The environment is benign to favorable for financial assets. Given steady interest rates, moderate economic growth and continued moderate corporate earnings growth, there are few excesses in the system. In fact, real interest rates are probably too high considering our outlook for inflation, and we may see them decline over time. Naturally, we cannot rule out the possibility of a market correction. But, in our belief, the downside would appear to be limited to 5% to 8%, which is the size of a typical correction based on historical data. As we have said in previous outlooks, three elements tend to move the market: Earnings. We forecast corporate earnings to range between 0% and 5% on average for the Standard & Poor's 500* in 1997 -- not as high as in recent previous years but positive nonetheless. Interest rates. Rates should remain stable, and short-term interest rates may even decline. Liquidity. Investors, through mutual funds, 401(k)s and qualified contribution plans in particular, will continue to create strong demand for securities. In order to move the market more than would be expected in a typical decline, one or more of these elements will have to turn negative in 1997, and, while future conditions cannot be predicted with certainty, we fail to see what would materially change our outlook. Our outlook going forward is that 1997 should be a lot like 1996. While the economy continued along a relatively consistent path, the United States took some politically significant steps in 1996. First, of course, President Bill Clinton and a Republican Congress were re-elected by the voters. In the first few days after the general election, especially, investors demonstrated their support for such a balance in our leadership. But of much greater long-term significance is the expressed commitment by both parties to balance the federal budget and address certain entitlement programs. The first year after an election can be a fertile time to accomplish major initiatives, and we are hopeful that progress can be made. The future of the Social Security system, which many experts believe will run out of money about 20 years from now, will be a subject in which you can expect Zurich Kemper Investments to play a leadership role. The possible solutions for "fixing Social Security" are finite: raise Social Security taxes, reduce benefits, raise the retirement age, change inflation assumptions or pursue a higher rate of return on assets contributed by workers. We believe that a bipartisan solution will be worked out, which will include giving individuals the option of investing a portion of their Social Security contributions in an account earmarked for them. This change is needed to return credibility to the system, which many Americans have lost faith in. What to do with Social Security is a debate that spans generations and promises to occupy much attention in the coming years. As we hope to help advance constructive debate, we'll be advocating partial privatization for this federal program while maintaining a safety net for many low-wage earners and providing a seamless transition for seniors near or in retirement. With this letter as an economic backdrop, we encourage you to read the following detailed report of your fund, including an interview with your fund's portfolio management. Thank you for your continued support. We appreciate the opportunity to serve your investment needs. Sincerely, Stephen B. Timbers President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. December 10, 1996 *The Standard & Poor's 500 is an unmanaged index generally representative of the U.S. stock market. Stephen B. Timbers is president, chief executive and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI and its affiliates manage approximately $79 billion in assets, including $45 billionin retail mutual funds. Timbers is a graduate of Yale University and holds an M.B.A. from Harvard University. A Weather Forecast For International Markets © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1002180-T WT01-B13-79IA018-000196-B048-255http://www.kemper.com:80/prospectus_email.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171746 text/html 4262HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:13:46 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 21-Oct-96 16:03:53 GMTContent-length: 4080Content-type: text/html Request A Kemper Funds Prospectus By E-mail Thank you for your interest in Kemper Funds. Please select whichprospectus or prospectuses that you would like to receive and completethe following information. A package containing your prospectusrequest and a Kemper Funds account application will be mailed to youwithin two weeks. New! Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Money Funds Kemper Fixed Income Funds Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds Kemper Retirement Fund Series VI Kemper Equity Funds Kemper-Dreman Fund, Inc. Kemper Europe Fund Kemper International Fund and Kemper Global Income Fund Kemper Horizon Fund Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: If we have questions processing your request, may we contact you bytelephone? Yes No If yes, your daytime telephone number: © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010930-A WT01-B13-80IA018-000196-B048-265http://www.kemper.com:80/prospectus_download.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171753 text/html 3020HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:13:54 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 17-Dec-96 20:56:34 GMTContent-length: 2837Content-type: text/html Download A Kemper Funds Prospectus Or Account Application Now (All files are in Adobe Acrobat .pdf format. If you have not previouslyinstalled Adobe Acrobat Reader, the software requiredto view these files, you can download a free copy now.) New! Kemper Asian Growth Fund (620k) Kemper Europe Fund (620k) Kemper Money Funds (166k) Kemper Fixed Income Funds (766k) Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds (669k) Kemper Retirement Fund Series VI (400k) Kemper Equity Funds (719k) Kemper-Dreman Fund, Inc. (338k) Kemper International Fund and Kemper Global Income Fund (900k) Kemper Horizon Fund (526k) Kemper Funds account application (445k) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010940-A WT01-B13-81IA018-000196-B048-278http://www.kemper.com:80/learn/learn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171801 text/html 4117HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:02 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:41:32 GMTContent-length: 3934Content-type: text/html To Learn More Welcome to Kemper Funds, where we believe "A stranger is just a friendwe haven't met yet." If you'd like to learn more about Kemper Funds, we encourage you to lookaround our site. Specifically, be sure to visit About Kemper Funds,Kemper Funds and You and Your FinancialRepresentative. For completeinformation about any Kemper Fund, including management fees andexpenses, request a prospectus now. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010230 WT01-B13-82IA018-000196-B048-292http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/contact_shareholders.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171808 text/html 3997HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:33:28 GMTContent-length: 3815Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper By E-mail: Given ongoing security concerns, please do not refer to any personal information(Social Security numbers, fund account numbers or account balances) in correspondenceyou send to us by e-mail. Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Your inquiry: By Telephone Or By Mail © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011460 WT01-B13-83IA018-000196-B048-306http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/contact_about.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171818 text/html 3967HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:18 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:27:44 GMTContent-length: 3783Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Your first name: Your last name: Your media organization: Your e-mail address: How would you prefer us to respond to your inquiry? (Check one) By e-mail By telephone - Your telephone number By fax - Your fax number Your inquiry: Deadline date: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Thanks for your interest. We'll respond to your inquiry as quickly as possible. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011430-A WT01-B13-84IA018-000196-B048-314http://www.kemper.com:80/learn/contact_learn_other.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171826 text/html 2290HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:20:46 GMTContent-length: 2108Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 between 7 a.m. and 6pm. Central Time Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. Kemper Funds P.O. Box 419151 Kansas City, MO 64141-6151 © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1011470 WT01-B13-85IA018-000196-B049-14http://www.kemper.com:80/about/aboutkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171836 text/html 4749HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:38 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:05:48 GMTContent-length: 4566Content-type: text/html About Kemper Kemper Funds Group is a unit of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI isthe investment advisor to the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 36open-end funds with more than 70 portfolios - including international and global funds, capitalgrowth funds, capital growth and income funds, target equity funds,tax-free income funds, and income funds - and seven closed-end funds. Kemper Funds has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and approximately $45 billion in assets. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organizationheadquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life andnon-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45countries. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. About Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Introducing Kemper Funds Kemper Firsts Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009990-B WT01-B13-86IA018-000196-B049-23http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempercom.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171843 text/html 3207HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 22:29:24 GMTContent-length: 3025Content-type: text/html About Kemper.com Kemper.com is the World Wide Web site for Kemper Funds, one of the largest mutual fund complexes in the United States. This site was established as an extension of the services we provide to ourshareholders and to the financial representatives who offer KemperFunds to the investing public. As we gather information about whatvisitors would like to see at Kemper.com, we expect to be continuallyenhancing the site. All comments and suggestions are welcome, and shouldbe sent via e-mail to info@kemper.com.Thanks for your interest! New To Kemper.com Best of Kemper.com Tour Our Site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010000 WT01-B13-87IA018-000196-B049-42http://www.kemper.com:80/about/bestofkemper/bestofkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171852 text/html 5393HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:14:52 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 16:34:32 GMTContent-length: 5211Content-type: text/html Best of Kemper.com At the risk of seeming immodest, we hope you'll make a special effort to visit what we consider the best of Kemper.com. Holiday Greetings! We review the many gifts of 1996. What does a happy retiree look like? You'll see when you scroll through our photo album. Are you retired? We have a page just waiting for you! How does the stock market perform when the bond market is up -- and vice versa? To aid your understanding of how markets have performed, Kemper.com enables you to create and print your own graph comparing the long-term performance of 12 stock and bond market indices. And how do the Kemper Funds' perform against the leading market indices? You can create and print your own graphical comparison. It's in the daily news but what is the significance of the monthly announcement of the country's employment situation? This page provides a graphical look of how the markets react to the monthly unemployment report. For more information about one of several economic measures, click on the "gear." Are you ready to retire? Our interactive test will analyze your retirement readiness. While you're here, be sure to meet our Friends And Neighbors. You'll meet the professional golfers who wear the Kemper Funds name (an animated arrow will show you where), learn about In the Prime, the public television series sponsored by Kemper Funds Group -- you can even view our Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023880-A WT01-B13-88IA018-000196-B049-53http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/newtokemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171900 text/html 4759HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:01 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 09-Dec-96 16:34:24 GMTContent-length: 4577Content-type: text/html New To Kemper.com The following are highlights of what's been added to Kemper.com. Remember: if you find a page you'll want to visit often, just add it as a bookmark or favorite place to your Web browser. (Since this content of this page changes regularly, you may want to bookmark it.) And remember -- Kemper.com is searchable by keyword. Holiday Greetings! We review the many gifts of 1996. Scroll through Kemper.com's on-line photo album of happy retirees and links to favorite Web sites. To share your happiness (or the happiness of a loved one) with visitors to Kemper.com, mail a color print or slide and a list of favorite Web sites, along with the retiree's name, address, telephone number and e-mail address, to: On-line Photo Album Kemper Distributors, Inc. Shareholder Marketing -- 33rd Floor 222 South Riverside Plaza Chicago, IL 60606-5808 Kemper Funds as gifts for children. Just in time for the holiday season, you'll find complete information on how to give the gift of a Kemper fund to a child. Also included: An explanation of how the gift of a mutual fund compares with the gift of a U.S. savings bond. An interactive feature enables you to view the 20-year performance of a $1,000 savings bond versus the performance of $1,000 invested in one of the six Kemper funds with a 20-year history. "On The Horns Of A Dilemma." A special report on growth and value investing -- you'll find the full text and charts that appeared in Kemper's November 14, 1996, special supplement to The Wall Street Journal. Best of Kemper.com. Recognizing that time is at a premium for Web surfers, we've assembled a Best of page -- just so you don't miss the best of what we have to offer. Of the tens of thousands of commercial sites on the World Wide Web, Kemper.com is one of 850 highlighted within the WebTV service as a "preferred destination." And, of course, we're continually refreshing: Our economic outlook by Stephen B. Timbers, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. president and chief investment and executive officer Kemper Funds shareholder news Kemper Funds press releases Kemper Funds prospectuses General investing topics What more would you like to see on Kemper.com? Tell us now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016630-E WT01-B13-89IA018-000196-B049-63http://www.kemper.com:80/about/friends.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171907 text/html 4123HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:08 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:50:47 GMTContent-length: 3939Content-type: text/html Friends And Neighbors Kemper Funds originated in Chicago in 1948, when five entrepreneurs formed a mutual fund to capitalize on a technological breakthrough called television. Much - the company's name, ownership and scope of its funds' investments - has changed since then. While Kemper headquarters today remain in Chicago, the company's reach extends far and wide. We share our success with the many friends, neighbors and partners we invite you to meet on the following pages. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. Friends Meet Team Kemper Funds Neighbors Are you heading to Chicago? Let Kemper show you around. Click here to e-mail your request for a free map of downtown Chicago, produced by The LaSalle Street Council. Kemper.com is a work in progress, produced by Boller Coates & Neu, Chicago, andAdjacency, Inc., Madison, Wis. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014220-B WT01-B13-90IA018-000196-B049-73http://www.kemper.com:80/about/innews.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171917 text/html 5756HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:19 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 18-Oct-96 14:09:21 GMTContent-length: 5574Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds In The News Where you might have read about Kemper Funds or Kemper Funds investmentexperts recently And The Contrarian column in Forbesis written by David Dreman, a pioneer of the philosophy of contrarian investing and portfolio manager ofKemper-Dreman High Return Fund. "Back On Track," Barron's, October 14, 1996 An interview with President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer Stephen B. Timbers outlines Kemper's "ambitious growth plans and generally solid performance." "Zurich Kemper Adds Products, Expands Staff," Pensions & Investments, September 20, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments Inc.'s efforts to build on its sales and marketing structure are described. "Zurich-Kemper's Blue Chip Fund Makes Comeback," Dow Jones News Service, September 11, 1996 The strategy of Kemper Blue Chip Fund Portfolio Manager Tracy McCormick Chester is profiled. "Sowing Seeds At Kemper Growth," Business Week, September 30, 1996 The efforts of Portfolio Manager Patrick S. Adams to revive Kemper Growth Fund are described. Kemper International Fund Portfolio Manager Dennis Ferrois recognized by Barron's (July 22, 1996) for excellence in fund management. "The road ahead," Financial Planning, June 1996 Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund Portfolio ManagerDavid Dreman is included as one of four managers who share their management philosophies,investment strategies and market outlooks. "New Swiss owner funding Kemper in return to banks," American Banker, June 13, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. is profiled as placing a renewed emphasis on reclaimingits position as a dominant seller of mutual funds through banks. "Nintendo capitalism: Zapping the markets," The New York Times, May 28, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. is profiled as an example of how traders use sophisticated economic models and powerful computers to make quick decisions. "The Outliers," Barron's, May 20, 1996 Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund are cited as funds that refuse to run with the herd. "Oldest muni fund rides rates and risks into third decade," The Bond Buyer, April 22, 1996 Kemper Municipal Bond Fund Portfolio Manager Christopher Mier is profiled. "Two players dominate DC market," Pensions & Investments, April 1, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. ranks third among defined contribution service providers, based on total number of plan sponsors. "It's all in the families," Barron's, February 5, 1996 A 1995 performance survey of mutual fund families. Barron's notedKemper's strength in its bond funds and overseas stock funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009870-E WT01-B13-91IA018-000196-B049-84http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/kempernews.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171924 text/html 5316HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:53:05 GMTContent-length: 5132Content-type: text/html  Kemper News We welcome your interest in Kemper Funds. On this page you'll find alisting of our most recent and/or requested press releases. Foradditional information about the company, go to About Kemper Funds. Our Outlook will give you an economic overview whileindividual Kemper Funds data can be accessed via Kemper Funds Profiles. New To Kemper.com provides a guide to our recent additions and enhancements. Kemper Funds Group Joins Schwab's Institutional OneSource (October 31, 1996) Kemper Funds Survey Finds Two Out Of Three "Empty Nesters"Gain $5,000+ Annual Boost When Kids Fly The Coop; Despite Concerns About The Future, Few Diverting Most Of"Parental Bonus" To Retirement Savings (August 23, 1996) Kemper Money Funds Build A South Pacific Hide-Away On The World Wide Web (August 19, 1996) Charles R. Manzoni, Jr. Joins Zurich Kemper As General Counsel (June 6, 1996) Patrick Adams Named Portfolio Manager Of Kemper Funds Flagship Growth EquityFund (June 3, 1996) Kemper Funds Marks 20th Anniversary Of Nation's First Retail Municipal Bond Fund (April 23, 1996) Zurich Kemper Investments Launches New Retirement Plans Unit (April 2, 1996) Zurich Kemper Investments Announces Definitive Agreement To Sell Invest Financial Corporation To First American Corporation (March 28, 1996) Kemper Funds Announces New Chief Investment Officer For Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (March 21, 1996) Kemper Funds Forms New Distribution Unit For Fee-Based Advisors And Mutual Fund Wrap Programs (March 20, 1996) Zurich Insurance Group Completes Acquisition Of Kemper Corporation (January 4, 1996) Kemper Rolls Out Executive Plus - A Retirement Plan Solution For KeyExecutives (November 28, 1995) Kemper Financial Completes Acquisition Of Dreman Value ManagementAssets; Names President And CEO Of Acquired Operations (August 24, 1995) Changing Definition Of Retirement: Majority Of Americans Expect To WorkDuring Retirement, According To Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor (June 15, 1995) "20 Somethings" No Slackers When It Comes To Retirement Planning,According To Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor (June 15, 1995) Five Things Investors Should Know Before Choosing A Money Market Fund (May 31, 1995) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010030 WT01-B13-92IA018-000196-B049-93http://www.kemper.com:80/about/opportunities.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171932 text/html 3538HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:33 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:22:51 GMTContent-length: 3356Content-type: text/html Employment Opportunities In this constantly changing world, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI)offers its employees and prospective candidates a pleasantly challengingwork environment with opportunities for career enhancement and where newideas are always welcome. We have a broad spectrum of job opportunitiesavailable throughout the organization and excellent career developmentplanning for current employees. ZKI has maintained a competitive edgewithin the financial services industry. We credit this stance to ourmost valuable asset -- our employees. Discover the opportunities within Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. byexploring the rest of this Employment Opportunities section. Kemper As An Employer Opportunities Application For Employment (Kemper.com has been optimized to be viewed using Netscape Navigator 2.0.Accessing this application using a Netscape 1.x browser may cause your software to freeze. Click here to download a copy of Netscape Navigator 2.0.) Link To JobWeb WT01-B13-93IA018-000196-B048-217http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/longerview.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171719 text/html 3704HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:13:20 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:15:17 GMTContent-length: 3521Content-type: text/html The Longer View Of course, markets rise and fall. But individualinvestors can't afford to be erratic. As significant and as interestingas financial market news may be, it's essential for investors tomaintain a certain perspective. Taking a longer view, considering basicinvestment principles and tactics, can help a curious investor be a calminvestor. Think of The Longer View as your gateway to general investment andeducational information. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010050 WT01-B13-94IA018-000196-B049-107http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/understand_fundsmenu.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171942 text/html 4237HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:43 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 14-Nov-96 00:23:47 GMTContent-length: 4053Content-type: text/html Understanding Mutual Funds Mutual funds have made it possible for the individual investor tobenefit from professional management. And, if you're a shareholder inKemper Funds, it's likely that you also have the benefit of theexpertise of your financial representative. Even with both of theseadvantages, there's plenty that the curious investor may want to learnabout mutual funds. On The Horns Of A Dilemma A special report explaining growth and value investing. This article, which presents Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. as the only U.S. asset manager with separate organizations to manage growth and value portfolios, appeared as a special advertising supplement in the November 14, 1996, Wall Street Journal. How To Arrive At Total Return The Power of Diversification The 13 Most Common Mistakes To Avoid When Investing In Mutual Funds Dollar Cost Averaging Taxable Or Tax-Exempt? How Kemper Shareholders Evaluate Performance The Difference Between Mutual Fund And Stock Dividends What's In A Yield? What You Might Miss If You Don't Read The Prospectus The Benefits Of Automatic Investing Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment What's A Signature Guarantee? Why Mutual Funds Waive Expenses © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010060 WT01-B13-95IA018-000196-B049-117http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/shortterm.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171950 text/html 3079HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:58 GMTContent-length: 2897Content-type: text/html Short Term Investing Most investing is done for the long term. But investors who are lookingfor a temporary stopping place or who have only a short time for theirmoney to work have certain needs. If you're a short-term investor, yourdesire to maintain a stable principal may guide the investment decisionsyou make. We have some ideas just for you. Do You Need A Rainy Day Fund? Do's And Don'ts For Daydreamers The Down Payment Just Gets You In The Door Purchasing A New Car? Money Market Funds Balance Income, Stability © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010080 WT01-B13-96IA018-000196-B049-124http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/planning.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171957 text/html 3564HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:15:58 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:39 GMTContent-length: 3382Content-type: text/html Planning As an investor, you have a schedule of your own. You know when yourchild will be entering college or the number of years until you plan toretire, for example. But what can be complicated about investing is thatyour investing cycle - when you invest and when you use the proceeds -takes place within the realm of a broader cycle. Your objective as aninvestor is to find a way to dovetail your investing cycle with theunpredictable ups and downs of the overall economy. Planning for Your Child's Future includes what you can do with your owninvestments as well as the possibilities with a child's portfolio. Be sure to visit Your Retirement for insights on the all-important taskof planning for your retirement. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010090 WT01-B13-97IA018-000197-B001-12http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/childsfuture.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172009 text/html 2771HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:16:09 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:31:13 GMTContent-length: 2586Content-type: text/html For Your Child's Future Encourage The Habit Of Investing College Planning How To Give The Gift Of A Kemper Fund How The Gift Of A Mutual Fund Compares With The Gift Of A U.S.Savings Bond What Are The Tax Consequences For Gift-Givers? U.S. Savings Bonds vs. The Standard & Poor's 500 U.S. Savings Bonds vs. Kemper Funds About Custodial Accounts © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016160-A WT01-B13-98IA018-000197-B001-23http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/your_ret.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172022 text/html 3305HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:16:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 22:25:56 GMTContent-length: 3123Content-type: text/html Your Retirement Our Photo Album Of Happy Retirees Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. Are You Ready To Retire? Pre-Retirees Have Special Planning Pressures Get Ready To Retire! How Early IRA Contributions Can Add Up Don't Touch Your Retirement Plan Distribution FREE! Call For Your Free Kemper Retirement Dream Planner National Council On The Aging The Price Of Your Retirement Dream Can You Rely On A Savings Account? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009760-B WT01-B13-99IA018-000196-B048-235http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/business/business.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171730 text/html 3141HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:13:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 18:14:03 GMTContent-length: 2957Content-type: text/html  For The Curious Business Investor As one of the largest mutual fund complexes in the United States,Kemper Funds services many types of investors -- some investingfor personal goals and others investing for their businesses. For The Curious Business Investor includes a selection of articleswritten about current issues that may impact small business owners,qualified plan sponsors and general corporate investors. Mostof the articles are excerpted from Corporate Investor,a newsletter mailed each quarter to Kemper's corporate accountshareholders. To establish a corporate account, fill out a Kemper Funds Account Application now and mail it in today. Small Businesses To Benefit From Pension Law Changes Help Protect Your Company's Retirement Plan From Claims The DOL Pushes For Better Investment Education Links To Small Business Sites 1025520 WT01-B13-100IA018-000197-B001-37http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/kemperfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172031 text/html 4936HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:16:33 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:29:55 GMTContent-length: 4753Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds In your lifetime, you will have several, varying financial goals. Tohelp in your pursuit of these goals, Kemper Funds includes a mix of fundsdesigned for an array of investment objectives. Our risk/return spectrumpresents the range, from higher risk/return potential to lowerrisk/return potential. For Kemper Funds' comparative total returns foreach of the last 10 years, as well as the current year to date, you'llwant to view our comparative total return tables, organized by eachclass of shares. And, for the latest in Kemper Funds, be sure to checkout our new fund introductions. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. Risk/Return Spectrum Kemper Funds Class A Comparative Total Returns Kemper Funds Class B Comparative Total Returns Kemper Funds Class C Comparative Total Returns Performance And Yield Notes © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010210-A WT01-B13-101IA018-000197-B001-48http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/spectrum.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172038 text/html 7942HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:16:39 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:24:31 GMTContent-length: 7760Content-type: text/html Risk/Return Spectrum This illustration is for comparative purposes only and is intended to describe general characteristics only. It is not intended to represent past or future performance for any fund. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from your financialrepresentative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048) or request one now.Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Money market funds seek to maintain a net asset value of $1.00 per share, but there is no assurance that they will. Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010950-A WT01-B13-102IA018-000197-B001-58http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/funds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172046 text/html 3702HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:16:47 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:30:26 GMTContent-length: 3520Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Kemper Funds can be organized in seven general categories. Forinformation on an individual fund, you can access the fund's profileaccording to its fund type. Alternately, you can access a fund's profileby clicking on its name on the risk/return spectrum. An interactivefeature available at the bottom of every fund profile enables you tocompare individual Kemper Fund's performance to one of seven broadmarket indices. Kemper Funds New Funds International And Global Funds Capital Growth Funds Capital Growth And Income Funds Asset Allocation Funds Target Equity Funds Tax-Free Income Funds Income Funds Money Market Funds Risk/Return Spectrum Performance And Yield Notes To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, please contact your financial representative, call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011500 WT01-B13-103IA018-000197-B001-74http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/closedendfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172055 text/html 4466HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:16:55 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:44 GMTContent-length: 4284Content-type: text/html Kemper Closed-End Funds Kemper manages seven closed-end funds designed to meet varying financial goals. Six funds invest in the fixed-income or municipal markets while one fund invests primarily in Spanish equities. A closed-end fund differs from an "open-end" fund (commonly referred to as a "mutual fund") in several important ways: A closed-end fund is usually capitalized through a one-time public offering. New shares may be created only in certain circumstances -- to satisfy dividend reinvestment plan requirements with respect to income and capital gains distributions and occasionally rights offerings, for example. By contrast, an open-end fund continuously issues new shares. Once issued, the shares of a closed-end fund are not redeemable by the fund and are exchangeable only in the open market, generally by a listing on a recognized stock exchange. Shares of Kemper's closed-end funds are traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the Chicago Stock Exchange (CSE). Shares of an open-end fund, by contrast, are redeemable by the fund at any time. Because the supply of shares of a closed-end fund is finite, the market price of a closed-end fund share is based upon the forces of supply and demand. Shares may trade at either above or below their net asset value (NAV) based on their perceived value in the marketplace. This price differential is referred to as a premium or discount to NAV. Again, by contrast, an open-end fund stands ready at all times to redeem its shares at their current NAV. Because all trading of a closed-end fund's shares takes place in the open market, the portfolio manager of a closed-end fund does not need to worry about maintaining cash balances to fund share redemptions. This tends to give the manager more latitude to fully invest the portfolio and to consider a broader range of portfolio securities. Kemper Closed-End Funds Comparative Total Returns Kemper Closed-End Funds October 1996 News © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016500-B WT01-B13-104IA018-000197-B001-86http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/youandrep.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172102 text/html 3027HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:04 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 05-Jun-96 21:12:48 GMTContent-length: 2842Content-type: text/html You And Your Financial Representative Prospectuses And Important Information At Kemper Funds, we believe that establishing a relationship witha professional financial representative is the best way to takeadvantage of today's investment alternatives. Mutual funds are excellentbuilding blocks for your portfolio, with their built-in diversification,professional management and convenience. And, with over 6,000 fundsavailable today, we believe the best way to choose among them is withthe guidance and advice of a professional financial advisor. A Who's Who of Financial Representatives Here's how a professional financial representative can... Provide a custom-tailored plan to help you achieve your financial goals. Boost your investment confidence. Be results-oriented. Establish a relationship based on mutual respect and trust. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010220-A WT01-B13-105IA018-000197-B001-95http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/shareholders.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172109 text/html 4053HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:10 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:34:32 GMTContent-length: 3870Content-type: text/html Just For Kemper Funds Shareholders You found us! One of the reasons that we're happy to be on the WorldWide Web is that it expands on the possibilities for communicating withKemper Funds' shareholders. In News, you'll find information about new funds and fund performance. Think of Making the Most of Your Investment as your online source about Kemper Funds'shareholder services. Printable Forms lets you take action to initiateone or more of your many shareholder account services. Please take a look around the site and check back often. We'll berolling out additional information and introducing some features thataren't possible in print communications. You are the people that we mosthope to please - so let us know what you think! Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010280 WT01-B13-106IA018-000197-B001-108http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/news.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172117 text/html 4330HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:18 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 03-Dec-96 20:05:03 GMTContent-length: 4147Content-type: text/html News Thanks in part to your support, we've been busy at Kemper Funds. Here'swhere you'll find the most recent developments. New To Kemper.com Kemper Funds Capital Gains Dividend Estimates For December Our Outlook Our economic outlook, by Stephen B. Timbers, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc.'s president, chief investment and executive officer. On The Horns Of A Dilemma A special report explaining growth and value investing. This article, which presents Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. as the only U.S. asset manager with separate organizations to manage growth and value portfolios, appeared as a special advertising supplement in the November 14, 1996, Wall Street Journal. New Fund: Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Funds Management Sponsors Public Television Series News About Your Transaction Confirmation Statements Hold Period Reduced Five Stars For Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund We're Improving Your Year-end Statement In the July 22, 1996, Barron's Kemper International Fund Portfolio Manager Dennis Ferro was recognized for excellence in fund management. Announcing Improved Flexibility For Processing Requests Meet the Newest Member of Our Equity Investment Team A New Name: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Watch For Our Ads! America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011440-F WT01-B13-107IA018-000197-B001-121http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/most.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172125 text/html 3428HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:26 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:28:31 GMTContent-length: 3246Content-type: text/html Making the Most of Your Investment Kemper Funds offers an array of services and features that are designedto help you achieve your financial goals as simply and conveniently aspossible. Direct Deposit Your Government Check Contacting Kemper From Abroad New Services On KemperACCESS Reduce Your Kemper Mailings Why Published Investment Returns May Not Match Your Experience Invest By Mail Slips Your Reinvestment Privilege About Your KemperACCESS PIN Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment Diversification Within The Kemper Funds Share Certificates Changes In Account Ownership Have You Changed Banks? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011450-B WT01-B13-108IA018-000197-B001-135http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/forms.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172133 text/html 4790HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:34 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:33:54 GMTContent-length: 4608Content-type: text/html Printable Forms For Kemper Funds' shareholders who believe that there's no time like thepresent, we offer a series of shareholder account service forms. Ifthere's an action that you'd like to take now, just click on theappropriate form, print it, complete and sign it and return it by mail to: Kemper Service Company P.O. Box 419415 Kansas City, MO 64141-6415 (This address also appears on each form.) Kemper Funds account application (445k) Systematic Withdrawals (231k) To receive regular cash withdrawals from your account. Checkwriting (for Kemper Money Funds only) (170k) You may write as many checks as you like for amounts of $500 or more upto the available balance in your account. Bank Direct Deposit (203k) For automatic investing directly from your financial institution. Dividend Payment (223k) To change dividend payment options on the Kemper account identified inthe Authorization Agreement. Expedited Wire Redemptions (143k) To request quick redemptions by phone from the Kemper account identifiedin the Authorization Agreement to your financial institution. EXPRESS-Transfer (196k) To request quick cash transfers by phone to and from the Kemper accountidentified in the Authorization Agreement. Systematic Exchanges (243k) To invest automatically, by periodic exchange, from the Kemper account identified in the Authorization Agreement into another existingKemper account(s). Payroll Direct Deposit (189k) For investing into your account directly from your employer's payroll. Government Direct Deposit (116k) To invest all or a portion of your government check directly into your mutual fund account. Statement Customization Request Form (170k) To customize your Kemper account statement mailings by consolidating additional accounts on one statement or by combining additional statements in one envelope. Download a free copy of Acrobat Reader © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010290-A WT01-B13-109IA018-000197-B001-144http://www.kemper.com:80/about/tour.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172142 text/html 6005HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:41 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:26:44 GMTContent-length: 5821Content-type: text/html Tour Our Site Welcome aboard! On this tour, you're free to chew gum, play your musicloud and stand in the aisles to get a better view. To orient yourself, you should know that Kemper.com has six main hubs.Clicking on one of them will take you into a separate hierarchy. If you're looking for general information about the company as a whole,you'd go to About Kemper Funds. For general investing and financial planninginformation, head for For The CuriousInvestor. To obtain detail about a Kemper Fund and its performance, as well asan explanation of the importance of a financial representative, drop inat Kemper Funds. The better informed Kemper Funds shareholders will want to spend time in Just For Kemper FundsShareholders. To Learn More is a starting pointfor people who'd like to know moreabout Kemper Funds, including a system for referrals to an areafinancial representative. The sixth hub, Are You AFinancialRepresentative?, is apassword-restricted section of the site. Think of it as a 24-hour salesand marketing meeting for the financial representatives who offerKemper Funds to the investing public. As you make your way through the site, there are several features thatyou might want to use: The Kemper Funds logo at the bottom right-hand of every page will takeyou back to the welcome page. Clicking on the Prospectuses And Important Information link at the top left-hand corner of every page enables you to request a prospectus. Kemper is just a click away. Search will enable you to search the entire site for a keyword or phrase. Our Financial Whiz-dom icon flags an interactive feature. For detail about what's in each one of our hubs, go to the Kemper.com Site Map. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010010 WT01-B13-110IA018-000197-B001-157http://www.kemper.com:80/learn/introduce.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172150 text/html 4451HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:20:26 GMTContent-length: 4269Content-type: text/html May We Introduce You? Kemper Funds believes that working with financial representatives is aninvestor's best approach for achieving his or her goals in today's complexand global investment markets. Would you like to work with a financial representative but don't know whoto call? We would be happy to introduce you to someone in your area. Just fill out the following information and we'll be in touch as soon as possible. Thank you for your interest in Kemper Funds. Here's hoping thatthis is the start of a productive relationship! Your first name: Your last name: Street address or P.O. Box: City: State: ZIP: E-mail: How would you prefer to be contacted? (Check one) By telephone - Your telephone number: By mail Comments? © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010240 WT01-B13-111IA018-000197-B001-167http://www.kemper.com:80/financialrep/financialrep.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172158 text/html 4628HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:17:59 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 15:47:22 GMTContent-length: 4445Content-type: text/html Are You A Financial Representative? Kemper Funds believes that working with financial representatives is aninvestor's best approach for achieving his or her goals in today'scomplex and global investment markets. Kemper Funds are offered bymany financial representatives, including broker/dealers, financialplanners, insurance agents and bank investment counselors. This part of Kemper.com is restricted because communications created forregistered financial representatives do not include the same disclosuresrequired ofcommunications for the general public or fund shareholders. A registeredrepresentative is someone who has completed extensive coursework in investmentcompany products. Much of the information presented in this area isavailable, with additional disclosure, elsewhere on the site. Other material wascreated for Kemper Funds' sales force and not relevant to the generalpublic. Your first name: Your last name: Your firm's name: Your Kemper rep #: Your e-mail address: Would you like to be added to our e-mail mailing list? Yes No Please enter your Kemper.com password The password to this section can be found on the back page of Kemper's fund performance publication, Capital Ideas. Ifyou don't have ready access to the publication, please call Kemper Sales Support (1-800-621-5027) to request the password. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010250 WT01-B13-112IA018-000196-B045-279http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/areworld1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170833 text/html 8542HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:04:35 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 30-Oct-96 15:14:58 GMTContent-length: 8357Content-type: text/html Are World Financial Markets Underpricing Political Risk? The Weekly Money Report October 21, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The most distinctive feature of the world's financial markets thisautumn is their capacity for accepting increased political risksin the pursuit of higher asset returns. Financial markets incountries as diverse as New Zealand, Italy and the Ukraine areexperiencing rallies which suggest that the world is awash withsurplus liquidity and that investors believe the commitment toliberal economic reform which swept the Anglo-Saxon world afterthe first Thatcher election victory of 1979 is immune to electoralreversals. After ten years of supporting one of the world's most aggressiveeconomic liberalization programs, the voters of New Zealand haveelected a new parliament in which three left of center and populistpolitical parties will have 55% of the seats. Yet instead of declining,New Zealand's debt and equity markets rallied on the perceptionthat the election will probably be irrelevant to the country'seconomic performance. Optimists believe that the forces of thepost cold war global marketplace are too powerful for any newleft-wing government to restore New Zealand's pre-1984 traditionof protectionism and lavish welfare spending. A few pundits evenhope that the election has left the parliament so fragmented thatit will be impossible for the parties to form an effective government.The 1996 New Zealand election was the first held under the country'snew system of proportional representation and thus encouragedfar more fragmentation than the traditional Westminster systemof electing M.P.'s (single member seats awarded to the candidatewith a plurality of votes). In early October, the international credit rating agencies gaveRussia a series of ratings which ranged from BB+ (IBCA) to BB-(S&P 500) with Moody's in the middle at BA2. Such ratingsplace Russia towards the upper end of the Brady bond market, aheadof Brazil but still below Poland. There is little doubt that Russiawill someday deserve a high credit rating. It has immense naturalresources, a low ratio of government debt to GDP and during thedecade before 1914 was one of the world's high growth economiesand large scale capital importers. But the decision to award sucha high credit rating when Russia's political situation is in astate of flux provides further confirmation of the financial community'sincreasing tolerance for risk. Meanwhile, the improvement in Russia'scredit rating has caused such a large rally in Russian debt pricesthat adventuresome investors are now shifting capital from theRussian securities market to the Ukraine. The economic reformprogram in the Ukraine has been lagging far behind Russia's, sothe yield on Ukrainian government debt was still above 70% inSeptember. But as a result of the flight from quality in Russia,yields on Ukrainian Treasury bills have plunged to barely 50%during the past two weeks despite a projected inflation rate of112% this year. Russia's yields also have stabilized at about50-55% compared to 150-200% during the spring. The bond markets of Italy and Spain have also experienced majorrallies since August in the expectation that European governmentswill introduce a broad based monetary union in 1999 despite thefailure of several countries to comply with the spirit, if notthe letter, of the Maastricht terms for economic convergence.The yield gap between German and Italian bonds has fallen from650 basis points eighteen months ago to just over 200 basis pointstoday. Investors have bid up the price of Italian securitiesin the expectation that German politicians will permit Italy toenter the monetary union in 1999 despite the fact that the country'sratio of public debt to GDP is almost 120% compared to a Maastrichttarget of 60%. The market's new optimism about Italy's entryto EMU is based on the fact that the German officials appear willingto accept liberal interpretations of the Maastricht agreementfor France and Belgium. They are permitting France to achieveits deficit target through one time revenue transfers from thepension funds of state enterprises. They seem willing to let Belgiumenter the union despite the fact that her ratio of public debtto GDP exceeds 100%. In recent days, Bundesbank officials andmembers of the Social Democratic Party responsible for monitoringmonetary policy have begun to suggest that they will not encourageentry for countries which engage in accounting adjustments toreduce their fiscal deficit to 3.0% of GDP. But investors havenot focused on these objections because of hopes that they willat most delay EMU entry for Spain and Italy by two or three years,not postpone it until all the Maastricht conditions are satisfied.While German officials can persuade their public to accept Belgianmembership at the start of EMU, Italy is too large a country toenter under current circumstances despite the fact that Italywas among the original six countries which signed the Treaty ofRome creating the European Common Market in 1958. When one considers the resilience of the New Zealand financialmarket and the aggressive investor demand for bonds in Europe'speripheral debt markets during recent weeks, it is not surprisingthat the Dow Jones Industrial average has reached new highs duringOctober. The outlook for the U.S. economy is still benign. Themarkets have been discounting a Clinton victory in the presidentialelection for several weeks while investors remain hopeful thatthe Republicans will retain at least a narrow majority in bothhouses of the Congress. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024320 WT01-B13-113IA018-000196-B046-6http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/howlong1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170843 text/html 10281HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:04:42 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 30-Oct-96 15:13:38 GMTContent-length: 10095Content-type: text/html How Long Can the Federal Reserve Delay Tightening? The Weekly Money Report September 26, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The Fed's decision to leave U.S. interest rates unchanged at itsmeeting on September 24th has left many unresolved questions forthe financial markets to ponder. Was the focus of the FOMC meetingthe outlook for the U.S. economy or the breach of security whichproduced a Reuters story about several district banks seekinga discount rate hike the week before the meeting? Did the FOMCrenew its previous directive with a bias towards tightening andthus leave open the possibility of raising interest rates in responseto economic reports during October, or has it closed the dooron possible tightening until November? How far will the chairmango in attempting to assert his authority over FOMC dissidentswho have attempted to campaign for a rate hike through conversationswith the media? There is no way of telling whether the Reuters story about thedistrict banks altered the outcome of the FOMC meeting. Ifthe retail sales and inflation data published in mid-Septemberhad showed clear signs of accelerating inflation and robust growthin final demand, there is little doubt that the FOMC would havehiked interest rates. But because the data suggested thatgrowth may be moderating and that inflation is still under control,the Chairman was able to persuade the FOMC to defer any proposalfor tightening in order to demonstrate that he is still firmlyin control of the Federal Reserve. It is doubtful, though, thatthe FOMC abandoned its bias in favor of tightening. On the contrary,if the employment report scheduled to appear on October 4th showssigns of strong growth in the U.S. economy, the Fed could moveto hike interest rates immediately. Almost 90% of the upwardmove in U.S. bond yields this year has occurred in the minutesafter three employment reports showing large monthly job gains. If the October 4th report produces evidence of large job gains(over 250,000) and the unemployment rate drops below 5.0%, therewill probably be another upward spike in bond yields so largethat the Fed will feel compelled to show that it has not becometotally passive. The rally in the bond market after the Fed decisionto leave interest rates unchanged demonstrates that investorsare as uncertain about the U.S. economic outlook as the FOMC. But since the preconditions for an acceleration of wage growthand a revival of inflation clearly exist, the Fed cannot affordto procrastinate for long when new data appears confirming thatthe economy is still expanding at a growth rate well above 2.0%. There is little disagreement at the Federal Reserve that thepreconditions for a revival of inflation are appearing. Thedissension about policy centers on three questions. First,is the third quarter slowdown in domestic final sales growth to1.5-2.0% from 4.8% during the second quarter temporary or thestart of a prolonged trend? Secondly, is government data understatingproductivity growth and thus causing policy makers to be overlypessimistic about the economy's optimal non-inflationary growthrate? Thirdly, if wages do accelerate further, will corporationsbe able to pass on the cost hikes to consumers or will they simplyerode profit margins? The answer to the first question will be provided by forthcomingretail sales and capital goods orders data for September and October. The growth of consumer spending did slow sharply during the thirdquarter (it appears to be 1.2% compared to 3.4% during the firsthalf) but it should not remain subdued if employment continuesto expand at a steady rate and consumers remain confident. TheSeptember Conference Board survey of consumer confidence is positiveon both counts. It shows that confidence remained close to 112for a second consecutive month during September compared to 100in June. Household perceptions of the job market also were verypositive. About 27.0% said that jobs were plentiful comparedto 24.8% during June while only 20.8% said jobs were hard to getcompared to 22.0-23.6% during the second quarter. If resilientconsumer confidence produces a rebound in retail sales duringthe autumn, real GDP growth will probably accelerate to the 3.0-3.5%range during the fourth quarter from 2.0-2.5% during the thirdquarter. Business fixed investment also should expand ata 5.0-6.0% annual rate during the second half compared to 4.0%during the second quarter and 11.6% during the first quarter. While the computer sector is experiencing a slowdown, the highlevel of manufacturing capacity utilization rates, the 10-12%profit growth now occurring in the corporate sector, and the highvalue of American share prices in relation to asset replacementcosts should encourage other sectors to expand their investmentoutlays. The current financial environment in the U.S. today is probablymore supportive of business expansion than any other in recentyears. The number of equity I.P.O.'s was 428 during the firsthalf of 1996 compared to 573 during all of 1995, 571 during 1994,and a peak of 665 during 1993. These I.P.O.'s raised about $27.2billion during the first half of 1996 compared to $28.9 billionlast year, $22.9 billion during 1994 and $34.0 billion during1993. As a result of the stock market boom, the U.S. venturecapital industry will be able to provide entrepreneurs with almost$4 billion of new capital this year or the highest level since1987. According to a recent survey by the National Federationof Independent Business, entrepreneurs established nearly 3.5million new businesses in the U.S. last year. While many of thesenew businesses may employ only one person, the rate of new businessformation suggests that demand for labor will persist at highlevels if firms can actually find new workers. If rising wagesand faltering productivity starts to depress profit margins, thebusiness sector could turn more cautious about new hiring andinvestment. But it is difficult to find such signs of cautionin either business surveys or the financial markets at present. The major business risk in the outlook is the rising delinquencyrates on consumer debt and the pressure it is putting on banksto impose tougher quality standards on people being screenedfor credit cards. But as Fed Governor Larry Lindsey explainedin recent congressional testimony, it would be imprudent to over-generalizeabout the dangers poised by consumer debt until the economy startsto experience increasing unemployment. Lindsey reported to theCongress, "Consumer delinquencies on nonmortgage debt have increasedin recent periods and bankruptcy filing could well exceed onemillion in 1996. These developments have begun to affect profitmargins at some financial institutions and the Federal Reservehas been closely monitoring these conditions and discussing theirimplications with individual banking organizations and industrygroups. In our view, given the generally strong financial conditionof the institutions most affected by these developments and thatthe U.S. banking system, these adverse trends do not currentlypresent a material threat either to individual banking organizations to the overall banking system." © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023160 WT01-B13-114IA018-000196-B046-18http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/risingbondyields1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170851 text/html 7782HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:04:52 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 13-Sep-96 20:34:00 GMTContent-length: 7600Content-type: text/html Will Rising Bond Yields Force The Fed To Tighten? The Weekly Money Report September 2, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The poor performance of the U.S. bond market since the decision of the Federal Open Market Committee to leave U.S. interest rates unchanged at its late August meeting reflects growing investor apprehension about the strength of the U.S. economy. The low level of unemployment claims, the buoyancy of the equity market, and anecdotal evidence of resilient retail sales suggest that the economy is continuing to expand at an annual rate of at least 3.0%. Such a number is not alarming by historical standards, but it is troublesome for the financial markets when it occurs against a backdrop of only 5.5% unemployment and widespread business concern about labor scarcity. There is also increasing evidence that the government's GDP accounts may be underestimating the economy's true growth rate. During the past year, real personal and business incomes have expanded at a rate about 1.0% higher than official measures of real output. As the government's estimates of income and output are supposed to converge over time, it appears increasingly likely that the government's new system of GDP measurement is underestimating the economy's true growth rate. There is evidence that the Federal Reserve is deeply divided about the inflation risks in the U.S. economy. District presidents from the middle west have become increasingly vociferous about the danger of low unemployment pushing up wages and reviving inflationary psychology, but the new Clinton appointees to the FOMC have been reluctant to raise interest rates only a few months after their appointments. As the Clinton appointees are mainstream economists who understand the inflation risks poised by high levels of resource utilization, it is doubtful that they will oppose monetary tightening if unemployment declines further this autumn. But the delays in Fed tightening could still set the stage for a sharp rise in bond yields because of market concern about the Fed pursuing too passive a monetary strategy in the run-up to the presidential election. A sharp rise in bond yields will probably also depress the equity market and provide the Dole campaign with an opportunity to raise questions about the economic outlook for 1997. The evidence of the economy enjoying above trend growth is widespread. The level of unemployment claims has dropped to a six year low. The Manpower Employment survey is projecting expanded hiring activity during the fourth quarter. Retailers are experiencing good back to school sales. The level of capital goods orders, excluding the aircraft and defense sectors, rose to $127.8 billion during July from $125 billion during June and the second quarter average was $123.8 billion. The July Dun and Bradstreet survey of business expectations is projecting healthy gains in both orders and production. The production index rose to 43 from 37 in June while the order index shot up to 46 from 40 in June. Most measures of consumer confidence are also very upbeat. In fact, the University of Michigan survey of consumer perceptions of government economic policy during July showed that for the first time in the history of the Clinton administration as many people now think that government policy is good (22%) as think it is poor (22%). The Michigan index of the overall approval rating of government policy is also at 100 compared to 50-60 during late 1992 and a previous peak of 118 during the mid-1980's. Some of the sectors which boosted output growth during the second quarter are losing momentum. The auto industry is projecting unit sales of only 15.3 million during the second half of 1996 compared to 15.6 million during the first half. Home sales should soon respond to the uptick which occurred in mortgage rates during the spring. As a result, residential construction activity will slow compared to annualized rates of gain of 15.1% during the second quarter and 7.4% during the first quarter. It also is unclear how large a contribution inventory will make to the economy's third quarter growth rate. The level of non-farm inventory accumulation shot up to $11.9 billion at annual rates during the second quarter from $2.9 billion during the first quarter and $19.0 billion during the fourth quarter of last year. In June, it appeared that the auto industry would attempt to boost inventories during the third quarter in order to compensate for the risk of a strike during September, but the purchasing agent survey for July showed no evidence of an inventory build-up. As inventory levels are satisfactory in most industries, inventories will not be a drag on third quarter output growth but their contribution could be quite modest compared to the second quarter. The August Blue Chip survey of the economic consensus indicates that most American forecasters expect output growth to slow sharply by the fourth quarter. In early August, the median forecast projected, 2.6% output growth during the third quarter, 2.1% during the fourth quarter, and 1.9% during the first quarter of 1997. The ten most optimistic forecasters projected 3.3% growth during the third quarter and 2.9% during the fourth quarter. The most pessimistic expected growth of only 1.8% and 1.1% during the final two quarters of 1996. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1021740 WT01-B13-115IA018-000196-B046-31http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/greensp1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170901 text/html 10738HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:05:01 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:23:14 GMTContent-length: 10552Content-type: text/html Is Wall Street Experiencing a Greenspan or Gephardt Correction? The Weekly Money Report July 29, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The Clinton administration should be pleased about the Julycorrection in U.S. equity prices. The market has begun adjusting to thegrowing likelihood of Federal Reserve tightening during August. If the marketshad expected the Fed to remain passive, the risk would have increased ofinvestors becoming even more speculative than they were during the spring andsetting the stage for a dramatic stock market correction in the weeks beforethe presidential election. Any Fed tightening during August will have onlya marginal effect on the economy this autumn whereas a repetition of the 1987stock market crash would permit the Republicans to argue that the economy'scurrent prosperity is an illusion which will give way to recession nextyear. While most of Wall Street is now prepared for a 25 basis point interest ratehike this month, there continues to be considerable disagreement about theeconomy's underlying strength. As Alan Greenspan himself suggested in hisrecent congressional testimony, there are good arguments for expecting finaldemand growth to slow during the second half of 1996. He said, "...the support to economic growth provided by expenditures on durable goods,both for household consumption and business fixed investment, is likely to wanein coming quarters. Consumer spending in the past few years has been boostedas households have made up the purchases of big-ticket items that they haddeferred during the recession and the early, weaker phase of the recovery.Five years after the business-cycle trough, however, we should expect that thispent-up demand has been largely exhausted. Moreover, many households havebuilt up sizable debt burdens in recent years, and coping with debt repaymentscould hold down their spending. The business sector has been addingconsiderably to capacity; opportunities to invest profitably in new capitalshould be increasing less rapidly as final demand slows some." The problem for the Federal Reserve and investors is that the U.S. economy hasjust completed an inventory sub-cycle lasting almost one year and is now poisedfor a revival of stock-building. The auto sector added about 1.0% to outputgrowth during the second quarter and will probably add another 0.5% during thethird quarter. The GM strike shifted some auto output to the second quarterwhile GM may build inventory during the third quarter in order to hedge againststrike risks in September The non-auto manufacturing sector remained subduedduring the second quarter but should give a boost to output during the next fewquarters. It is possible that the auto industry will create excess inventoryduring the third quarter if there is no strike to consume it during Septemberbut auto sales have been so responsive to price discounting that it should notbe difficult to reduce inventories quickly if the need arises. The economy's performance during the past year has been very comparable tothe gradual upturns which followed previous sub-cycles of slow growth resultingfrom monetary tightening and inventory adjustments during the long expansionsof the 1960's and 1970's. Excluding weather driven disruptions of outputduring January, the purchasing agent index reached a trough of 45.7 duringJune, 1995 and rebounded to 54.3 during June, 1996 after fluctuating in a narrow range of 46.0-48.0 during recentmonths. The rebound in the purchasing agent index so far has been highlycomparable to the upturns which followed the slow growth sub-cycles of1984-1985 and 1988-1989, but it has been much weaker than the recovery from theslow growth sub-cycle of 1966-1967, when defense spending was buoyant. Therebound in the stock market also has been very positive compared to the upturnsfrom previous slow growth sub-cycles. The stock market has increased by 24%since June, 1995 whereas during the upturn from the 1967 slowdown the gain wasonly 5.0% and during the rebound from the 1989 slowdown the market declined.Monetary policy and inflation have been the critical determinant of equityprices during all of the sub-cycles. In the late 1960's, the economy wasso overheated by the Vietnam War that monetary policy had to be tightened. Inthe 1989 sub-cycle, inflation had accelerated by enough that the Fed decided toraise interest rates despite the sluggish growth of output. In 1985, bycontrast, inflation was so subdued that interest rate declined and encouragedequity prices to rise by 29% during the twelve months after the trough in thepurchasing agent index. The inflation environment today is analogous to the 1986 subcycle on the basisof indicators such as the purchasing agent price index. It is now about 50compared to a trough of 40-45 twelve months ago and a peak of 70-80 two yearsago. But the level of unemployment today is 5.3% compared to an average of7.2% during 1985. As a result of the low level of unemployment, the majorconcern of policy makers today is not industrial commodity prices but potentialupward pressure on wages. As Chairman Greenspan noted in his recenttestimony, "The economy is already producing at a high level -- and some early signs ofpressures on resources are emerging, especially in the labor market." The uptick occurring in the level of wage growth is not alarming but itis clear that a change of trend is underway. The wage component of theEmployment Cost Index is now rising at an annual rate of nearly 4.0% comparedto less than 3.0% during 1995 while benefits are rising at an annual rate ofclose to 3.0%. If this acceleration continues in response to another year oflow unemployment, the core U.S. inflation rate could approach 4.0% by late1997. The risk facing the corporate sector is that the Fed will attempt toprevent rising wages from pushing up prices by dampening output growth,depressing productivity, and creating a squeeze on profit margins. The level of unemployment is now below 4.0% in two regions accounting for 10.8%of the national labor market (the upper mid west, the plains and rocky mountainstates). It is below 5.0% in four other regions accounting for over 36% of thenational labor market (New England, the southeast, the middle west and theborder states). It is in the 5.0-6.0% range in six other regions(mid-Atlantic, Florida, the deep south, the oil patch, the southwest and thePacific northwest). It is above 6.0% only in New York (6.6% of the nationallabor market) and California (10.6% of the labor market). As both New Yorkand California are currently experiencing much stronger output growth than theywere one year ago, it is doubtful that their district presidents would opposeproposals to tighten monetary policy from low unemployment districts such asKansas City, Chicago or Minneapolis. The major argument against tightening in the face of escalating wages is thatfinal demand growth will soon moderate and thus lessen the upward pressure onthe economy's resource utilization rates. The growth rate of retail sales slowed during June and July after strong growthduring the spring. The uptick in mortgage rates should start to cool thehousing market this autumn. Companies, such as Hewlett Packard, have warnedthat there will be a major slowdown in high technology capital spending duringthe next twelve months. The sharp uptick in credit card delinquency ratescould encourage some banks to impose tighter lending quality standards on theircredit card operations. If low income households suddenly lose access tocards, they could be forced to curtail their spending. The inventoryrestocking process in the U.S. corporate sector has already produced a largerebound in the level of imports which will erode the economy's growth momentumby expanding the trade deficit. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019990 WT01-B13-116IA018-000196-B046-47http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/delayed1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170910 text/html 13435HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:05:09 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:23:20 GMTContent-length: 13249Content-type: text/html Will Delayed Fed Tightening Set the Stage For An October Stock Market Crash? The Weekly Money Report June 21, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. Most American forecasters now accept that U.S. output growth duringthe second quarter will be in the 3.5-4.5% range. The strengthof the May data for employment, production and retail sales haseliminated any doubts about the economy's capacity to recoverfrom the inventory adjustment which dampened output growth duringmuch of 1995 and early 1996. The great controversies now centeron whether output growth can be sustained at a rate of 3.0% orwhether it will fade back to the 1.0-2.0% range which prevailedduring much of 1995. The majority of forecasters continue to expect a slowdown becausethey perceive the business cycle to be mature, the household sectorto be overleveraged, and the business sector to be losing momentum.They also believe that the large rise in bond yields since Januarywill depress home sales and residential construction by the autumn.The optimists believe that the private sector has far more resilienceand that there will be spurt in federal expenditures as governmentagencies rush to spend discretionary funds provided by the recentCongressional-White House budget agreement. The case for above trend U.S. growth during the second halfof 1996 has five major pillars. First, consumer spending should benefit from steady growth ofemployment, modest upward pressure on wages, buoyant balance sheets,and the high level of confidence apparent in the household sector.According to the early June survey of consumer confidence by theUniversity of Michigan, households are optimistic about both theirfinancial situation and the general business outlook. Such optimismis not surprising in view of the recent revisions in the government'ssurvey of labor market condition. On the basis of the data whichwas available before June 7th, the average monthly increase inemployment had been 116,000 for the past three months, 163,000for the past six months, and 162,000 for the past twelve months.The new data has revised up the average monthly growth rateof employment to 223,000 jobs for the past three months, 225,000jobs for the past six months, and 195,000 jobs for the past twelvemonths. The 1995 employment growth rate also was revised upto 185,000 jobs per month from 144,000 while 1994 was revisedup to 318,000 from 294,000. The wage data look stronger as well.The three month and twelve month growth rates of wages are now3.5% and 3.4% compared to 2.8% and 3.3% previously. There are risks in the consumer outlook. Fluctuations in autodiscounts could produce large monthly swings in retail spendingon autos. Rising mortgage rates will probably dampen home salesby the autumn. The sharp rise now occurring in delinquency rateson credit card loans could ultimately encourage banks to promotethem less aggressively among low income people. But the strengthof employment growth and the uptrend now occurring in wages suggeststhat the underlying growth rate trend of consumer spending willbe at least 2.5% during the next few quarters. While the lendingpolicies of the credit card sector should be monitored carefully,the major banks report that the rise in delinquency rates willnot deter them from offering new cards to people earning lessthat $30,000 per annum. As the bottom 20% of the U.S. populationaccounts for only 5-6% of consumer spending, more careful rationingof credit card access would also not produce a broad based slumpin consumer spending. While the major factor boosting consumer confidence is the improvedlabor market, it also should benefit from the recovery occurringin the advertising industry and the real incomes of financialjournalists. Analysts project that domestic advertising outlayswill rise by 7.4% this year compared to nominal GDP growth ofonly 5.0-6.0%. Such a healthy advertising environment will improvethe salaries and expense accounts of the business journalistswho influence household psychology through the tone of the newsstories which they write about the economy. When advertising isin recession, journalists suffer real income losses which encouragepessimistic news reporting about the economy. When the advertisingsector is prosperous, the real incomes of journalists improveand thus reinforces the new mood of optimism about the economy. The fluctuation in advertising expenditures during the 1990'shave been so large that they have become an important influenceon both the economy and public policy. Newspaper advertising fellby 6-7% during 1990 -1991 and grew by only 1.0% during 1992. Theonly previous contraction was a 0.2% decline in 1970 which wasfollowed by 8.1% growth during 1971. Television advertising declinedduring 1991 for the first time ever in the post war era whileradio advertising declined for the first time since 1961. Forecastersdo not ordinarily focus on advertising expenditures as a proxyfor consumer confidence but the fact is they are highly interdependent.If an advertising slump depresses the real incomes of the scribblingclasses, it influences the tone of media commentary about businessconditions and economic policy. There also has been a goodcorrelation during recent years between newspaper advertisingexpenditures and election results. George Bush presided overthe greatest advertising recession of the post-war era. RonaldReagan won re-election in 1984 on the back of double digit growthin advertising outlays. Jimmy Carter's defeat in 1980 coincidedwith a collapse in the growth rate of advertising outlays to only6.0-7.0% from 14-15% during the previous four years. Richard Nixon'svictory in 1972 coincided with a double digit spurt in advertisingoutlays after two years of decline and slow growth. The Republicanslost the White House to the Democrats in 1960 against a backdropof advertising expenditures slowing from double digit growth ratesin 1959 to only 4.4% during 1960 and a decline of over 2.0% during1961. The only electoral contest which has run contrary to thetrend of advertising expenditures is the 1976 presidential election,when Gerald Ford lost to Jimmy Carter despite an upturn in thegrowth rate of advertising expenditures to 16.8% from 4.0-5.0%during the previous two years. The second pillar of the above trend growth scenario is the benignoutlook for business investment. Corporate profits should riseby 10-12% this year. Capacity utilization rates in the manufacturingsector have risen back to 82.0% from 81.3% in January while utilizationrates for the economy as a whole are at 83.2%. The ratio of stockprices to asset replacement costs (Tobin's Q) is at the highestlevel in post-war history. As result, the corporate sectoris enjoying an unprecedented fund raising boom in the securitiesmarkets. During the first five months of 1996, there were364 new equity I.P.O's raising $23.7 billion of capital comparedto 573 I.P.O.'s raising $28.9 billion last year and a previouspeak of 665 I.P.O.'s raising $34 billion during 1993. The marketfor non-investment grade debt is also enjoying strong growth.There were 92 non-investment grade bond offerings worth $17 billionduring the first five months of 1996 compared to 159 worth $28.7billion last year and a peak of 343 worth $54.4 billion during1993. The bond market is producing less new financing thanthe equity market because bond mutual funds are attracting farless new money than equity mutual funds but the magnitude of non-investmentgrade financing in the debt market is still the greatest sincethe Drexel Burnham boom of the mid-1980's. The third pillar of the strong growth scenario is that the economyhas recently experienced its greatest inventory adjustment sincethe mid-1980's. Further growth of final demand will now requirefaster growth of output. Non-farm inventories contracted at anannul rate of $0.1 billion during the first quarter compared togrowth of $37.4 billion during 1995 and $46.8 billion during 1994.In April, retail inventories rebounded at a 0.4% monthly ratebut the economy's inventory/sales ratio was still only 1.38 comparedto a peak of 1.41 during the second half of 1995. In the non-autoretail sector, the I/S ratio was 1.36 compared to 1.39 duringthe third quarter of 1995 while in the general merchandise sectorit was 2.23 compared to 2.33 during the fourth quarter of lastyear. The weakness of output during the past year in sectors otherthan computers and communications equipment suggests that therecould be a broad based upturn in the level of inventory accumulationworth at least $30 billion during the second half of 1996. The fourth pillar of the strong growth scenario is a resurgenceof discretionary federal spending after several months of fiscalgridlock and temporary government shutdowns during the first twoquarters of the current fiscal year. Recent CBO studies projectthat discretionary federal spending during fiscal 1996 will beworth bout $535 billion. As a result of the government shutdown,federal spending during the first seven months of the fiscal yearaveraged only $510 billion at annual rates. As a result, federalagencies will have to spend at an annual rate of $570 billionduring the final five months of the fiscal year if they are toachieve the CBO target. There is no precise way to convertsuch spending into the federal government components of the GDPaccounts but the pressure to spend suggests that real federalexpenditures will rise moderately during the third quarter comparedto widespread forecasts that they will decline at a 3.0-4.0% annualrate. As a result of the recent congressional-White House disagreementsover fiscal policy, federal spending has been very volatile duringthe current fiscal year. It fell at a 12.8% annual rate duringthe fourth quarter of 1995 and then rebounded at an 8.5% annualrate during the first quarter of 1996. The final pillar of the strong growth scenario is the upturnnow occurring in other G-7 countries, Latin America and China.If the U.S. economy can achieve 2.5-3.0% output growth this year,the world economy should enjoy a growth rate in excess of 4.0%for the first time since 1988. As the cyclical upturns in othercountries are just getting underway, the odds are high that globaloutput growth will remain above 4.0% next year as well. The recoveryin the world economy will not prevent an inventory induced upsurgeof imports from widening the U.S. trade deficit this summer butit should cause improvement of the trade account to boost outputgrowth by at least 0.2-0.3% during 1997. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018480 WT01-B13-117IA018-000196-B046-59http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/estonia1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170918 text/html 11772HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:05:18 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:23:39 GMTContent-length: 11586Content-type: text/html Significance of the Estonian-Russian Interest Rate Differential The Weekly Money Report June 20, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. There are few better proxies for measuring economic and politicalrisk in the former Soviet Union than the interest rate differentialbetween Estonia and Russia. After five years of independence, Estonia has achieved such aremarkable economic transformation that her nominal short-terminterest rates are about 8% while her real interest rates area negative 10%. In Russia, by contrast, there is so much investorapprehension about the country's economic policies that nominalinterest rates are over 150% despite the fact that the Ruble hasbeen stable for nearly a year and inflation has declined to 30%. Estonia's economic transformation is remarkable by the standardsof both the former Communist countries to her east and the socialistScandinavian economies to her west. She is a nation of one millionNordic people and one half million displaced Russians trying tocreate a new Hong Kong on the edge of the old Soviet Union. Herpolicies are so unambiguously market oriented that she could soonhave the most open economy and smallest government sector of anycountry on the European continent. Estonia has no tariffs, no government deficit, no central governmentdebt, a flat rate income tax of 26% and a government expenditureshare of GDP equal to 27% or less than one half of the west Europeanaverage. She also conducts her monetary policy through a currencyboard which has made the Kroon convertible into the D-mark ata fixed rate of eight to one. As with the currency board regimesin Hong Kong and Argentina, the expansion of Estonia's money supplynow depends upon the growth of foreign exchange reserves, notjust domestic economic conditions. Since foreign investment inEstonia has been expanding steadily, Estonian interest rates havedeclined to negative levels despite the fact that she is runninga current account deficit equal to about 6% of GDP. Foreign directinvestment as a share of GDP already exceeds 10%, a level whichis close to the record set by Singapore. In the initial years after independence and the dismantling ofcommunism, official measures of Estonian economic output contractedby over 40%. But the output losses resulted from people reallocatingresources from sectors producing goods which no one wanted tobuy to sectors which reflected the economy's new openness. Inthe last year of the Soviet era, 62% of Estonia's output derivedfrom manufacturing, 17% from agriculture and 12% from services. Today, the service sector accounts for almost two thirds of GDPwhile the manufacturing share has fallen to less than 25%. Asa result of the speed of this restructuring, the economy is nowexpanding at a 6% annual rate and unemployment is only 5.0%. Estonia has enjoyed some unique advantages in creating a dynamicservice sector. She is very close to Finland (one hour by hydrofoil)and was able to attract nearly three million Finnish touristslast year. They come to see the medieval center of the capital,Tallinn, as well as to shop for goods which sell at a discountto prices in Helsinki. While the two countries have always beenseparate, their languages are very similar and Finnish companieshave been the largest foreign investors in Estonia. The other great opportunity for Estonia's service sector is thedevelopment of Tallinn as a major trans-shipment point for Russiaand other countries in the region. Tallinn has one of the bestharbors on the Baltic Sea and could easily become a more importantport than St. Petersburg. But Tallinn's future role could beinhibited by the poor relations which exist between Russia andEstonia. In a recent poll of Russian popular attitudes aboutwhich country is most hostile to Russia, the winner was Estonia. The Estonian ambassador to Moscow said the poll resultwas greathonor for such a small country, but the deep animosities lingeringfrom the Soviet era are a potential obstacle to Estonia achievingits full potential as a new Hong Kong for the region. Estoniais such a small country that foreign companies will want to investthere only if the country can serve as a warehouse and distributioncenterfor the whole Baltic region and eastern Russia, not just the localmarket. The Estonians have much to learn from the Poles, who havedeveloped such successful relations with their former enemiesin both the east and west that exports are growing at a 35% annualrate while cross border retail trade is worth over 5% of GDP. Estonia also has such a small population that her own industrieswill someday need access to Russian labor in order to expand. If barriers to trade and capital can be removed, northeast Russiacould emerge as a low cost labor reserve for Estonia in much thesame way that the southern Chinese province of Guandong does forHong Kong. Estonia is still in the midst of privatizing former state enterprisesand establishing the legal infrastructure of capitalism. Buther greatest economic policy challenge during the next few yearswill probably be managing the financial side-effects of the currencyboard monetary regime on credit expansion and asset prices. Estonia'sKroon was the first new currency to emerge from the former SovietUnion and it was pegged at such a deeply undervalued level thatthe exchange rate link to the D-mark has not undermined the country'scommercial competitiveness despite the large inflation differentialwith Germany. The only powerful protectionist lobby in Estoniais the agricultural sector, which has been suffering from hightariffs in both Russia and the European Union. But with realinterest rates at minus 10% and the economy enjoying strong growth,there is a risk that Estonia's currency board could encouragespeculative bank lending and a sharp rise in asset prices. Undera currency board monetary system, the sole goal of monetary policyis to maintain a convertible currency at a fixed exchange rate. The central bank cannot manipulate interest rates in order tofine tune the economy. At present, both domestic and internationalinvestors are very happy to purchase Kroon financial assets withnegative real interest rates because Estonian interest rates areseveral hundred basis points above the yields available on D-markfinancial assets. The risk is that negative real interest ratesin an environment of high economic growth will encourage a burstof speculative bank lending to finance inflation in real estateprices and equity values. The central bank will have to carefullymonitor credit quality in the banking system in order to preventa boom and bust cycle from occurring. Estonia had a major bankingcrisis in 1992 but that crisis resulted from loans to bankruptSoviet era state enterprises. Today, the Estonian banking systemis so well capitalized that the some of its institutions are takingadvantage of Latvia's banking problems by expanding into thatcountry. While Estonia's rate of economic growth is one of the highestin the world, her standard of living is still suffering from thelagged effects of fifty years of communism. Before World WarTwo, Estonia had a per capita income comparable to Finland's. Today, her per capita income is about $3,000 while Finland'sis $18.850. If we adjust for price differences, the per capitaincome of Estonia on a purchasing power parity basis is probablyover $6,000, but it is still far below its long term potential. Estonia is such a small country that many pundits will probablydismiss her success as the by-product of unique historical andgeo-political circumstances. Despite a long period of Russiandomination by both the Czars and the Communists, Estonia's culturalroots are in Scandinavia. She was a member of the Hanseatic leagueduring the early middle ages and a province of the Swedish empireuntil the 18th century. Before 1939, her economy had consistedof small farms and a wealthy class of German merchant familieswho had emigrated to Tallinn during the Hanseatic era. But thefact remains that Estonia is creating such a dynamic free marketeconomy that she will soon appear to be an anomaly compared toall of the countries of the Baltic, not just former Republicsof the Soviet Union. When Mrs. Thatcher named her first cabinet in 1979, it had somany people of eastern European descent that one media punditsaid it was unique for containing more Estonians than Etonians. In the early Thatcher years, Estonia was still a Soviet satelliteand no one could have imagined her serving as a role model forany form of free market economic experiment. But if Estonia canmanage the potential monetary risks in her Hong Kong style economicpolicy mix, there is little doubt that she will emerge as an importantcase study of the benefits of currency boards, free trade, andlow income tax rates for all developing countries and even herScandinavian neighbors. Estonia's monetary system could alsoserve as a useful tool for improving relations with Russia. AsMr. Yeltsin tries to re-establish the credibility of his economicreform program, he could do no worse than to announce that theRussian central bank will attempt to improve its anti-inflationcredibility by pegging the Ruble to the Estonian Kroon. (D. Hale) David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018780 WT01-B13-118IA018-000196-B046-77http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/tighten1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170927 text/html 12280HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:05:26 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:23:45 GMTContent-length: 12094Content-type: text/html Will the Fed Tighten in July or August? The Weekly Money Report May 29, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. As a result of the strength of final demand and rundown of inventorieswhich occurred during the first quarter, the majority of Americanforecasters will soon be projecting 3.0-4.0% output growth duringthe second quarter. The great unresolved question which stillhangs over the financial markets is whether final demand willslacken again and cause output growth to dip back into the 1.0-2.0%range during the third quarter or whether output growth will remainin the 3.0-3.5% range as a result of robust capital investment,steady expansion of retail sales and a burst of discretionaryfederal spending during the closing months of the 1996 fiscalyear. The economy's performance during the third quarter willbe of critical importance to investor psychology this summer becauseit will probably determine whether the Federal Reserve decidesto hike short-term interest rates. The Fed can avoid tighteningin response to one strong quarter because output growth has beenweak or erratic for over a year. But with the unemployment rateat 5.4%, inflation already under upward pressure because of oiland food price shocks, and the stock market seemingly obliviousto all risks, it will be difficult to avoid at least one modestmonetary tightening at either the early July or late August FOMCmeeting. The American forecasting community expects the second quarterto represent the growth peak of 1996 but there is no consensusabout the growth rate for the second half. Pessimists believethat the economy will loose growth momentum quickly because ofthe adverse effect of higher oil and food prices on consumer realincome, the impact of rising bond yields on demand for housingand a general slowdown in business fixed investment after twoyears of robust gains. There will probably also be a sharp riseof imports and deterioration of the trade account because of inventoryrestocking in many tradable goods sectors. The growth optimists accept that retail spending will slow andthat the trade deficit will widen but they still project outputgrowth to remain in excess of 3.0% because of robust businessinvestment, steady growth of residential construction, a largeswing in corporate demand for inventories and a rebound in governmentexpenditures as federal agencies rush to spend unexpected appropriationsprovided by the budget compromise announced a few weeks ago. Under the new budget, federal agencies will be able to engagein $291 billion of discretionary spending during the April toSeptember period compared to $244 billion during the first halfof the current fiscal year. Several recent economic data reports have strengthened thearguments of the optimists. The latest Manpower EmploymentSurvey is projecting a moderate uptick of employment growth duringthe second quarter and is optimistic about the third quarter aswell. In April, non-defense capital goods orders excluding aircraftenjoyed their strongest growth rate in several months. The recentdecline in oil prices suggests that consumer inflation will easeduring the summer while the year on year growth rate of the CPIhas run so far ahead of the consumption deflator that real householdincome is not as weak as the CPI may suggest. The resilienceof the stock market continues to boost household wealth and ishaving positive spillover effects on sectors of the economy sensitiveto discretionary spending. The government also appears to haveenjoyed a surprisingly large windfall in capital gains tax receiptsduring April while America's charities report that personal contributionsto them rose by 11% last year or the highest growth rate since1986. Nor is the stock market boom just increasing householdwealth. It also is boosting investment and job creation byincreasing the flow of capital to entrepreneurial firms throughinitial public offerings. In the first half of 1996, IPO activityappears likely to expand at a $60 billion annual rate comparedto $29.7 billion last year and a previous peak of $41.7 billionduring 1993. Despite the allegations of many economic commentators that FederalReserve policy is restrictive, the growth of IPO activity as wellas bank lending to small and medium sized companies makes it clearthat the overall financial environment is quite stimulative. Commercial banks enjoy strong balance sheets and are competingto make new loans. The mutual fund boom is encouraging an upsurgein securitized capital formation through new stock and bond issues. Investors are more willing to assume risks because they haveenjoyed healthy capital gains on their existing equity portfolios. In fact, the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP hasitself expanded to 90.4% or the highest level ever recorded inAmerican history. The previous all time peak was 81% in 1929and the post-war peak was 78% in 1972. As a result of healthyprofit growth in the corporate sector since 1991, the stock market'sp/e multiple is still at moderate levels (16 using 1996 profits)but the ratios of price to book value and price to replacementcost (Tobin's Q) have risen to record levels. Federal ReserveChairman Alan Greenspan has downplayed the significance of theseratios by stressing that book value cannot adequately measurethe impact of America's investment in technology and human capitalon potential corporate earnings power but the fact remains thatfirms are enjoying such rich valuation ratios that they have avery strong incentive to boost investment. As a result, itis not surprising that the most distinguishing feature of thecurrent business cycle has been its supply side dimension. The economy enjoyed a healthy recovery after 1993 because ofan upsurge of capital investment which is causing the economy'spotential manufacturing capacity to expand at a 4.5% annual ratecompared to 2.0-2.5% in the early 1990's. A recovery with suchstrong investment leadership enjoys self-reinforcing momentumbecause it boosts the economy's potential growth rate and thuslowers the risk of inflation even as demand increases. The problemfor policy-makers is that official output data does not yet showany productivity pay-off from the recent investment boom, so theycontinue to perceive the economy's optimal growth rate to be onlyabout 2.0-2.5%. There is not yet a consensus at the Federal Reserve on the needto tighten monetary policy, but opinion will move in that directionif May and June data confirm that final demand is expanding ata steady rate and that the manufacturing sector is shifting froma sub-cycle of inventory liquidation to accumulation. Excludingfood and oil, the economy's inflation performance is still excellentbut if output growth remains above 3.0% through year end, theunemployment rate will drop to 5.0% and provoke increasing anxietyabout the danger of increased pressure on wages and prices. Therisk of tightening will fade only if there is such pronouncedweakness in retail sales that the FOMC can ignore the resilienceof other sectors or if there is a sudden precipitous correctionin equity prices. Political factors could delay any new Fed tightening until August. The Senate has not yet been able to confirm the reappointmentof Alan Greenspan as Fed Chairman or the appointment of two newGovernors because of a filibuster by Senator Harkin of Iowa. The two new appointees may also be reluctant to launch their Fedcareers by tightening immediately. But if third quarter growthforecasts solidify in the 3.0-3.5% range, there will be at leasta 75% chance of monetary tightening at the August FOMC meeting. The other factor which could encourage U.S. monetary tighteningand depress bond markets this summer is the growing confidenceamong forecasters that 1997 will be the most robust year for theworld economy since 1988. According to the latest IMF forecast,world output should expand by 4.3% during 1998 compared to 3.8%this year, 3.5% during 1995, and 1.5-2.4% during the early 1990's. As a result of its below consensus forecast of only 1.8% and2.2% U.S. output growth during 1996 and 1997, the IMF is projectingjust 2.0% and 2.6% output growth in all the industrial countriesduring this year and next year, but it expects output growth inthe developing countries to rise to 6.4% from 6.3% during 1995and 5.9% during 1995. The countries in transition from communismalso should enjoy growth rates of 2.5% and 3.8% during 1995 and1996 compared to large output losses during the early 1990's. As the IMF is significantly undersestimating U.S. output growth,the world economy should enjoy a growth rate in excess of 4.0%this year and over 4.5% next year. Most Wall Street people still view the world economy largely fromthe perspective of the G-7 countries but the fact is they nowaccount for only about 55% of world output compared to 40% forthe developing countries and 5% for the transition economies. As a result of the high growth differentials between the developingcountries and industrial countries, the G-7 share of world outputwill decline steadily during the next decade. The fact is thedeveloping countries have about 70% of the world's land area and85% of its population compared to 45% of its output and 15% ofits stock market capitalization. The gaps between human resourcesand output should decline significantly as the developing countriescontinue their transition to market oriented economic systems. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017320 WT01-B13-119IA018-000196-B046-94http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/bondalter1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170939 text/html 11645HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:05:35 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:23:51 GMTContent-length: 11459Content-type: text/html Will Bond Market Perceptions Alter Economic And Political Reality? The Weekly Money Report May 6, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The major risk now confronting the U.S. financial markets is that bond yields will rise sharply in response to both evidence of economic recovery and the increasingly populist tone of the 1996 election campaign. Most forecasters have clearly underestimated the U.S. economy's resilience while congressional Republicans are so alarmed about their low standing in the opinion polls that they have decided to counter-attack by proposing an immediate reduction in the gasoline tax. If the bidding war in Washington continues to escalate, investors will become concerned about expansion of the federal deficit and enactment of new regulatory entitlements, such as a higher minimum wage, at a time when the demand for labor is already starting to encourage faster wage growth. The overall cyclical condition of the U.S. economy is the best since the 1960's, but there is widespread dissatisfaction with perceived changes in the composition of national income. The profit share of GDP is still well below its peak in the 1950's and 1960's, but many people believe that the post-1991 economic expansion has benefited only a small elite of senior executives and stockholders, not the great mass of the American people. As a result the U.S. economy will be caught between two colliding forces this summer; a bond market which distrusts output growth in excess of 2.0% and a bidding competition in Washington to redistribute income at the expense of corporate profits and the federal deficit. Since perceptions are reality in both the bond market and politics, bond investors must now confront a perplexing dilemma. If they start to discount a robust economy and Democratic takeover of the Congress, bond yields will rise so sharply that the economy could stall this autumn and help set the stage for a Dole victory. In such a scenario, bond yields could drop from 8.0% this summer back to 5.5% next year. If, by contrast, bond yields peak close to 7.0% or soon decline, the economy will lose momentum only gradually and the odds of Democratic victories in November will improve. If the Democrats regain control of the Congress, bond yields will remain in the 6.5-7.5% range in late 1996 even if output growth slows to 1.5-2.0%. Election campaigns always encourage politicians to make promises about the economy which they regret later, but the stakes in the 1996 election are unprecedented in the modern era. No Democratic President has won two consecutive election victories since Franklin Roosevelt. The Republicans have not controlled the Congress for two consecutive terms, since the days of Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover. As a result, both parties perceive great opportunities and risks in the current election. The President has done a masterful job of borrowing much of the Republican rhetoric about reducing the size of government while playing upon the theme of economic insecurity through populist proposals, such as boosting the minimum wage. As is apparent with his stands on Tort Reform and the balanced budget, he is remarkably adept at shifting between the imagery of a New Democrat and an Old Democrat on an issue-by-issue basis. In fact, a recent media search by The New York Times found that President Clinton did not refer to the minimum wage once when his party controlled the Congress, but he has endorsed a minimum wage hike nearly fifty times since the Republicans took over the Congress in early 1995. The minimum wage has fallen so sharply in real terms since the 1980's that an increase will pose only modest risks for employment creation, but the markets regard it as a bad omen of the policies which could follow in 1997 if the Democrats win back control of the Congress. As a result, it is not surprising that Dr. Al Wojinlower refers to the current American economic scene as one of "glum prosperity". The U.S. economy expanded at a 2.8% annual rate during the first quarter compared to wide-spread expectations that output growth would be only 1.5-2.0%. Domestic final sales rose at a 4.1% annual rate compared to 0.6% during the fourth quarter of 1995, 2.6% during the third quarter, and 2.2% during the second quarter. The uptick in domestic final sales was led by a 14.5% growth rate in business spending on new equipment, 5.8% growth in business spending on structures, and 3.5% growth in consumer spending. After falling steadily for several quarters, federal government spending also rebounded at a 6.7% annual rate compared to a 12.8% decline during the fourth quarter. As a result of auto inventory liquidation, non-farm business inventories grew at only a $12.8 billion annual rate compared to $19.5 billion during the fourth quarter of 1995, $36 billion during the middle quarters of 1995, and $54.5 billion during the first quarter of 1995. If we exclude autos, though, real business inventories rose at a $36.9 billion annual rate last quarter compared to $19.1 billion during the fourth quarter of 1995 and $44.5 billion during the third quarter. The underlying strength of domestic final demand suggests that the economy should continue to expand at a 3.0-3.5% annual rate through the middle quarters of 1996. There will be renewed weakness in federal spending during the second quarter and inventory rebuilding will boost the trade deficit, but steady growth of private final demand, coupled with a swing in the corporate inventory cycle, should still produce output growth in excess of 3.0%. The best confirmation that the inventory cycle has turned is the purchasing agent index. It rose back over 50 in April, or its highest level since June, 1995, in response to stronger orders, output, and backlogs. The April employment report was weak after hefty job gains during the first quarter, but some of this weakness appears to reflect seasonal problems with the timing of the survey. The April Conference Board survey of consumer perceptions of the job market was much more upbeat. Only 21.3% of households reported that jobs were hard to get compared to 26.5% during March and 23.4% during February. The economy's surprising resilience during the first quarter has already provoked a new debate about when the Fed might feel compelled to tighten monetary policy again. It is doubtful that the Fed will want to move as early as its late May meeting, but some analysts are now speculating about a rate hike in July or one year after the Fed first began easing policy in response to the 1995 slowdown. There is no consensus at the Fed about when to act because there are as many divisions about the economic outlook on the FOMC as there are in the private sector. Some governors perceive that the economy is structurally vulnerable to weakness because of the high level of consumer debt, while the majority perceive that the economy is expanding at a moderate non-inflationary rate. They will not want to tighten until they see clear signs that output growth will remain above 2.5% on a sustained basis and push utilization rates to levels which might encourage higher inflation. The evidence on the inflation outlook itself is mixed. There have been large price increases for food and fuel during recent weeks because of exogenous shocks, such as poor weather and low inventories. Such price shocks are occurring independently of the global business cycle, but they could alter the inflation outlook if they began to influence corporate price and wage behavior. Traditional cyclical measures of inflation pressure, such as the purchasing agent price index, are still subdued, but if the output growth remains close to 3.0% they are bound to revive in the near future. The first quarter employment cost index report also contained the first hints of wage escalation in the U.S. economy. Wages and salaries in the private sector rose at a 3.3% annual rate compared to gains of only 2.8-2.9% during the previous four quarters. The uptick in wages was partly offset by slower growth of benefits after a long period in which benefit costs exceeded wage gains. But with the unemployment rate at 5.4%, the risk is high that wages will continue to escalate because of business competition for labor. As a result of the low level of surplus capacity in the U.S. economy, there is clearly a case for monetary tightening as early as the July FOMC meeting, but there will not be a consensus on the FOMC for action without evidence that output growth will be sustained at a level above 2.5% and that industrial commodity prices are rising. If the purchasing agent price index shoots up to 50% or higher during the next two months, and the Blue Chip Survey of the economic consensus projects a new median forecast of 3.0-3.5% output growth through the second half, the Fed is virtually certain to hike money market yields 25 basis points in July. But if the purchasing agent price index is still in the 40-45 range and forecasters remain ambiguous about the growth outlook, the Fed could defer a decision until later in the summer. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016570 WT01-B13-120IA018-000196-B046-115http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/usoutputgrowth1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106170957 text/html 9350HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:05:52 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:24:05 GMTContent-length: 9165Content-type: text/html Will U.S. Output Growth Exceed 3.0% During the Second Quarter? The Weekly Money Report March 25, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The performance of the U.S. financial markets during the next few quarters will be driven by the interaction between business cycle developments and the unfolding of the 1996 election campaign. Monetary policy will be expansionary in most G-7 countries, but bond yields could fluctuate in a wide range because of changing investor perception of political and economic risk. The large rise in U.S. bond yields since January suggests the market already is discounting several developments, including a moderate upturn in the economy, no further progress in resolving the fiscal deadlock in Washington, and a high probability of President Clinton winning re-election. European bond yields have risen partly in response to U.S. developments and partly because of investor apprehension about how the governments of Germany and France will resolve the contradictions in their program for European monetary union. Japanese bond yields have risen because of continuing evidence that the Japanese economy has bottomed as well as investor concern about the cost of future bank bail-outs on the government's fiscal deficit. The uptick in bond yields during February and March was so sudden that some pundits began to make comparisons with the bond market collapse of 1994, but it is doubtful that the cyclical revival in the U.S. economy this spring and summer will be as robust as the upturn which pushed U.S. bond yields over 8.0% two years ago. In 1994, the economy enjoyed a spurt to 3.5% output growth from 2.2% because of 3.0% growth in personal consumption, 9.2% growth in business fixed investment and an inventory swing worth 0.6% of GDP. In 1996, the economy will probably enjoy 2.4% growth in consumer spending, 5.0-6.0% growth in business investment, and a stabilization of corporate inventories. But while output growth for the year as a whole will probably average only 2.5%, there could be a spurt to growth rates as high as 3.0- 3.5% during the second and third quarter, as the manufacturing sector shifts from inventory liquidation to inventory accumulation. The 1994 rebound in the economy produced a large rise in capacity utilization rates and industrial commodity prices, so the Federal Reserve hiked U.S. short-term interest rates from 3.0% to 6.0%. If the coming rebound in output stabilizes with growth rates of 2.0-2.5% after one or two moderately stronger quarters, it will not have as dramatic an impact on commodity prices as the 1994 upturn. Capacity utilization rates have dropped back to 82.0% from 85.0% last year while new capacity is expanding at a 4.0% annual rate compared to only 2.0-2.5% during the early 1990's. There is a risk that the low level of unemployment will encourage some escalation of wage growth but the flexibility of the U.S. labor market will probably cause changes in wage compensation to occur gradually. Unemployment has been at 4.0% in several mid-western states since 1994 and firms have still been successful at restraining costs. In 1996, productivity also should improve as output growth recovers. It is possible that the coming turn in the inventory cycle could produce such large income gains that consumer spending will rise sharply rather than moderately, but several factors suggest that the economy does not have the pent-up demand which existed after three years of sluggish growth between 1991 and 1994. The ratio of consumer debt to income has risen sharply and consumer delinquency rates on credit cards are back at the highs of 1990. While the delinquency rate on the total stock of consumer debt remains very subdued, the uptick in the delinquency rate on cards could encourage some consumer finance companies to impose tighter credit standards after a prolonged period in which lending conditions became progressively easier. As Federal Reserve Governor Larry Lindsey has warned, such a change in the credit environment could reduce the spending power of lower middle class households who lack discretionary income. The potentially new positive factor for consumer spending is the huge wealth gains which the household sector has enjoyed from the appreciation of equity prices. The capitalization of the U.S.- equity market has risen to $6.7 trillion or 87.5% of GDP compared to a seventy year average of 48% of GDP. Households own about two-thirds of all U.S. corporate equity, with one-third held in the form of mutual funds, IRA's, or defined benefit pension plans and two-thirds owned directly. Econometric research shows only a weak link between aggregate consumer spending and stock market gains because about 90% of U.S. corporate equity is owned by less than 5% of the households. But the capital gains of the past year have been so large that they should encourage healthy growth of demand for upmarket consumer goods as well as stronger retail spending in states with large concentrations of retired people, such as Florida. In 1992, households over the age of 65 owned 41.4% of publicly traded U.S. corporate equity despite the fact that they account for only 21.8% of all households. Households in the 45-54 year range, by contrast, own 18.07% of all U.S. equity and account for 16.42% of the population. It is popular in the investment community to describe senior citizens as people living on fixed incomes, but the spectacular performance of the stock market compared to real wages during recent years suggests that this label is misapplied. In the 1990's, it is people in their 20's and 30's, not the elderly, who are living on fixed incomes. If the rebound in the economy this spring does not push the purchasing agent index for inflation and other sensitive measures of industrial prices sharply higher, the Federal Reserve will probably permit short-term interest rates to remain at current levels through the summer and autumn. It might decide to tighten in late 1996 if stronger growth in the world economy threatens to give a significant boost to commodity prices but the recovery in Europe and Japan is so weak that it will probably not generate major pressure on commodity prices until 1997. In contrast to U.S. industry, the European corporate sector has not yet reduced inventories significantly while final sales remain weak. Japan enjoyed healthy growth of final sales during the final quarter of 1995, but inventory levels are high and the government has not yet completed enactment of a rescue program for the banks. Large tax hikes are also scheduled for 1997. It should be noted as well that the bank rescue program now before the Japanese Diet is focused solely on the 8 trillion yen of bad debt in the Jusen. There are numerous other non-bank financial intermediaries with problem loans approaching 40 trillion yen. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013820 WT01-B13-121IA018-000196-B046-131http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/socialsecurity.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171007 text/html 3232HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:06:08 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:24:13 GMTContent-length: 3047Content-type: text/html Investing Social Security in Mutual Funds The Weekly Money Report March 14, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. A Memo from David Hale A preliminary version of the coming White House report on social security reform is available by calling Debbie Hamilton at 312-499-1760. It contains proposals for radical changes in the investment policies of the social security system. Among the alternatives mentioned are investing social security funds directly in the equity market or turning over the assets for deployment in individually controlled retirement accounts. There was no consensus in the study group taskforce about how to proceed, so this report will not lead to any immediate legislative proposals. But after the 1996 elections there could be significant changes in the social security system's investment policies with potentially benign consequences for the mutual fund industry. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013810 WT01-B13-122IA018-000196-B046-150http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/usyieldcurve1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171019 text/html 12170HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:06:17 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:24:17 GMTContent-length: 11984Content-type: text/html Is The U.S. Yield Curve Discounting Increased Political Risk? The Weekly Money Report February 29, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The yield on long-term U.S. Treasury bonds has increased by nearly 40 basis points since early January despite Fed easing and continued evidence of sluggish economic growth in the United States. The steepening of the yield curve reflects a variety of economic and political developments. Retailers have reported a stronger tone to consumer spending since January and thus the risk of the fourth quarter slowdown evolving into a recession has been greatly reduced. The weakness of Senator Robert Dole in the early primaries has lowered the odds of any new breakthrough in the budget talks in Washington while the success of Patrick Buchanan has provoked new anxieties about the ability of the Republicans to retain their congressional majorities in this autumn's election. The yen has rallied sharply because of Japanese corporations repatriating capital at the end of the March fiscal year and increasing evidence that the Japanese economy has stabilized. While the European economy is clearly weak, German investors are demanding increased yield premiums to compensate for the risk that Chancellor Kohl and President Chirac will pursue monetary union despite the failure of both countries to achieve the Maastricht targets for reduction of their government deficits. The only clearly positive news for the bond market during the past week was the decision of President Clinton to re-appoint Alan Greenspan as Fed Chairman as well as to fill the existing vacancies with competent and credible economists widely perceived to have mainstream views about the role of the Federal Reserve in economic policy. The failure of the White House and Congress to agree on a fiscal package has been a major disappointment to investors because in the autumn of 1995 there appeared to be an unprecedented opportunity for long-term deficit reduction through cuts in Medicare entitlement programs. If the Republicans retain control of Congress, there will be a second opportunity to pursue some form of deficit reduction in 1997 but forecasts about next year's fiscal policy are speculative at best. The most popular Republican presidential candidates so far have been Steve Forbes and Patrick Buchanan, neither of whom has stressed balancing the budget as a policy priority. Ironically, if they force the Republican Party to adopt a more populist fiscal policy of tax cuts and increased federal spending to promote job security, President Clinton could emerge as the champion of fiscal conservatism this autumn. The primary consolation for the bond market from this year's budget gridlock is that the Republicans will probably be able to impose $10-15 billion of targeted spending cuts in the continuing resolutions still moving through Congress and thus lower the fiscal 1996 deficit to $120-130 billion. While investors have long been apprehensive about the ability of a man as old as Senator Robert Dole to be an effective presidential candidate, the fragmentation of the Republican Party in the early primary elections has still come as a shock to the financial markets. It creates several potential risks. First, the Republican Party could become so badly divided that it will lose control of the Congress this autumn, not just the opportunity to regain the White House. Secondly, the issue of deficit reduction has faded completely from the political debate because of the popularity of Steve Forbes and Patrick Buchanan. Forbes is running on Reaganite themes, such as cutting taxes, while Buchanan is campaigning against free trade and an unregulated labor market. The candidate most closely identified with the Congressional Contract with America, Senator Phil Gramm, was the first to drop out. Thirdly, investors are apprehensive that Buchanan's successes will encourage other candidates to move in a populist direction by advocating more restrictive trade policies or large increases in marginal income tax rates to punish highly paid executives responsible for job shedding at large corporations. Senator Robert Dole has some advisors sympathetic to Buchanan's positions on trade and they have already encouraged him to make speeches attacking the American corporate sector. If the Democrats were to regain control of the House, Rep. Richard Gephardt would become the House speaker and probably use his new position to develop a Democratic version of the Buchanan agenda for his own presidential campaign in 2000. Patrick Buchanan is such a divisive candidate that it will be impossible for him to win the Republican nomination, but his primary victories are exposing the social contradictions in America's recent economic performance and thus provoking a debate about income distribution, corporate responsibility, and other issues which the Republicans are often uncomfortable discussing. The U.S. economy has significantly out-performed all other industrial countries in job creation since the 1970's. During the past sixteen years, the U.S. economy has created 28 million new jobs and reduced its unemployment rate to 5.7% while the unemployment rate in many European countries is twice as high. The ratio of long-term unemployed (unemployed longer than one year) to total unemployment is also only 12% in the U.S. compared to 40% in Germany and 35% in France. During the half century since the end of the Second World War, the U.S. economy has produced an expansion of private affluence on a scale unprecented since the industrial revolution began. In 1950, fewer than one million Americans earned as much as $60,000 in today's money. By 1967, slightly more than one million Americans had incomes of $100,000 per annum on the basis of 1993 constant dollars. Despite the volatile business cycles of the 1970's and early 1980's, this number expanded to 2.7 million by 1980 and to 5.6 million by 1993. In fact, over one million Americans had incomes above $200,000 per annum by 1993. But the price of this flexibility has been an increase in job insecurity and erosion in the real wages of less skilled workers since the 1970's. The U.S. economy has out-performed all other industrial countries in job creation during recent years because it enjoys far more price and regulatory flexibility in its labor market than other countries. Almost 20 million Americans change their job every year and even during the recession of the early 1990's only about 3 million did so because of employment termination. American firms are far more willing to hire than European firms because the cost of layoffs is much lower than in Europe. According to a recent research report from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the duration of jobs for most categories of American workers has been remarkably stable since 1973. But there has been a major increase in the rate of permanent dismissals at companies compared to temporary layoffs. In the 1960's, permanent dismissals accounted for only about 30-35% of new unemployment compared to 40-45% in 1993. The share of temporary layoffs, by contrast, has declined from just over 20% to about 17%. Job insecurity has been an especially striking feature of employment at the large Fortune 500 companies which were once considered to be the country's most stable employers. Since 1979, their total employment has declined from 16.5 million jobs to 11.5 million jobs, with most of the job losses occurring in the U.S. itself. The growth of small and medium sized firms has provided many alternative forms of employment but some workers have had to accept lower pay when making such transitions. Start-up firms have much higher failure rates than old established companies and thus contribute to the sense of insecurity among people leaving job at large firms. Patrick Buchanan alleges that U.S. firms have been transferring jobs to foreign countries in pursuit of lower wages but employment data for U.S. multinationals suggests that the technological factors which have forced cuts in U.S. manufacturing employment have been operative in other countries as well. Between 1979 and 1989, American firms reduced their employment of foreign production workers by 2.3 million jobs while creating 1.2 million new jobs in non-production departments, such as marketing and distribution. The expansion of U.S. companies in foreign markets is making them more formidable global competitors and thus boosting U.S. exports. It is not merely transferring jobs between countries on a zero sum basis. The introduction of new and more sophisticated forms of technology into the workplace has also produced greater income inequality based on education. Since 1979, the real wages of high school graduates have fallen by 21% while the earnings of people with advanced technical degrees have often increased significantly. Firms also have tried to help their employers avoid high effective marginal tax rates by expanding benefits more aggressively than wage and salary income. During the past fifteen years, the government's employment cost index has increased by about 22.0% in real terms while real average hourly earnings have fallen by 8%. The biggest gains in employment costs were concentrated in benefits (up 38% in real terms), not take-home pay. Benefits have expanded from 16% of compensation in the early 1980's to over 18.0% today. As a result, workers which are employed by small firms without non-taxable benefit packages have suffered a much greater erosion of real income than people employed by firms with health care, pensions, and other non-taxable forms of compensation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013070 WT01-B13-123IA018-000196-B046-166http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/hasdollarpeaked.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171028 text/html 13119HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:06:27 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:24:27 GMTContent-length: 12933Content-type: text/html Has The Dollar Peaked? The Weekly Money Report January 31, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The U.S. dollar has eased against both the Japanese yen and German mark since January because of a mixture of economic and political factors. First, there are signs that the U.S. investors are exporting capital aggressively again. In January, retail investors purchased almost $8 billion of international funds or the highest level since early 1994. If these trends were to be sustained, total capital outflows from the U.S. during 1996 could rise to $150-200 billion at annual rates. During 1995, U.S. investors purchased foreign equities at a rate of $4.1 billion during the first quarter, $10.2 billion during the second quarter, and $21.5 billion during the third quarter compared to $47 billion during 1994 and $63 billion during 1993. American demand for foreign bonds also has been expanding. In 1995, U.S. investors purchased foreign bonds at a rate of $3.8 billion during the first quarter, $12.7 billion during the second quarter and $13.8 billion during the third quarter. Pension capital outflows have been steady at about $35 billion per annum during recent years but retail investment demand for foreign securities has fluctuated in a wide range. In 1995, the growing U.S. demand for foreign securities was offset by foreign purchases of American securities by both private and official investors. Foreign investors bought U.S. equities at a rate of $5.8 billion during the second quarter and $5.2 billion during the third quarter after selling $3.5 billion during the first quarter. Foreign investors were much more enthusiastic buyers of U.S. Treasury bonds last year. Their purchases were $32.9 billion during the first quarter, $43.5 billion during the second quarter, and $46.9 billion during the third quarter. A large share of these purchases were probably official intervention to support the dollar. Japan, for example, purchased $31.4 billion of U.S. government securities during the first three quarters of 1995 despite a cautious attitude towards the dollar by Tokyo's big life insurance companies. But the U.S. bond market rally also attracted many foreign buyers to corporate bonds, not just government securities. Foreign purchases of U.S. corporate bonds were $14.4 billion during the first quarter, $13.1 billion during the second quarter, and $13.2 billion during the third quarter. The problem for the U.S. capital account during 1996 is that American equity values are high relative to the rest of the world while the U.S. bond market is unlikely to produce returns as attractive as those which occurred during 1995. There is also far more human and organizational infrastructure on Wall Street promoting foreign investment than ever before in American history. The U.S. now has 367 international equity funds compared to 196 in 1993, 95 in 1990, and only 13 in 1984. The number of global equity funds has also expanded to 167 from 99 in 1992 and 16 in 1984. While global bond funds have attracted less money than international equity funds, their number also has expanded to 145 from 87 in 1992 and only 1 in 1984. As a result of the growth of America's international fund management industry and the significant out-performance of Wall Street compared to many foreign markets during recent years, American demand for foreign securities during 1996 could be much higher than foreign private demand for U.S. securities. The second factor which has depressed the dollar during recent weeks has been seasonal repatriation of capital to Japan and investor concerns about the Bank of Japan shifting away from its easy monetary policy. The new finance minister recently stated that the yields on pensioners' bank deposits were excessively low. New data for industrial production and retail sales also suggest that the Japanese economy has bottomed and begun to recover. As a result of these developments, the futures market is now suggesting that the Bank of Japan could raise short-term interest rates this summer despite the severe asset quality problems of many Japanese banks. The slump in interest rates futures and rally in the yen has become self-reinforcing during recent weeks by encouraging many foreign borrowers of yen, such as hedge funds, to reduce their yen liabilities. As a result, the Bank of Japan has intervened on a large scale during recent weeks in order to persuade investors that they will not permit the seasonal pressures for a stronger yen to go too far. As a result of the problems of the Japanese banking system, it is very doubtful that there will be any new monetary tightening in the near future but the yen could still hold in a trading range of 103 to 107 because of political factors, not just divergences in monetary cycles and business conditions. In January, U.S. manufacturing firms began to complain about dollar appreciation while the primary victories of Patrick Buchanan are reviving political focus on the trade deficit after a period in which it faded from Washington radar screens. Recent Japanese import and export data are also calling into question how much further the trade surplus will contract if the yen stays in a range of 100-110. Many Japanese firms are profitable at yen rates of 100-110 and their exports would probably rise sharply if the yen fell back to 110-120. As recently as three months ago, by contrast, many analysts were suggesting the trade surplus would fall sharply if the yen simply held at 105 to the dollar. Persistence of a large Japanese trade surplus is potentially bullish for world financial markets because it provides a source of surplus liquidity but the yen will not weaken dramatically if the surplus remains at high levels or expands further unless Japanese investors export capital far more aggressively. Japanese investors have been boosting their purchases of Australian and European bonds during recent months but they continue to be cautious towards the dollar. Recent political developments in the U.S. will probably reinforce this caution, especially if Mr. Buchanan goes into the Republican convention with a third or more of the delegates. The third factor which has depressed the dollar is global bond yield differentials. The German mark has rallied against the dollar because German bond yields have backed up as much as U.S. bond yields during recent weeks while the German economy is so weak that most investors expect further Bundesbank easing. At present, Germany is offering nominal bond yields of 6.2% with a prospective inflation rate of 1.5-2.0% while U.S. bond yields are 6.4% despite a prospective inflation rate closer to 3.0%. French and British real long-term interest rates are also 4.0-5.0% on the basis of current bond yields and prospective inflation performance. These yield differentials have helped to boost investor demand for European currencies. In the second quarter, several factors could help to encourage stronger demand for the dollar. First, the U.S. economy should improve and lessen investor concern about the risk of a recession depressing corporate profits. Secondly, the repatriation of capital to Japan should slow, if not reverse, while many investment institutions may respond to the start of the new fiscal year by diversifying more of their portfolios into foreign securities. Recent proposals to shift a large share of pension fund assets to non-life insurance company managers also should set the stage at some point for larger capital outflows from Japan. Thirdly, European currencies could suffer during the second quarter from investor concern about the Russian presidential election in June. The opinion polls suggest that the most likely winner is the communist candidate, Mr. Gennady Zyuganov. He has tired to reassure foreign investors that he will not reverse recent economic reforms but most Russian liberals believe that he is a front man for members of the old Nomenklatura who will do significant damage to Russia's emerging market economy. Mr. Zyuganov's party also favors restoring stronger links with the former Republics of the Soviet Union and opposing the entry of the countries of eastern Europe into NATO. As the IMF recently provided Mr. Boris Yeltsin with a $9 billion loan and he still controls the machinery of government, it is possible that he will be able to make a comeback in time for the election. But as a result of his health problems and low level of public approval, investors will have to assign a high risk to the probability of either Mr. Zyuganov winning the election or Mr. Yeltsin inventing some political excuse to delay the election (such as new military action in the Chechen Republic or a sudden decision to merge Belarus back into Russia). The first major test of market perceptions of the Russian political situation will come in April when Morgan Guaranty plans to offer a Russian Eurobond to foreign investors. If the Eurobond offering goes well, the foreign exchange market may conclude that investors are already discounting a Zyuganov victory. But as Russia has not had an open election for its head of state since 1613, it is difficult to believe that the coming presidential election will not produce some news events potentially damaging to the currencies of the countries close to Russia, including the German mark. To summarize, the large rise in U.S. bond yields since late January appears to reflect a mixture of economic and political factors, including the decreased risk of a full scale recession, new pessimism about the prospects for a fiscal compromise in Washington and investor anxiety about what fragmentation of the Republican Party in recent primaries portends for this November's presidential and congressional elections. Investors are especially concerned that Patrick Buchanan's success could help to set the stage for the election of a Democratic House majority which would then embrace themes such as economic nationalism and greater federal regulation of the labor market. The firmer tone to retail sales since January suggests the U.S. economy should soon complete its inventory adjustment and return to a growth rate of 2.0-3.0% during the second quarter. But if bond yields continue to rise in response to America's new political risks, the upturn in housing could stall and depress consumer spending on furniture and appliances at a time when fiscal policy will be restrictive and monetary policy will be the primary engine for restoring growth. Rising bond yields also could depress equity prices after a market rally so broad based that U.S. corporations now have a market capitalization of $6.6 trillion or a level equal to 87.5% of GDP compared to a previous peak of 81.0% of GDP in 1929. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015700 WT01-B13-124IA018-000196-B046-178http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/benefit2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171036 text/html 15852HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:06:36 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 11-Oct-96 15:24:16 GMTContent-length: 15669Content-type: text/html Will Investors Or the Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? (continued page 2) Will Investors Or the Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? (continued) Canada, Australia, and New Zealand followed Britain's lead byintroducing index linked debt during the 1980's and early 1990's,but their stock of index linked debt is much smaller than Britain'sboth in absolute terms and as a share of their national debt. Canada has about $5.8 billion ($4.4 U.S.) of index linked debt,Australia has about $6 billion ($4.8 U.S.) and New Zealand hasonly about $200 million ($130 U.S.). New Zealand has recentlyincreased its use of index linked debt and investor interest hasbeen strong because of the high yields (5.8%) and the fact thatNew Zealand will soon have an election under a new system of proportionalrepresentation which could weaken political support for non-inflationaryeconomic policies. Canada issued its first index linked bondsduring 1991 when real interest rates on conventional bonds wereat high levels and then reduced the supply as interest rates fell. But the Canadian govenment recently began issuing new index linkedbonds and plans to have quarterly auctions at a rate of $300-500million. Sweden introduced index linked bonds only last yearbut it is promoting them so aggressively that they could be worthabout 10% of Sweden's $100 billion of public debt by early 1997. The bonds have so far suffered from illiquidity because pensionfunds have been hoarding them, but the coming expansion of supplyshould enhance trading. They offer a real yield of over 5.5%as well as an inflation adjustment but, in contrast to Britainand Australia, there is no tax exemption for the inflation indexationcomponent of the return. The U.S. Treasury plans to offer a ten year bond in denominationsas small as $1,000 in 1997 and $50 in 1998. The new bond willbe indexed by the general CPI urban inflation rate. The Treasurydesigned the bonds after holding hearings around the country aboutissues such as the appropriate indexation formula and maturityof the bonds. It says that the model for its new security willbe the Canadian Real Return bonds. As with Canada, the valueof the principal will be adjusted for inflation and every sixmonths the security will pay interest, which will be an amountequal to a fixed percentage of the inflation adjusted value ofthe principal. The Treasury also guarantees the final paymentof principal of the security will not be less than the originalpar value of the security at issuance, so deflation would notproduce a decline in the value of the bond. The one issue which the Treasury did not propose for debate wasthe tax treatment of the bonds. It intends to tax both the realreturn and the inflation adjustment component of the new instrumentsdespite the fact that Britain and Australia have exempted theinflation adjustment from taxation. Senior officials in the Clintonadministration are aware of the tax differential with the othercountries but they cannot introduce a tax allowance for the inflationcomponent of the bond return without obtaining Congressional permission. As a result of the intense partisan environment in Washingtonfollowing the early 1996 acrimony over fiscal policy, the Treasuryis reluctant to seek congressional cooperation in adding a taxallowance. The decision to tax the inflation component of thereturn will greatly reduce the appeal of the index linked securitiesfor taxable investors, such as high income individuals, but itwill not discourage demand from pension funds and other tax exemptretirement savings programs. The Treasury has not yet volunteered an opinion on the yield whichthe new index linked bonds will have to offer because it willobviously depend upon market conditions at the time of issue. At present, the UK government's index linked bond is offeringa real yield of 3.9%, the Australian and Canadian index linkedbonds offer real yields of 4.5-5.0% and New Zealand index linkeddebt offers a real yield of 5.9%. The government of the UnitedStates should be able to sell securities at a lower yield thanher Majesty's governments in London, Ottawa, Canberra and Wellington,but it is doubtful that the yield will be much below the yieldavailable on the UK securities for two reasons. First, the U.S.government wants to tax the security's inflation adjustment whereasBritain and Australia do not impose any tax. Secondly, Americaninvestors have enjoyed such high returns on conventional financialassets during recent years that they will probably not be attractedto a low yield inflation adjusted security until there is morewidespread pessimism about the outlook for inflation itself. The real yield on U.S. equities during the 20th century has averagedabout 6.8% while the real yield during the past decade has beenclose to 10.2%. The real yield on U.S. bonds during the pastcentury has averaged close to 3.0% but real interest rates wereso high during the 1980's that many investors now believe theyshould earn a real yield on bonds of at least 4.0-6.0% excludingcapital gains. Since 1992, the yields on long-term Treasury securitieshave fluctuated between 5.5% and 8.25% while the annual CPI inflationrate has averaged 3.0%, 2.8% and 2.6%. The real total returnon U.S. government bonds since 1986 has also been 5.14%. Themajor advantage of the new index linked security is that interestpayments will expand in line with the bank's inflation adjustedprincipal. Neither the coupon nor the value of the principalwill be fixed. In its early stages, the new index linked security will probablyappeal to four categories of investors. First, it will be ofinterest to pension funds which want to obtain an inflation-adjustedasset which they can use for matching with long-term liabilities. Secondly, the instrument will appeal to investment contrarianswhom believe that Wall Street has become overly optimistic aboutinflation and that the move towards expansionary monetary policynow underway in most G-7 countries will produce a burst of highercommodity prices next year. Since the U.S. Treasury's indexlinked bond has the potential to be more liquid and tradable thanthe index linked bonds of other countries, it could also helpto attract capital from inflation wary investors all over theworld. Thirdly, many Wall Street firms will probably use theindex-linked bonds to create new hybrid securities offering arbitrageagainst other potential inflation hedges, such as gold, commodities,and real estate. The Treasury may also produce an instrumentwith strip features which could emerge as a popular way for tradersto play on the market's changing perceptions of inflation. WallStreet has not yet developed a nickname for the index linked bonds,but it is not difficult to imagine labels such as the "Clintonstrips" or "Rubin Zeros" becoming popular in thefinancial media. Finally, retail investment service organizationswill probalby use the index linked bonds to develop inflationadjusted annuities and other retirement oriented products. When the UK government introduced index linked bonds, it was perceivedthat the major loser in institutional asset allocation modelswould be real estate. As a result of Britain's high inflationrate after 1950, property had come to play an increasingly importantrole in the portfolio of many British pension funds and insurancecompanies. Because of the long upturn in the UK economy after1982, the index linked bonds did not prevent a significant boomin British commercial and residential real estate during the midand late 1980's. But as a result of the poor performance of Britishproperty since 1989, the odds are high that many institutionswill increase the weighting of index linked bonds at the expenseof property and other traditional inflation hedge assets in thefuture. A similar trend could occur in the U.S. once institutionsbecame more comfortable with index-linked securities. The U.S. Treasury has been debating the introduction of indexlinked bonds for many years. After the Thatcher government introducedthem in 1981, many American economists suggested that they wouldbe a useful innovation in government finance for the U.S. Treasuryas well. In the early 1980's, the interaction of large budgetdeficits, restrictive monetary policy, and financial deregulationproduced real yields on U.S. government bonds as high as 8-9%,so it was widely perceived that the Treasury would be able tosave money by introducing index linked bonds. Many economic commentatorsalso stressed that the introduction of index linked bonds woulddeny government the benefits of future inflation in reducing itsdebt servicing costs and thus remove one of the great moral hazardrisks in economic policy. But Wall Street was opposed to theintroduction of index linked bonds and Donald Regan did not wantto challenge the dealer community. He might also have been uncomfortableabout possible comparisons with the D-mark denominated securitieswhich the Treasury had briefly introduced during the Carter administrationin order to bolster investor confidence in the dollar. The Treasury probably has several motives for introducing indexlinked bonds today. First, bond yields have recently increased by almost 100 basispoints because of investor anxiety about a revival of the economyand the failure of congressional efforts to reduce the federaldeficit. The Treasury hopes that it will be able to reduce itsfunding costs by offering a security which is indexed for inflation. Secondly, the index linked bonds will provide a new yardstickfor measuring inflation expectations in the financial markets. At present, policy makers attempt to gauge inflationary psychologyby focusing on variables such as commodity prices, gold, the Australiandollar, and the slope of the yield curve but none of these indicatorsis as pure a proxy for inflation expectations as an instrumentwhich will be directly linked to the CPI, the GDP deflator, orsome comparable inflation index. Thirdly, the Treasury views the index linked bond as an instrumentwhich could be attractive to the baby boomers now accumulatingsavings for retirement through defined contribution pension funds,401-K plans, Individual Retirement Accounts, and so on. The U.S.mutual fund industry now has over $3.1 trillion of assets comparedto $4.5 trillion of assets in the banking system and nearly onethird of the mutual fund industry's assets are in long-term retirementsavings programs. As the baby boom generation moves into itslate 40's and 50's, it will be increasing its allocation of capitalto long-term retirement savings programs which would be a naturalmarket for an inflation indexed security. If the federal governmentever decides to privatize the social security system through thecreation of Chilean style household retirement accounts, suchsavings programs also would be a potentially important marketfor index linked bonds. At present, social security assets areinvested in short maturity government instruments with yieldswhich correlate with those in the marketplace. They provide noexplicit guarantees against inflation despite the fact that socialsecurity payments are indexed for inflation. As a result of the good performance of inflation in the U.S. economyduring recent years, the introduction of U.S. Treasury index linkeddebt will have a less dramatic impact on the investment communitythan would have been the case during the 1970's or 1980's. Butthe yield which emerges on the index linked bonds will graduallybecome an important benchmark for evaluating the portfolio returnson both traditional investment products as well as those focusedspecifically on beating inflation. What remains to be seen is whether the U.S. Treasury will actuallybe able to reduce its funding costs by introducing index linkedbonds. Cynics have already argued that the decision to offerindex linked debts is a confirmation that inflation has bottomedand that the government is accepting a liability which will proveto be quite expensive in future years. But cynicism aside, thereal problem facing the Treasury is that investors have earnedsuch high returns form both equities and conventional debt securitiesduring recent years that they may not be prepared to accept alow real yield on a taxable index linked bond until they see clearevidence of accelerating inflation and a correction in other financialasset markets. At present, there is little sign of such a sentimentshift occurring. Despite the recent uptick in oil and food prices,investors have remained remarkably complacent about the risk ofhigher inflation. As a result, the Treasury should consider hedgingits new funding strategy with other financial alternatives. Insteadof offering the public only a security indexed to the inflationrate, it should introduce new instruments indexed to both theinflation rate and the S&P 500. Once it has established amarket for both securities, the Treasury could then fine tunethe issuance of new supply to reflect changing investor perceptionsof the economic outlook. On the basis of current investor attitude,it is doubtful that the Treasury will be able to achieve significantsavings by offering instruments indexed only to the CPI. Butby offering instruments for hedging against both inflation andstock market risk, it should be able to both reduce governmentborrowing costs and create useful instruments for helping thebaby boom generation cope with the coming transition to a privatizedsocial security system. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023170 WT01-B13-125IA018-000196-B046-195http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/doleboost2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171044 text/html 9535HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:06:45 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 13-Sep-96 19:58:25 GMTContent-length: 9353Content-type: text/html Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? (continued) Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? (continued) Finally, if the Dole-Kemp team takes over the White House and the Republicans retain control of the White House, there would be a far greater likelihood of radical reform in the nation's hitherto uncontrolled entitlement programs than if the nation continues with its current mix of divided government or a return to full Democratic control over the executive and legislative branches. The Republicans would be more willing to impose limitations on the growth of Medicare spending. There is also strong support in the Republican congressional caucus for privatization of the social security system. The experience of other countries suggests that privatization of the social security system could have a very benign impact on U.S. interest rates by encouraging a rise in the household savings rate. At present, most of the nation's new private savings are invested in pension funds. Until recently, the bulk of these retirement savings were held in the form of defined benefit plans. Under such plans, corporations made annual contributions to their pension plan in order to create the pool of savings needed to deliver a guaranteed income stream to retired workers. During the past decade, though, there has been a major shift underway to defined contribution plans, in which corporations and workers contribute to a retirement savings program whose benefits depend upon the return earned by the assets. Under this form of retirement savings, individuals have a choice of the assets in which their retirement funds are invested whereas under a defined benefit plan they have an income claim which is independent of the return earned by the fund's assets. The defined benefit plans penalized the national savings rate during 1980's. As the stock market appreciated, some corporations developed overfunded pension plans which attracted corporate raiders. Other corporations responded to this threat by reducing their contributions and lowering the national savings rate. The defined contribution plans, by contrast, carry no such penalty for either the corporation or the worker. An individual can save as much as he wants even if he achieves his wealth accumulation target ahead of schedule because of booming equity prices or high interest rates on his fixed income assets. As a result of the tremendous growth occurring in defined contribution pension plans, the stock market boom of the past few years has not depressed the household savings rate. Various forms of defined contribution plans now account for almost one half of all pension fund savings in the U.S. and probably about one third of the three billion dollars of assets in the mutual fund industry. If retirement savings were still dominated by defined benefit pension plans, the great equity bull market would have produced both a slump in pension contributions and the national savings rate rather than the modest uptick which has occurred since 1994. There are many possible models for how the U.S. might privatize its social security system. Countries as diverse as Chile, Britain and Australia have already made major strides in the direction of government mandated retirement savings with managment of the funds by the private sector. The basic goal of any reform program would probably be to provide every U.S. citizen with a compulsorary retirement savings program which would be invested in a variety of potential investment products subject to careful government supervision. If introduced to the U.S., such a retirement savings account would function very much like a defined contribution pension plan. The individual would have an opportunity to invest his retirement savings in a variety of equity and fixed income assets whereas all social security assets are currently invested in short maturity government debt. It is quite possible that an individual would respond to a booming stock market by reducing his pension fund contributions but, as in 1995, he might decide to maintain his flow of savings despite the rise in capital values. Under a defined benefit plan, by contrast, the corporations would automatically curtail contributions if a rising stock market pushed asset values above the fund's actuarial target. The current social security system has even more perverse side-effects on private savings and the federal deficit than defined benefit pension plans. It promises a guaranteed income to every American citizen while investing the government's tax receipts in some of the lowest yielding assets available in the financial markets. If social security assets had been invested in equities and bonds at practically any point during the past half century, the government would have been able to choose between boosting social security payments or reducing the level of payroll taxation needed to finance the system. All the industrial nations will confront great fiscal challenges during the 21st Century because of the aging of their populations. Two thirds of all the people who have ever lived to the age of 65 in the history of mankind are alive today and life expectancy is still increasing. As the U.S. enjoys both a higher birth rate and greater tolerance for immigration than other industrial countries, it will face a much less profound problem in meeting this challenge than countries such as Japan and Germany. But despite its demographic advantages, even the U.S. will have to confront difficult choices over taxation, the level of benefits, and the appropriate age of retirement during the early decades of the 21st century. Despite the fact that Mr. Robert Dole already qualifies for social security and that President Clinton is a member of the baby boom generation which will produce major strains in the social security system's financial health, neither dares to discuss the issue of privatization because the public has not yet been educated about the choices which lie ahead. The White House has appointed a taskforce on social security reform but the membership is so divided they will probably delay their report until after this November's election. The U.S. Treasury recently announced plans to introduce inflation adjusted government bonds in part because it believes such an instrument will be popular for the retirement savings programs of the baby boom generation. But while inflation proof bonds would be useful assets for a privatized social security system, there is no explicit link between their introduction and social security reform. Since Mr. Dole has hinted that he will be only a one term president while Mr. Clinton will not be allowed to seek a third term, both would be well positioned to take the risk of promoting a major debate about the nation's system of retirement savings. But on the basis of general philosophical attitudes towards the issue of entitlements in the two major political parties, a Republican White House and Congress are more likely to enact far-reaching social security reforms than a divided government or one dominated solely by the Democrats. As the critical determinant of the level of U.S. interest rates in the year 2000 will be how social security reform affects the U.S. savings rate, not whether the Congress approves the Dole or Clinton economic programs, a Republican victory in November should not be viewed as negative for the U.S. bond market. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1021750 WT01-B13-126IA018-000196-B046-209http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/feddev2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171053 text/html 12900HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:06:54 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Sep-96 04:19:13 GMTContent-length: 12717Content-type: text/html Will Federal Devolution Set the Stage for a State and LocalPrivatization Boom in the Next U.S. Recession? (continued page 2) Will Federal Devolution Set the Stage for a State and LocalPrivatization Boom in the Next U.S. Recession? (continued) Fifth, the U.S. has enjoyed a five year bull market in stocks and bonds whichhas produced tremendous gains in household wealth as well as opportunities forentrepreneurial companies to raise capital. At the peak in June, the ratio ofstock market capitalization to GDP in the U.S. was about $7 trillion or 91% ofGDP. This was the highest since 1929, when the market was worth about 81% ofGDP. The stock market boom has added $2 billion to household net worth since1984. It also has permitted an extraordinary boom in new equity publicofferings and corporate fund raising through the sale of non-investment gradebonds. The number of equity I.P.O.'s was 428 during the first half of 1996compared to 470 during 1995, 599 during 1994, and a peak of 689 during 1993.These I.P.O.'s raised about $27.2 billion during the first half of 1996compared to $27.7 billion last year, $27.7 billion during 1994 and $39.2billion during 1993. The peak for I.P.O. financing during the 1980's, bycontrast, was $17.7 billion during 1986. The search for higher yields also hashelped to revitalize the so-called junk bond market. In the first half of1996, Wall Street sold 108 new non-investment grade bond offering compared to159 during 1995, 190 during 1994, and 343 during 1993. The funds raised were$20 billion during the first half of 1996, $28.8 billion during 1995, $231.5billion during 1994, and $54.4 billion during 1993. The previous peak innon-investment grade bond financing was 218 deals worth $30.5 billion during1986. The ability of small and medium sized companies to obtain so muchcapital from the stock market has helped to encourage the high growth rate ofinvestment and employment since 1993. The stock market boom has also been accompanied by a dramatic expansion of themutual fund industry and new forms of retirement savings, such as definedcontribution pension plans which could encourage an impovement in the nationalsavings rate. The mutual fund industry now has assets of over $3 trillioncompared to $4.2 trillion in the banking system and nearly one third of mutualfund assets are in long-term savings programs. There is some evidence thatdefined contribution pension plans have a more positive impact on householdsavings during periods of rising equity prices than the traditional definedbenefit pension plans. Under defined contribution plans, there is no penaltyfor households to maintain a steady flow of savings into their retirementprograms as asset prices rise whereas corporations which overfund their pensionplans penalize profits and attract corporate raiders. In 1995, the householdsavings rate in the U.S. rose despite the boom in equity prices. The uptick inthe savings rate may have resulted from the shift towards greater use ofdefined contribution pension system. The growth of defined contibution savingscould accelerate further if the White House and Congress ever agree toprivatize social security. Sixth, the U.S. economy has been a major economic beneficiary of the end of thecold war and the acceptance of liberal economic ideas by many formerlycommunist or mercantilist countries. The U.S. sends about one third of itsexports to developing countries and during the past five years these marketshave accounted for over two thirds of all export growth. In 1995, this exportgrowth slowed because of the financial crisis in Mexico and its spillovereffects on other Latin American countries. But the IMF-U.S. Treasury rescueprogram for Mexico helped to stabilize her financial system and has set thestage for a recovery this year. The ability of Mexico to avoid default alsohelped to lessen the impact of her crises on other developing countries,especially in Latin America. Finally, the general mix of macroeconomic policy in all the major industrialnations since 1992 has been supportive of non-inflationary growth. Europeangovernments have been attempting to reduce their budget deficits by trimmingtheir public spending. The counterpart to this deficit reduction has been alarge decline in the level of both short-term and long-term interest rates.Japan has been an outlier to the process of deficit reduction because of theimpact of her banking crisis on the economy. But the Bank of Japan hasnevertheless cut short-term interest rates to only 50 basis points in order tohelp prop up the financial system. The current level of interest rates inJapan is the lowest to occur in any industrial country since the GreatDepression of the 1930's. The challenge now confronting Federal Reserve policy makers is to sustain theexpansion by finding a rate of growth which is consistent with the economy'sunderlying supply side potential. There are many points of view on the levelof growth which is optimal for the economy but the Federal Reserve perceivesthat the number is about 2.0-2.5% once the economy achieves full employment.As the economy enjoyed 4.0-5.0% output growth during the second quarter and isprobably expanding at a 3.0-3.5% annual rate during the current quarter, theodds are high that there could be Federal Reserve tightening during the nextfew months to slow the economy's rate of growth. In fact, a rate hike duringlate August is very likely unless the upcoming data for employment costs showsa reversal of the uptick which became apparent during the first quarter. As inflation expectations are still under control, it is doubtful that the Fedwill raise interest rates by more than 50 basis points this year but there willbe no way to predict the peak until the economy actually slows. Anotherwildcard in the outlook is the lending policies of the credit card companies.The credit card companies have been so permissive in permitting low incomehouseholds to gain access to cards that their stock of non-performing loans hasrisen sharply. If they suddenly curtail access to cards by imposing morestringent lending quality screens, they will depress consumer spending by lowerincome Americans (who account for about 10% of the total). A policy of Federal Reserve fine tuning will not cause any sudden or abruptchanges in the economy's performance this autumn but it could produce acorrection in the equity market. In fact, the equity market has been veryturbulent during the past four weeks because of investor concern about bothmonetary policy and the economic policy risks poised by this autumn's election. Investors are concerned about monetary tightening because they fear it couldset the stage for a profit squeeze next year. With wages rising in response totight labor markets, corporations will find it more difficult to sustain theirprofit margins, especially if Fed tightening slows the economy's growth rate.In 1994, by contrast, the Fed had tightened to reduce upward pressure oncommodity prices, not wages. Rising commodity prices redistributed incomewithin the corporate sector whereas rising wages reduce the profit share ofnational income. Investor confidence also has been depressed by the extremely poor performanceof Robert Dole in the opinion polls. Wall Street has long perceived PresidentClinton to be a superior campaigner but they had expected Dole to benefit fromClinton's scandals in the "emerging market" state of Arkansas as well as hisown retirement from the Senate. With Mr. Dole still 15-20 points behind in theopinion polls, investors are becoming apprehensive about the risk of theRepublicans losing control of the Congress, not just the race for the WhiteHouse. The prospect of the Republicans losing control of the Congress is disturbing toWall Street for several reasons. First, the 1996 election poses a unique historic challenge for both parties.No Democratic president has won two consecutive elections since FranklinRoosevelt in the 1930's. The Republican Party has not controlled the Congressfor two consecutive terms since the 1920's. If the Republicans lose controlagain in 1996, it will suggest that the public is turning away from theirthemes of deficit reduction, slowing growth of entitlement spending, andpromoting lower marginal income tax rates. Secondly, there has been a profound change in the character of the DemocraticParty in the Congress as a result of recent Republican victories. TheRepublican Party now has 77 of the 125 house seats of the old southernConfederacy compared to 48 in 1992, 34 in 1972 and 6 in 1960. On the basis ofpending Democratic retirements, the Republicans may even be able to claimcontrol over two thirds of the seats in the south by next year even if theylose their overall majority. As a result of the Republican takeover of thesouth, the Democrats now depend far more upon the urban centers of thenortheast, the middle west and California for their congressional membership.This geographic shift in the composition of the parties suggests that futureDemocratic committee chairman would be far more supportive of federal spendingprograms and other forms of government intervention in the economy than boththe current Republican chairmen and past Democratic chairmen. Thirdly, if the Democrats win a majority in the House, their new speaker wouldbe Richard Gephardt. After flirting with the many "New Democratic" politicalthemes during the mid-1980's, Rep. Gephardt has devoted most of the past decadeto espousing protectionist trade policies, higher marginal income tax rates,and other forms of government intervention in the economy. As a result of the ideological polarization which has occurred in thecongressional membership of both major political parties, a Democratic victoryin this November's congressional races would probably have three immediateeffects on the economy. It would encourage investors to sell both U.S. bonds and the U.S. dollar. It would probably cause all investors to reduce their exposure to Mexico aswell as other emerging market countries which might be vulnerable tocongressional demands for more restrictive trade polices. It would probably encourage many U.S. companies to defer decisions about newinvestment and hiring until they had more visibility on how the election wouldaffect public policy in such critical areas as taxation and labor marketregulation. Ironically, such caution might cause bond yields to fall duringearly 1997, when lower investment depressed the economy, but in late 1996 theweakness of bond prices would itself help to set the stage for the economicslowdown. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020000 WT01-B13-127IA018-000196-B046-223http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/respond2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171102 text/html 13683HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:07:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Sep-96 04:20:53 GMTContent-length: 13500Content-type: text/html How Will Investors Respond to the U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? (continued) How Will Investors Respond to the U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? (continued) The Treasury is also asking for debate about the structure ofthe new securities. Should it offer a zero coupon bond or a securitywhich provides current income? In the case of a bond with currentincome, should the indexation for inflation occur monthly, quarterly,or annually and how long should the lag be with the inflationrate? In Britain, there is an eight month indexation lag andit is perceived to reduce the attractiveness of index linked securities. The one issue which the Treasury has not proposed for debateis the tax treatment of the bonds. It intends to tax both thereal return and the inflation adjustment component of the newinstruments despite the fact that Britain, Canada and other Commonwealthcountries have exempted the inflation adjustment from taxation. Senior officials in the Clinton administration are aware of thetax differential with the other countries but they cannot introducea tax allowance for the inflation component of the bond returnwithout obtaining Congressional permission. As a result of theintense partisan environment in Washington following this winter'sacrimony over fiscal policy, they are reluctant to seek congressionalcooperation in adding a tax allowance. The decision to tax theinflation component of the return will greatly reduce the appealof the index linked securities for taxable investors, such ashigh income individuals, but it will not discourage demand frompension funds and other tax exempt retirement savings programs. The Treasury has not yet volunteered an opinion on the yield whichthe new index linked bonds will have to offer because it willobviously depend upon market conditions at the time of issue. At present, the UK government's index linked bond is offeringa real yield of 3.9%, the Australian and Canadian index linkedbonds offer real yields of 4.5-5.0% and New Zealand index linkeddebt offers a real yield of 5.9%. The government of the UnitedStates should be able to sell securities at a lower yield thanher Majesty's governments in London, Ottawa, Canberra and Wellington,but it is doubtful that the yield will be much below the yieldavailable on the UK securities for two reasons. First, the U.S.government wants to tax the security's inflation adjustment whereasHer Majesty's governments in other English speaking countriesdo not impose any tax. Secondly, American investors have enjoyedsuch high returns on conventional financial assets during recentyears that they will probably not be attracted to a low yieldinflation adjusted security until there is more widespread pessimismabout the outlook for inflation itself. The real yield on U.S.equities during the 20th century has averaged about 6.8% whilethe real yield during the past decade has been close to 10.2%. The real yield on U.S. bonds during the past century has averagedclose to 3.0% but real interest rates were so high during the1980's that many investors now believe they should earn a realyield on bonds of at least 4.0-6.0% excluding capital gains. Since 1992, the yields on long-term Treasury securities have fluctuatedbetween 5.5% and 8.25% while the annual CPI inflation rate hasaveraged 3.0%, 2.8% and 2.6%. The real total return on U.S. governmentbonds since 1986 has also been 5.14%. In its early stages, the new index linked security will probablyappeal to four categories of investors. First, it will be ofinterest to pension funds which want to obtain an inflation-adjustedasset which they can use for matching with long-term liabilities. Secondly, the instrument will appeal to investment contrarianswhom believe that Wall Street has become overly optimistic aboutinflation and that the move towards expansionary monetary policynow underway in most G-7 countries will produce a burst of highercommodity prices next year. Since the U.S. Treasury's indexlinked bond has the potential to be more liquid and tradable thanthe index linked bonds of other countries, it could also helpto attract capital from inflation wary investors all over theworld. Thirdly, many Wall Street firms will probably use theindex-linked bonds to create new hybrid securities offering arbitrageagainst other potential inflation hedges, such as gold, commodities,and real estate. The Treasury may also produce an instrumentwith strip features which could emerge as a popular way for tradersto play on the market's changing perceptions of inflation. WallStreet has not yet developed a nickname for the index linked bonds,but it is not difficult to imagine labels such as the "Clintonstrips" or "Rubin Zeros" becoming popular in thefinancial media. Finally, retail investment service organizationswill probalby use the index linked bonds to develop inflationadjusted annuities and other retirement oriented products. When the UK government introduced index linked bonds, it was perceivedthat the major loser in institutional asset allocation modelswould be real estate. As a result of Britain's high inflationrate after 1950, property had come to play an increasingly importantrole in the portfolio of many British pension funds and insurancecompanies. Because of the long upturn in the UK economy after1982, the index linked bonds did not prevent a significant boomin British commercial and residential real estate during the midand late 1980's. But as a result of the poor performance of Britishproperty since 1989, the odds are high that many institutionswill increase the weighting of index linked bonds at the expenseof property and other traditional inflation hedge assets in thefuture. A similar trend could occur in the U.S. once institutionsbecame more comfortable with index-linked securities. The U.S. Treasury has been debating the introduction of indexlinked bonds for many years. After the Thatcher government introducedthem in 1981, many American economists suggested that they wouldbe a useful innovation in government finance for the U.S. Treasuryas well. In the early 1980's, the interaction of large budgetdeficits, restrictive monetary policy, and financial deregulationproduced real yields on U.S. government bonds as high as 8-9%,so it was widely perceived that the Treasury would be able tosave money by introducing index linked bonds. Many economic commentatorsalso stressed that the introduction of index linked bonds woulddeny government the benefits of future inflation in reducing itsdebt servicing costs and thus remove one of the great moral hazardrisks in economic policy. But Wall Street was opposed to theintroduction of index linked bonds and Donald Regan did not wantto challenge the dealer community. He might also have been uncomfortableabout possible comparisons with the D-mark denominated securitieswhich the Treasury had briefly introduced during the Carter administrationin order to bolster investor confidence in the dollar. The Treasury probably has several motives for introducing indexlinked bonds today. First, bond yields have recently increased by almost 100 basispoints because of investor anxiety about a revival of the economyand the failure of congressional efforts to reduce the federaldeficit. The Treasury hopes that it will be able to reduce itsfunding costs by offering a security which is indexed for inflation. Secondly, the index linked bonds will provide a new yardstickfor measuring inflation expectations in the financial markets. At present, policy makers attempt to gauge inflationary psychologyby focusing on variables such as commodity prices, gold, the Australiandollar, and the slope of the yield curve but none of these indicatorsis as pure a proxy for inflation expectations as an instrumentwhich will be directly linked to the CPI, the GDP deflator, orsome comparable inflation index. Thirdly, the Treasury views the index linked bond as an instrumentwhich could be attractive to the baby boomers now accumulatingsavings for retirement through defined contribution pension funds,401-K plans, Individual Retirement Accounts, and so on. The U.S.mutual fund industry now has over $3 trillion of assets comparedto $4.2 trillion of assets in the banking system and nearly onethird of the mutual fund industry's assets are in long-term retirementsavings programs. As the baby boom generation moves into itslate 40's and 50's, it will be increasing its allocation of capitalto long-term retirement savings programs which would be a naturalmarket for an inflation indexed security. If the federal governmentever decides to privatize the social security system through thecreation of Chilean style household retirement accounts, suchsavings programs also would be a potentially important marketfor index linked bonds. At present, social security assets areinvested in short maturity government instruments with yieldswhich correlate with those in the marketplace. They provide noexplicit guarantees against inflation despite the fact that socialsecurity payments are indexed for inflation. As a result of the good performance of inflation in the U.S. economyduring recent years, the introduction of U.S. Treasury index linkeddebt will have a less dramatic impact on the investment communitythan would have been the case during the 1970's or 1980's. Butthe yield which emerges on the index linked bonds will graduallybecome an important benchmark for evaluating the portfolio returnson both traditional investment products as well as those focusedspecifically on beating inflation. What remains to be seen is whether the U.S. Treasury will actuallybe able to reduce its funding costs by introducing index linkedbonds. Cynics have already argued that the decision to offerindex linked debts is a confirmation that inflation has bottomedand that the government is accepting a liability which will proveto be quite expensive in future years. But cynicism aside, thereal problem facing the Treasury is that investors have earnedsuch high returns form both equities and conventional debt securitiesduring recent years that they may not be prepared to accept alow real yield on a taxable index linked bond until they see clearevidence of accelerating inflation and a correction in other financialasset markets. At present, there is little sign of such a sentimentshift occurring. Despite the recent uptick in oil and food prices,investors have remained remarkably complacent about the risk ofhigher inflation. As a result, the Treasury should consider hedgingits new funding strategy with other financial alternatives. Insteadof offering the public only a security indexed to the inflationrate, it should introduce new instruments indexed to both theinflation rate and the S&P 500. Once it has established amarket for both securities, the Treasury could then fine tunethe issuance of new supply to reflect changing investor perceptionsof the economic outlook. On the basis of current investor attitude,it is doubtful that the Treasury will be able to achieve significantsavings by offering instruments indexed only to the CPI. Butby offering instruments for hedging against both inflation andstock market risk, it should be able to both reduce governmentborrowing costs and create useful instruments for helping thebaby boom generation cope with the coming transition to a privatizedsocial security system. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017330 WT01-B13-128IA018-000196-B046-241http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/global_economy/mutualfundboom2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171112 text/html 8674HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:07:11 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Sep-96 04:20:32 GMTContent-length: 8492Content-type: text/html Economic Implications of the Mutual Fund Boom (continued page 2) Economic Implications of the Mutual Fund Boom (continued) While low interest rates helped to ignite the mutual fund boom of the early 1990's, several other factors are now helping to sustain it. First, the industry has been steadily expanding its range of products. There are now 2211 equity funds compared to 1127 in 1990 and 471 in 1984. In the equity sector, there are now 352 aggressive growth funds, 699 general growth funds, 481 growth and income funds, 33 precious metal funds, 112 equity income funds, 367 international equity funds (excludes U.S.) and 167 global equity funds (includes U.S.). In the fixed income sector, there are now 2,544 bond funds compared to 1,235 in 1990 and 349 in 1994. There are 332 government bond funds, 99 high yield corporate bond funds, 306 long-term municipal bond funds, and hundreds of other bond funds offering different combinations of yield and risk. In the money market sector, there are 672 taxable money market funds, 158 national tax exempt money market funds, and 167 state tax exempt money market funds. Despite the proliferation of new funds, though, assets in the industry are becoming more concentrated. The top five fund management groups now account for 36% of industry assets compared to 29% in 1984. These organizations are spending heavily on marketing and thus increasing consumer awareness of new mutual fund products. Secondly, the expansion of the mutual fund industry has coincided with a dramatic expansion of U.S. stock market capitalization. In January, the market capitalization of America's 7,551 listed companies was about $6.63 trillion compared to $5 trillion in January, 1994 (6,925 companies) and $3,957 trillion in January, 1992 (5,608 companies). The ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP has risen to 87.5% compared to a previous all time high of 81.0% in 1929 and a post war peak of 79.0% in 1968. The all time trough of stock market capitalization to GDP was 16.0% in 1941 while in the post-war era it was 30.0% in 1974 and 1982. The average ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP since 1926 has been 48.0%. Rising equity prices have had a self-reinforcing impact on mutual fund demand by encouraging greater risk-taking in the household sector. Some stock market pundits regard the sharp rise in the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP as a sign of speculative overheating but evidence of serious excesses is inconclusive. The market's price/earnings ratio is only about 16-17 compared to 26 in 1991 and levels in the 15-19 range during the late 1960's, when interest rates were previously at current levels. Aside from the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP, the two measures of equity valuation which appear to be at extreme levels are dividend yields and Tobin's Q (the ratio of stock market value to asset replacement costs). The U.S. equity market now offers a dividend yield of only 2.6% compared to a previous trough of 2.7% in 1972 and an average of 4.0% during the 1980's. The ratio of equity prices to asset replacement costs has risen to 1.47 from a previous peak of 1.08 in 1965 and an average of .56 during the 1980's. But there are four explanations for the stock market's valuation level which suggest that the U.S. equity market may not be over-extended. First, inflation expectations have been falling steadily during recent years and economic forecasters are now projecting that it will remain subdued through at least 1997. Secondly, despite low inflation, the return on U.S. corporate capital has risen above 10% during the past two years for the first time since the late 1960's. The gains in profitability have resulted from expanded productivity and thus also contributed to the low inflation evironment in the economy. Thirdly, it is difficult for traditional measures of book value and asset replacement cost to capture the earnings potential which companies have as a result of new developments in technology and investment in human capital. As U.S. firms dominate many high technology sectors and technology has been an important market theme since 1994, book value has been a less dominant criteria for investment decision making. Finally, the end of the cold war has created a global market economy with 6 billion people compared to the 1.5 billion living in market oriented economies before 1989. In fact, if we add the foreign sales of U.S. multinational firms to GDP in order to compute a ratio of stock market capitalization to American controlled output, the ratio of stock market capitalization to output drops from 87.5% to 75%. American firms now have $1.5 trillion of foreign sales excluding exports and this number should expand rapidly as they diversify into new high growth developing countries. Thirdly, the mutual fund industry is benefiting from the high growth of retirement oriented savings products, such as Individual Retirement Accounts, 401-K plans, and various forms of defined contribution pension plans. In 1994, such retirement savings accounted for $716 billion of the industry's $2.1 trillion of assets. IRA programs had $362 billion of assets while defined contribution pension plans had $236 billion of assets. As a growing number of companies are shifting from defined benefit pension plans to defined contribution plans, the retirement savings held in mutual funds should expand at a steady rate in the future. In the late 1970's, Peter Drucker had produced a book contending that the U.S. was evolving towards a pension fund form of socialism, in which retirement plans would own most of the U.S. industry and alter worker attitudes towards business. But this argument was misfocused because the defined benefit plans which prevailed in that period offered the workers guaranteed returns, not the right to choose between a variety of funds with potentially divergent returns. Today, retirement plans are continuing to expand their ownership of the stock market but they are not producing a passive form of pension fund socialism. The U.S. is instead embarking upon an unprecedented experiment in the democratization of bond and equity ownership through a mixture of mutual funds, defined contribution pension plans, and direct ownership of securities. The New York Stock Exchange recently published a study estimating that 51.3 million Americans now own shares directly or through retirement savings programs compared to 42.9 million in 1989, 20 million in 1965 and 6 million during the early 1950's. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013370 WT01-B13-129IA018-000197-B002-17http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/photoalbum/photoalbum.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172414 text/html 2699HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:20:16 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 18:54:34 GMTContent-length: 2517Content-type: text/html Kemper Photo Album Click on the photo album to page through our pictures of happy retirees -- and links to their favorite Web sites. It's easy to add your smiling face (or that of a loved one), just mail a color print or slide and a list of favorite Web sites, along with the retiree's name, address, telephone number and e-mail address, to: On-line Photo Album Kemper Distributors, Inc. Shareholder Marketing -- 33rd Floor 222 South Riverside Plaza Chicago, IL 60606-5808 We'll be in touch! (All submissions and the rights to use them will become the property of Kemper Distributors, Inc.) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1024270 WT01-B13-130IA018-000197-B002-31http://www.kemper.com:80/holiday/holiday.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172434 text/html 2310HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:20:29 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Dec-96 15:21:37 GMTContent-length: 2128Content-type: text/html  Holiday Greetings! 1025910 WT01-B13-131IA018-000196-B047-55http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/evaluate_perform2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171156 text/html 3757HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:07:54 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 22-Aug-96 03:49:49 GMTContent-length: 3573Content-type: text/html How Kemper Shareholders EvaluatePerformance (Continued) No mutual fund can guarantee future results.Which of the followingwould you consider the most encouraging aboutyour fund? Which of the following events would you considerthe leastencouraging? A change in total return, considered to be thebest measure of fundperformance, could occur as a result of a changein a dividend paid, achange in net asset value or a combination ofboth. Income fund shareholders may be more sensitive tochanges in dividendsbecause of their relative higher reliance ondividend income. Inaddition, income funds often pay as frequently asonce a month. Dividends paid by an equity fund includedistributions of the dividendspaid by stocks owned by the portfolio and anyprofits earned whenindividual stocks are sold. Any gains aredistributed at least annually,and it is reasonable to expect some variation inthe dividend paymentfrom period to period. Information on the fund's performance compared tofunds with similarinvestment objectives can provide an insight thatabsolute returnnumbers cannot. No investor is pleased withnegative returns, forexample, but there will always be economicperiods that are hostile toinvestors. This article was excerpted from theFall/Winter 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholdermagazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009840 WT01-B13-132IA018-000196-B047-188http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/areworld1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171334 text/html 8577HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:09:36 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 30-Oct-96 15:14:58 GMTContent-length: 8392Content-type: text/html Are World Financial Markets Underpricing Political Risk? The Weekly Money Report October 21,1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The most distinctive feature of the world's financial markets thisautumn is their capacity for accepting increased political risksin the pursuit of higher asset returns. Financial markets incountries as diverse as New Zealand, Italy and the Ukraine areexperiencing rallies which suggest that the world is awash withsurplus liquidity and that investors believe the commitment toliberal economic reform which swept the Anglo-Saxon world afterthe first Thatcher election victory of 1979 is immune to electoralreversals. After ten years of supporting one of the world's most aggressiveeconomic liberalization programs, the voters of New Zealand haveelected a new parliament in which three left of center and populistpolitical parties will have 55% of the seats. Yet instead of declining,New Zealand's debt and equity markets rallied on the perceptionthat the election will probably be irrelevant to the country'seconomic performance. Optimists believe that the forces of thepost cold war global marketplace are too powerful for any newleft-wing government to restore New Zealand's pre-1984 traditionof protectionism and lavish welfare spending. A few pundits evenhope that the election has left the parliament so fragmented thatit will be impossible for the parties to form an effective government.The 1996 New Zealand election was the first held under the country'snew system of proportional representation and thus encouragedfar more fragmentation than the traditional Westminster systemof electing M.P.'s (single member seats awarded to the candidatewith a plurality of votes). In early October, the international credit rating agencies gaveRussia a series of ratings which ranged from BB+ (IBCA) to BB-(S&P 500) with Moody's in the middle at BA2. Such ratingsplace Russia towards the upper end of the Brady bond market, aheadof Brazil but still below Poland. There is little doubt that Russiawill someday deserve a high credit rating. It has immense naturalresources, a low ratio of government debt to GDP and during thedecade before 1914 was one of the world's high growth economiesand large scale capital importers. But the decision to award sucha high credit rating when Russia's political situation is in astate of flux provides further confirmation of the financial community'sincreasing tolerance for risk. Meanwhile, the improvement in Russia'scredit rating has caused such a large rally in Russian debt pricesthat adventuresome investors are now shifting capital from theRussian securities market to the Ukraine. The economic reformprogram in the Ukraine has been lagging far behind Russia's, sothe yield on Ukrainian government debt was still above 70% inSeptember. But as a result of the flight from quality in Russia,yields on Ukrainian Treasury bills have plunged to barely 50%during the past two weeks despite a projected inflation rate of112% this year. Russia's yields also have stabilized at about50-55% compared to 150-200% during the spring. The bond markets of Italy and Spain have also experienced majorrallies since August in the expectation that European governmentswill introduce a broad based monetary union in 1999 despite thefailure of several countries to comply with the spirit, if notthe letter, of the Maastricht terms for economic convergence.The yield gap between German and Italian bonds has fallen from650 basis points eighteen months ago to just over 200 basis pointstoday. Investors have bid up the price of Italian securitiesin the expectation that German politicians will permit Italy toenter the monetary union in 1999 despite the fact that the country'sratio of public debt to GDP is almost 120% compared to a Maastrichttarget of 60%. The market's new optimism about Italy's entryto EMU is based on the fact that the German officials appear willingto accept liberal interpretations of the Maastricht agreementfor France and Belgium. They are permitting France to achieveits deficit target through one time revenue transfers from thepension funds of state enterprises. They seem willing to let Belgiumenter the union despite the fact that her ratio of public debtto GDP exceeds 100%. In recent days, Bundesbank officials andmembers of the Social Democratic Party responsible for monitoringmonetary policy have begun to suggest that they will not encourageentry for countries which engage in accounting adjustments toreduce their fiscal deficit to 3.0% of GDP. But investors havenot focused on these objections because of hopes that they willat most delay EMU entry for Spain and Italy by two or three years,not postpone it until all the Maastricht conditions are satisfied.While German officials can persuade their public to accept Belgianmembership at the start of EMU, Italy is too large a country toenter under current circumstances despite the fact that Italywas among the original six countries which signed the Treaty ofRome creating the European Common Market in 1958. When one considers the resilience of the New Zealand financialmarket and the aggressive investor demand for bonds in Europe'speripheral debt markets during recent weeks, it is not surprisingthat the Dow Jones Industrial average has reached new highs duringOctober. The outlook for the U.S. economy is still benign. Themarkets have been discounting a Clinton victory in the presidentialelection for several weeks while investors remain hopeful thatthe Republicans will retain at least a narrow majority in bothhouses of the Congress. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024320 WT01-B13-133IA018-000196-B047-206http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/howlong1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171348 text/html 10235HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:09:43 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 30-Oct-96 15:13:38 GMTContent-length: 10049Content-type: text/html How Long Can the Federal Reserve Delay Tightening? The Weekly Money Report September 26, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The Fed's decision to leave U.S. interest rates unchanged at itsmeeting on September 24th has left many unresolved questions forthe financial markets to ponder. Was the focus of the FOMC meetingthe outlook for the U.S. economy or the breach of security whichproduced a Reuters story about several district banks seekinga discount rate hike the week before the meeting? Did the FOMCrenew its previous directive with a bias towards tightening andthus leave open the possibility of raising interest rates in responseto economic reports during October, or has it closed the dooron possible tightening until November? How far will the chairmango in attempting to assert his authority over FOMC dissidentswho have attempted to campaign for a rate hike through conversationswith the media? There is no way of telling whether the Reuters story about thedistrict banks altered the outcome of the FOMC meeting. Ifthe retail sales and inflation data published in mid-Septemberhad showed clear signs of accelerating inflation and robust growthin final demand, there is little doubt that the FOMC would havehiked interest rates. But because the data suggested thatgrowth may be moderating and that inflation is still under control,the Chairman was able to persuade the FOMC to defer any proposalfor tightening in order to demonstrate that he is still firmlyin control of the Federal Reserve. It is doubtful, though, thatthe FOMC abandoned its bias in favor of tightening. On the contrary,if the employment report scheduled to appear on October 4th showssigns of strong growth in the U.S. economy, the Fed could moveto hike interest rates immediately. Almost 90% of the upwardmove in U.S. bond yields this year has occurred in the minutesafter three employment reports showing large monthly job gains. If the October 4th report produces evidence of large job gains(over 250,000) and the unemployment rate drops below 5.0%, therewill probably be another upward spike in bond yields so largethat the Fed will feel compelled to show that it has not becometotally passive. The rally in the bond market after the Fed decisionto leave interest rates unchanged demonstrates that investorsare as uncertain about the U.S. economic outlook as the FOMC. But since the preconditions for an acceleration of wage growthand a revival of inflation clearly exist, the Fed cannot affordto procrastinate for long when new data appears confirming thatthe economy is still expanding at a growth rate well above 2.0%. There is little disagreement at the Federal Reserve that thepreconditions for a revival of inflation are appearing. Thedissension about policy centers on three questions. First,is the third quarter slowdown in domestic final sales growth to1.5-2.0% from 4.8% during the second quarter temporary or thestart of a prolonged trend? Secondly, is government data understatingproductivity growth and thus causing policy makers to be overlypessimistic about the economy's optimal non-inflationary growthrate? Thirdly, if wages do accelerate further, will corporationsbe able to pass on the cost hikes to consumers or will they simplyerode profit margins? The answer to the first question will be provided by forthcomingretail sales and capital goods orders data for September and October. The growth of consumer spending did slow sharply during the thirdquarter (it appears to be 1.2% compared to 3.4% during the firsthalf) but it should not remain subdued if employment continuesto expand at a steady rate and consumers remain confident. TheSeptember Conference Board survey of consumer confidence is positiveon both counts. It shows that confidence remained close to 112for a second consecutive month during September compared to 100in June. Household perceptions of the job market also were verypositive. About 27.0% said that jobs were plentiful comparedto 24.8% during June while only 20.8% said jobs were hard to getcompared to 22.0-23.6% during the second quarter. If resilientconsumer confidence produces a rebound in retail sales duringthe autumn, real GDP growth will probably accelerate to the 3.0-3.5%range during the fourth quarter from 2.0-2.5% during the thirdquarter. Business fixed investment also should expand ata 5.0-6.0% annual rate during the second half compared to 4.0%during the second quarter and 11.6% during the first quarter. While the computer sector is experiencing a slowdown, the highlevel of manufacturing capacity utilization rates, the 10-12%profit growth now occurring in the corporate sector, and the highvalue of American share prices in relation to asset replacementcosts should encourage other sectors to expand their investmentoutlays. The current financial environment in the U.S. today is probablymore supportive of business expansion than any other in recentyears. The number of equity I.P.O.'s was 428 during the firsthalf of 1996 compared to 573 during all of 1995, 571 during 1994,and a peak of 665 during 1993. These I.P.O.'s raised about $27.2billion during the first half of 1996 compared to $28.9 billionlast year, $22.9 billion during 1994 and $34.0 billion during1993. As a result of the stock market boom, the U.S. venturecapital industry will be able to provide entrepreneurs with almost$4 billion of new capital this year or the highest level since1987. According to a recent survey by the National Federationof Independent Business, entrepreneurs established nearly 3.5million new businesses in the U.S. last year. While many of thesenew businesses may employ only one person, the rate of new businessformation suggests that demand for labor will persist at highlevels if firms can actually find new workers. If rising wagesand faltering productivity starts to depress profit margins, thebusiness sector could turn more cautious about new hiring andinvestment. But it is difficult to find such signs of cautionin either business surveys or the financial markets at present. The major business risk in the outlook is the rising delinquencyrates on consumer debt and the pressure it is putting on banksto impose tougher quality standards on people being screenedfor credit cards. But as Fed Governor Larry Lindsey explainedin recent congressional testimony, it would be imprudent to over-generalizeabout the dangers poised by consumer debt until the economy startsto experience increasing unemployment. Lindsey reported to theCongress, "Consumer delinquencies on nonmortgage debt have increasedin recent periods and bankruptcy filing could well exceed onemillion in 1996. These developments have begun to affect profitmargins at some financial institutions and the Federal Reservehas been closely monitoring these conditions and discussing theirimplications with individual banking organizations and industrygroups. In our view, given the generally strong financial conditionof the institutions most affected by these developments and thatthe U.S. banking system, these adverse trends do not currentlypresent a material threat either to individual banking organizations to the overall banking system." © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023160 WT01-B13-134IA018-000196-B047-223http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/risingbondyields1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171358 text/html 7634HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:09:58 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 13-Sep-96 20:32:54 GMTContent-length: 7452Content-type: text/html Will Rising Bond Yields Force The Fed To Tighten? The Weekly Money Report September 2, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The poor performance of the U.S. bond market since the decision of the Federal Open Market Committee to leave U.S. interest rates unchanged at its late August meeting reflects growing investor apprehension about the strength of the U.S. economy. The low level of unemployment claims, the buoyancy of the equity market, and anecdotal evidence of resilient retail sales suggest that the economy is continuing to expand at an annual rate of at least 3.0%. Such a number is not alarming by historical standards, but it is troublesome for the financial markets when it occurs against a backdrop of only 5.5% unemployment and widespread business concern about labor scarcity. There is also increasing evidence that the government's GDP accounts may be underestimating the economy's true growth rate. During the past year, real personal and business incomes have expanded at a rate about 1.0% higher than official measures of real output. As the government's estimates of income and output are supposed to converge over time, it appears increasingly likely that the government's new system of GDP measurement is underestimating the economy's true growth rate. There is evidence that the Federal Reserve is deeply divided about the inflation risks in the U.S. economy. District presidents from the middle west have become increasingly vociferous about the danger of low unemployment pushing up wages and reviving inflationary psychology, but the new Clinton appointees to the FOMC have been reluctant to raise interest rates only a few months after their appointments. As the Clinton appointees are mainstream economists who understand the inflation risks poised by high levels of resource utilization, it is doubtful that they will oppose monetary tightening if unemployment declines further this autumn. But the delays in Fed tightening could still set the stage for a sharp rise in bond yields because of market concern about the Fed pursuing too passive a monetary strategy in the run-up to the presidential election. A sharp rise in bond yields will probably also depress the equity market and provide the Dole campaign with an opportunity to raise questions about the economic outlook for 1997. The evidence of the economy enjoying above trend growth is widespread. The level of unemployment claims has dropped to a six year low. The Manpower Employment survey is projecting expanded hiring activity during the fourth quarter. Retailers are experiencing good back to school sales. The level of capital goods orders, excluding the aircraft and defense sectors, rose to $127.8 billion during July from $125 billion during June and the second quarter average was $123.8 billion. The July Dun and Bradstreet survey of business expectations is projecting healthy gains in both orders and production. The production index rose to 43 from 37 in June while the order index shot up to 46 from 40 in June. Most measures of consumer confidence are also very upbeat. In fact, the University of Michigan survey of consumer perceptions of government economic policy during July showed that for the first time in the history of the Clinton administration as many people now think that government policy is good (22%) as think it is poor (22%). The Michigan index of the overall approval rating of government policy is also at 100 compared to 50-60 during late 1992 and a previous peak of 118 during the mid-1980's. Some of the sectors which boosted output growth during the second quarter are losing momentum. The auto industry is projecting unit sales of only 15.3 million during the second half of 1996 compared to 15.6 million during the first half. Home sales should soon respond to the uptick which occurred in mortgage rates during the spring. As a result, residential construction activity will slow compared to annualized rates of gain of 15.1% during the second quarter and 7.4% during the first quarter. It also is unclear how large a contribution inventory will make to the economy's third quarter growth rate. The level of non-farm inventory accumulation shot up to $11.9 billion at annual rates during the second quarter from $2.9 billion during the first quarter and $19.0 billion during the fourth quarter of last year. In June, it appeared that the auto industry would attempt to boost inventories during the third quarter in order to compensate for the risk of a strike during September, but the purchasing agent survey for July showed no evidence of an inventory build-up. As inventory levels are satisfactory in most industries, inventories will not be a drag on third quarter output growth but their contribution could be quite modest compared to the second quarter. The August Blue Chip survey of the economic consensus indicates that most American forecasters expect output growth to slow sharply by the fourth quarter. In early August, the median forecast projected, 2.6% output growth during the third quarter, 2.1% during the fourth quarter, and 1.9% during the first quarter of 1997. The ten most optimistic forecasters projected 3.3% growth during the third quarter and 2.9% during the fourth quarter. The most pessimistic expected growth of only 1.8% and 1.1% during the final two quarters of 1996. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1021740 WT01-B13-135IA018-000196-B047-241http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/greensp1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171415 text/html 10609HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:10:14 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:21 GMTContent-length: 10423Content-type: text/html Is Wall Street Experiencing a Greenspan or Gephardt Correction? The Weekly Money Report July 29, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. The Clinton administration should be pleased about the Julycorrection in U.S. equity prices. The market has begun adjusting to thegrowing likelihood of Federal Reserve tightening during August. If the marketshad expected the Fed to remain passive, the risk would have increased ofinvestors becoming even more speculative than they were during the spring andsetting the stage for a dramatic stock market correction in the weeks beforethe presidential election. Any Fed tightening during August will have onlya marginal effect on the economy this autumn whereas a repetition of the 1987stock market crash would permit the Republicans to argue that the economy'scurrent prosperity is an illusion which will give way to recession nextyear. While most of Wall Street is now prepared for a 25 basis point interest ratehike this month, there continues to be considerable disagreement about theeconomy's underlying strength. As Alan Greenspan himself suggested in hisrecent congressional testimony, there are good arguments for expecting finaldemand growth to slow during the second half of 1996. He said, "...the support to economic growth provided by expenditures on durable goods,both for household consumption and business fixed investment, is likely to wanein coming quarters. Consumer spending in the past few years has been boostedas households have made up the purchases of big-ticket items that they haddeferred during the recession and the early, weaker phase of the recovery.Five years after the business-cycle trough, however, we should expect that thispent-up demand has been largely exhausted. Moreover, many households havebuilt up sizable debt burdens in recent years, and coping with debt repaymentscould hold down their spending. The business sector has been addingconsiderably to capacity; opportunities to invest profitably in new capitalshould be increasing less rapidly as final demand slows some." The problem for the Federal Reserve and investors is that the U.S. economy hasjust completed an inventory sub-cycle lasting almost one year and is now poisedfor a revival of stock-building. The auto sector added about 1.0% to outputgrowth during the second quarter and will probably add another 0.5% during thethird quarter. The GM strike shifted some auto output to the second quarterwhile GM may build inventory during the third quarter in order to hedge againststrike risks in September The non-auto manufacturing sector remained subduedduring the second quarter but should give a boost to output during the next fewquarters. It is possible that the auto industry will create excess inventoryduring the third quarter if there is no strike to consume it during Septemberbut auto sales have been so responsive to price discounting that it should notbe difficult to reduce inventories quickly if the need arises. The economy's performance during the past year has been very comparable tothe gradual upturns which followed previous sub-cycles of slow growth resultingfrom monetary tightening and inventory adjustments during the long expansionsof the 1960's and 1970's. Excluding weather driven disruptions of outputduring January, the purchasing agent index reached a trough of 45.7 duringJune, 1995 and rebounded to 54.3 during June, 1996 after fluctuating in a narrow range of 46.0-48.0 during recentmonths. The rebound in the purchasing agent index so far has been highlycomparable to the upturns which followed the slow growth sub-cycles of1984-1985 and 1988-1989, but it has been much weaker than the recovery from theslow growth sub-cycle of 1966-1967, when defense spending was buoyant. Therebound in the stock market also has been very positive compared to the upturnsfrom previous slow growth sub-cycles. The stock market has increased by 24%since June, 1995 whereas during the upturn from the 1967 slowdown the gain wasonly 5.0% and during the rebound from the 1989 slowdown the market declined.Monetary policy and inflation have been the critical determinant of equityprices during all of the sub-cycles. In the late 1960's, the economy wasso overheated by the Vietnam War that monetary policy had to be tightened. Inthe 1989 sub-cycle, inflation had accelerated by enough that the Fed decided toraise interest rates despite the sluggish growth of output. In 1985, bycontrast, inflation was so subdued that interest rate declined and encouragedequity prices to rise by 29% during the twelve months after the trough in thepurchasing agent index. The inflation environment today is analogous to the 1986 subcycle on the basisof indicators such as the purchasing agent price index. It is now about 50compared to a trough of 40-45 twelve months ago and a peak of 70-80 two yearsago. But the level of unemployment today is 5.3% compared to an average of7.2% during 1985. As a result of the low level of unemployment, the majorconcern of policy makers today is not industrial commodity prices but potentialupward pressure on wages. As Chairman Greenspan noted in his recenttestimony, "The economy is already producing at a high level -- and some early signs ofpressures on resources are emerging, especially in the labor market." The uptick occurring in the level of wage growth is not alarming but itis clear that a change of trend is underway. The wage component of theEmployment Cost Index is now rising at an annual rate of nearly 4.0% comparedto less than 3.0% during 1995 while benefits are rising at an annual rate ofclose to 3.0%. If this acceleration continues in response to another year oflow unemployment, the core U.S. inflation rate could approach 4.0% by late1997. The risk facing the corporate sector is that the Fed will attempt toprevent rising wages from pushing up prices by dampening output growth,depressing productivity, and creating a squeeze on profit margins. The level of unemployment is now below 4.0% in two regions accounting for 10.8%of the national labor market (the upper mid west, the plains and rocky mountainstates). It is below 5.0% in four other regions accounting for over 36% of thenational labor market (New England, the southeast, the middle west and theborder states). It is in the 5.0-6.0% range in six other regions(mid-Atlantic, Florida, the deep south, the oil patch, the southwest and thePacific northwest). It is above 6.0% only in New York (6.6% of the nationallabor market) and California (10.6% of the labor market). As both New Yorkand California are currently experiencing much stronger output growth than theywere one year ago, it is doubtful that their district presidents would opposeproposals to tighten monetary policy from low unemployment districts such asKansas City, Chicago or Minneapolis. The major argument against tightening in the face of escalating wages is thatfinal demand growth will soon moderate and thus lessen the upward pressure onthe economy's resource utilization rates. The growth rate of retail sales slowed during June and July after strong growthduring the spring. The uptick in mortgage rates should start to cool thehousing market this autumn. Companies, such as Hewlett Packard, have warnedthat there will be a major slowdown in high technology capital spending duringthe next twelve months. The sharp uptick in credit card delinquency ratescould encourage some banks to impose tighter lending quality standards on theircredit card operations. If low income households suddenly lose access tocards, they could be forced to curtail their spending. The inventoryrestocking process in the U.S. corporate sector has already produced a largerebound in the level of imports which will erode the economy's growth momentumby expanding the trade deficit. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019990 WT01-B13-136IA018-000196-B047-253http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/delayed1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171423 text/html 13278HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:10:23 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:07 GMTContent-length: 13092Content-type: text/html Will Delayed Fed Tightening Set the Stage For An October Stock MarketCrash? The Weekly Money Report June 21, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. Most American forecasters now accept that U.S. output growth duringthe second quarter will be in the 3.5-4.5% range. The strengthof the May data for employment, production and retail sales haseliminated any doubts about the economy's capacity to recoverfrom the inventory adjustment which dampened output growth duringmuch of 1995 and early 1996. The great controversies now centeron whether output growth can be sustained at a rate of 3.0% orwhether it will fade back to the 1.0-2.0% range which prevailedduring much of 1995. The majority of forecasters continue to expect a slowdown becausethey perceive the business cycle to be mature, the household sectorto be overleveraged, and the business sector to be losing momentum.They also believe that the large rise in bond yields since Januarywill depress home sales and residential construction by the autumn.The optimists believe that the private sector has far more resilienceand that there will be spurt in federal expenditures as governmentagencies rush to spend discretionary funds provided by the recentCongressional-White House budget agreement. The case for above trend U.S. growth during the second halfof 1996 has five major pillars. First, consumer spending should benefit from steady growth ofemployment, modest upward pressure on wages, buoyant balance sheets,and the high level of confidence apparent in the household sector.According to the early June survey of consumer confidence by theUniversity of Michigan, households are optimistic about both theirfinancial situation and the general business outlook. Such optimismis not surprising in view of the recent revisions in the government'ssurvey of labor market condition. On the basis of the data whichwas available before June 7th, the average monthly increase inemployment had been 116,000 for the past three months, 163,000for the past six months, and 162,000 for the past twelve months.The new data has revised up the average monthly growth rateof employment to 223,000 jobs for the past three months, 225,000jobs for the past six months, and 195,000 jobs for the past twelvemonths. The 1995 employment growth rate also was revised upto 185,000 jobs per month from 144,000 while 1994 was revisedup to 318,000 from 294,000. The wage data look stronger as well.The three month and twelve month growth rates of wages are now3.5% and 3.4% compared to 2.8% and 3.3% previously. There are risks in the consumer outlook. Fluctuations in autodiscounts could produce large monthly swings in retail spendingon autos. Rising mortgage rates will probably dampen home salesby the autumn. The sharp rise now occurring in delinquency rateson credit card loans could ultimately encourage banks to promotethem less aggressively among low income people. But the strengthof employment growth and the uptrend now occurring in wages suggeststhat the underlying growth rate trend of consumer spending willbe at least 2.5% during the next few quarters. While the lendingpolicies of the credit card sector should be monitored carefully,the major banks report that the rise in delinquency rates willnot deter them from offering new cards to people earning lessthat $30,000 per annum. As the bottom 20% of the U.S. populationaccounts for only 5-6% of consumer spending, more careful rationingof credit card access would also not produce a broad based slumpin consumer spending. While the major factor boosting consumer confidence is the improvedlabor market, it also should benefit from the recovery occurringin the advertising industry and the real incomes of financialjournalists. Analysts project that domestic advertising outlayswill rise by 7.4% this year compared to nominal GDP growth ofonly 5.0-6.0%. Such a healthy advertising environment will improvethe salaries and expense accounts of the business journalistswho influence household psychology through the tone of the newsstories which they write about the economy. When advertising isin recession, journalists suffer real income losses which encouragepessimistic news reporting about the economy. When the advertisingsector is prosperous, the real incomes of journalists improveand thus reinforces the new mood of optimism about the economy. The fluctuation in advertising expenditures during the 1990'shave been so large that they have become an important influenceon both the economy and public policy. Newspaper advertising fellby 6-7% during 1990 -1991 and grew by only 1.0% during 1992. Theonly previous contraction was a 0.2% decline in 1970 which wasfollowed by 8.1% growth during 1971. Television advertising declinedduring 1991 for the first time ever in the post war era whileradio advertising declined for the first time since 1961. Forecastersdo not ordinarily focus on advertising expenditures as a proxyfor consumer confidence but the fact is they are highly interdependent.If an advertising slump depresses the real incomes of the scribblingclasses, it influences the tone of media commentary about businessconditions and economic policy. There also has been a goodcorrelation during recent years between newspaper advertisingexpenditures and election results. George Bush presided overthe greatest advertising recession of the post-war era. RonaldReagan won re-election in 1984 on the back of double digit growthin advertising outlays. Jimmy Carter's defeat in 1980 coincidedwith a collapse in the growth rate of advertising outlays to only6.0-7.0% from 14-15% during the previous four years. Richard Nixon'svictory in 1972 coincided with a double digit spurt in advertisingoutlays after two years of decline and slow growth. The Republicanslost the White House to the Democrats in 1960 against a backdropof advertising expenditures slowing from double digit growth ratesin 1959 to only 4.4% during 1960 and a decline of over 2.0% during1961. The only electoral contest which has run contrary to thetrend of advertising expenditures is the 1976 presidential election,when Gerald Ford lost to Jimmy Carter despite an upturn in thegrowth rate of advertising expenditures to 16.8% from 4.0-5.0%during the previous two years. The second pillar of the above trend growth scenario is the benignoutlook for business investment. Corporate profits should riseby 10-12% this year. Capacity utilization rates in the manufacturingsector have risen back to 82.0% from 81.3% in January while utilizationrates for the economy as a whole are at 83.2%. The ratio of stockprices to asset replacement costs (Tobin's Q) is at the highestlevel in post-war history. As result, the corporate sectoris enjoying an unprecedented fund raising boom in the securitiesmarkets. During the first five months of 1996, there were364 new equity I.P.O's raising $23.7 billion of capital comparedto 573 I.P.O.'s raising $28.9 billion last year and a previouspeak of 665 I.P.O.'s raising $34 billion during 1993. The marketfor non-investment grade debt is also enjoying strong growth.There were 92 non-investment grade bond offerings worth $17 billionduring the first five months of 1996 compared to 159 worth $28.7billion last year and a peak of 343 worth $54.4 billion during1993. The bond market is producing less new financing thanthe equity market because bond mutual funds are attracting farless new money than equity mutual funds but the magnitude of non-investmentgrade financing in the debt market is still the greatest sincethe Drexel Burnham boom of the mid-1980's. The third pillar of the strong growth scenario is that the economyhas recently experienced its greatest inventory adjustment sincethe mid-1980's. Further growth of final demand will now requirefaster growth of output. Non-farm inventories contracted at anannul rate of $0.1 billion during the first quarter compared togrowth of $37.4 billion during 1995 and $46.8 billion during 1994.In April, retail inventories rebounded at a 0.4% monthly ratebut the economy's inventory/sales ratio was still only 1.38 comparedto a peak of 1.41 during the second half of 1995. In the non-autoretail sector, the I/S ratio was 1.36 compared to 1.39 duringthe third quarter of 1995 while in the general merchandise sectorit was 2.23 compared to 2.33 during the fourth quarter of lastyear. The weakness of output during the past year in sectors otherthan computers and communications equipment suggests that therecould be a broad based upturn in the level of inventory accumulationworth at least $30 billion during the second half of 1996. The fourth pillar of the strong growth scenario is a resurgenceof discretionary federal spending after several months of fiscalgridlock and temporary government shutdowns during the first twoquarters of the current fiscal year. Recent CBO studies projectthat discretionary federal spending during fiscal 1996 will beworth bout $535 billion. As a result of the government shutdown,federal spending during the first seven months of the fiscal yearaveraged only $510 billion at annual rates. As a result, federalagencies will have to spend at an annual rate of $570 billionduring the final five months of the fiscal year if they are toachieve the CBO target. There is no precise way to convertsuch spending into the federal government components of the GDPaccounts but the pressure to spend suggests that real federalexpenditures will rise moderately during the third quarter comparedto widespread forecasts that they will decline at a 3.0-4.0% annualrate. As a result of the recent congressional-White House disagreementsover fiscal policy, federal spending has been very volatile duringthe current fiscal year. It fell at a 12.8% annual rate duringthe fourth quarter of 1995 and then rebounded at an 8.5% annualrate during the first quarter of 1996. The final pillar of the strong growth scenario is the upturnnow occurring in other G-7 countries, Latin America and China.If the U.S. economy can achieve 2.5-3.0% output growth this year,the world economy should enjoy a growth rate in excess of 4.0%for the first time since 1988. As the cyclical upturns in othercountries are just getting underway, the odds are high that globaloutput growth will remain above 4.0% next year as well. The recoveryin the world economy will not prevent an inventory induced upsurgeof imports from widening the U.S. trade deficit this summer butit should cause improvement of the trade account to boost outputgrowth by at least 0.2-0.3% during 1997. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018480 WT01-B13-137IA018-000196-B047-267http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/estonia1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171434 text/html 11615HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:10:35 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:16 GMTContent-length: 11429Content-type: text/html Significance of the Estonian-Russian Interest Rate Differential The Weekly Money Report June 20, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. There are few better proxies for measuring economic and politicalrisk in the former Soviet Union than the interest rate differentialbetween Estonia and Russia. After five years of independence, Estonia has achieved such aremarkable economic transformation that her nominal short-terminterest rates are about 8% while her real interest rates area negative 10%. In Russia, by contrast, there is so much investorapprehension about the country's economic policies that nominalinterest rates are over 150% despite the fact that the Ruble hasbeen stable for nearly a year and inflation has declined to 30%. Estonia's economic transformation is remarkable by the standardsof both the former Communist countries to her east and the socialistScandinavian economies to her west. She is a nation of one millionNordic people and one half million displaced Russians trying tocreate a new Hong Kong on the edge of the old Soviet Union. Herpolicies are so unambiguously market oriented that she could soonhave the most open economy and smallest government sector of anycountry on the European continent. Estonia has no tariffs, no government deficit, no central governmentdebt, a flat rate income tax of 26% and a government expenditureshare of GDP equal to 27% or less than one half of the west Europeanaverage. She also conducts her monetary policy through a currencyboard which has made the Kroon convertible into the D-mark ata fixed rate of eight to one. As with the currency board regimesin Hong Kong and Argentina, the expansion of Estonia's money supplynow depends upon the growth of foreign exchange reserves, notjust domestic economic conditions. Since foreign investment inEstonia has been expanding steadily, Estonian interest rates havedeclined to negative levels despite the fact that she is runninga current account deficit equal to about 6% of GDP. Foreign directinvestment as a share of GDP already exceeds 10%, a level whichis close to the record set by Singapore. In the initial years after independence and the dismantling ofcommunism, official measures of Estonian economic output contractedby over 40%. But the output losses resulted from people reallocatingresources from sectors producing goods which no one wanted tobuy to sectors which reflected the economy's new openness. Inthe last year of the Soviet era, 62% of Estonia's output derivedfrom manufacturing, 17% from agriculture and 12% from services. Today, the service sector accounts for almost two thirds of GDPwhile the manufacturing share has fallen to less than 25%. Asa result of the speed of this restructuring, the economy is nowexpanding at a 6% annual rate and unemployment is only 5.0%. Estonia has enjoyed some unique advantages in creating a dynamicservice sector. She is very close to Finland (one hour by hydrofoil)and was able to attract nearly three million Finnish touristslast year. They come to see the medieval center of the capital,Tallinn, as well as to shop for goods which sell at a discountto prices in Helsinki. While the two countries have always beenseparate, their languages are very similar and Finnish companieshave been the largest foreign investors in Estonia. The other great opportunity for Estonia's service sector is thedevelopment of Tallinn as a major trans-shipment point for Russiaand other countries in the region. Tallinn has one of the bestharbors on the Baltic Sea and could easily become a more importantport than St. Petersburg. But Tallinn's future role could beinhibited by the poor relations which exist between Russia andEstonia. In a recent poll of Russian popular attitudes aboutwhich country is most hostile to Russia, the winner was Estonia. The Estonian ambassador to Moscow said the poll resultwas greathonor for such a small country, but the deep animosities lingeringfrom the Soviet era are a potential obstacle to Estonia achievingits full potential as a new Hong Kong for the region. Estoniais such a small country that foreign companies will want to investthere only if the country can serve as a warehouse and distributioncenterfor the whole Baltic region and eastern Russia, not just the localmarket. The Estonians have much to learn from the Poles, who havedeveloped such successful relations with their former enemiesin both the east and west that exports are growing at a 35% annualrate while cross border retail trade is worth over 5% of GDP. Estonia also has such a small population that her own industrieswill someday need access to Russian labor in order to expand. If barriers to trade and capital can be removed, northeast Russiacould emerge as a low cost labor reserve for Estonia in much thesame way that the southern Chinese province of Guandong does forHong Kong. Estonia is still in the midst of privatizing former state enterprisesand establishing the legal infrastructure of capitalism. Buther greatest economic policy challenge during the next few yearswill probably be managing the financial side-effects of the currencyboard monetary regime on credit expansion and asset prices. Estonia'sKroon was the first new currency to emerge from the former SovietUnion and it was pegged at such a deeply undervalued level thatthe exchange rate link to the D-mark has not undermined the country'scommercial competitiveness despite the large inflation differentialwith Germany. The only powerful protectionist lobby in Estoniais the agricultural sector, which has been suffering from hightariffs in both Russia and the European Union. But with realinterest rates at minus 10% and the economy enjoying strong growth,there is a risk that Estonia's currency board could encouragespeculative bank lending and a sharp rise in asset prices. Undera currency board monetary system, the sole goal of monetary policyis to maintain a convertible currency at a fixed exchange rate. The central bank cannot manipulate interest rates in order tofine tune the economy. At present, both domestic and internationalinvestors are very happy to purchase Kroon financial assets withnegative real interest rates because Estonian interest rates areseveral hundred basis points above the yields available on D-markfinancial assets. The risk is that negative real interest ratesin an environment of high economic growth will encourage a burstof speculative bank lending to finance inflation in real estateprices and equity values. The central bank will have to carefullymonitor credit quality in the banking system in order to preventa boom and bust cycle from occurring. Estonia had a major bankingcrisis in 1992 but that crisis resulted from loans to bankruptSoviet era state enterprises. Today, the Estonian banking systemis so well capitalized that the some of its institutions are takingadvantage of Latvia's banking problems by expanding into thatcountry. While Estonia's rate of economic growth is one of the highestin the world, her standard of living is still suffering from thelagged effects of fifty years of communism. Before World WarTwo, Estonia had a per capita income comparable to Finland's. Today, her per capita income is about $3,000 while Finland'sis $18.850. If we adjust for price differences, the per capitaincome of Estonia on a purchasing power parity basis is probablyover $6,000, but it is still far below its long term potential. Estonia is such a small country that many pundits will probablydismiss her success as the by-product of unique historical andgeo-political circumstances. Despite a long period of Russiandomination by both the Czars and the Communists, Estonia's culturalroots are in Scandinavia. She was a member of the Hanseatic leagueduring the early middle ages and a province of the Swedish empireuntil the 18th century. Before 1939, her economy had consistedof small farms and a wealthy class of German merchant familieswho had emigrated to Tallinn during the Hanseatic era. But thefact remains that Estonia is creating such a dynamic free marketeconomy that she will soon appear to be an anomaly compared toall of the countries of the Baltic, not just former Republicsof the Soviet Union. When Mrs. Thatcher named her first cabinet in 1979, it had somany people of eastern European descent that one media punditsaid it was unique for containing more Estonians than Etonians. In the early Thatcher years, Estonia was still a Soviet satelliteand no one could have imagined her serving as a role model forany form of free market economic experiment. But if Estonia canmanage the potential monetary risks in her Hong Kong style economicpolicy mix, there is little doubt that she will emerge as an importantcase study of the benefits of currency boards, free trade, andlow income tax rates for all developing countries and even herScandinavian neighbors. Estonia's monetary system could alsoserve as a useful tool for improving relations with Russia. AsMr. Yeltsin tries to re-establish the credibility of his economicreform program, he could do no worse than to announce that theRussian central bank will attempt to improve its anti-inflationcredibility by pegging the Ruble to the Estonian Kroon. (D. Hale) David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018780 WT01-B13-138IA018-000196-B047-284http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/tighten1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171443 text/html 12123HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:10:43 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:38 GMTContent-length: 11937Content-type: text/html Will the Fed Tighten in July or August? The Weekly Money Report May 29, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Please note: If you're interested in receiving a copy of the exhibitsthat accompany this report, please send an e-mail stating yourrequest and the title of the report to dhamilto@kemper.com. Orcall Debbie Hamilton at (312) 499-1760. As a result of the strength of final demand and rundown of inventorieswhich occurred during the first quarter, the majority of Americanforecasters will soon be projecting 3.0-4.0% output growth duringthe second quarter. The great unresolved question which stillhangs over the financial markets is whether final demand willslacken again and cause output growth to dip back into the 1.0-2.0%range during the third quarter or whether output growth will remainin the 3.0-3.5% range as a result of robust capital investment,steady expansion of retail sales and a burst of discretionaryfederal spending during the closing months of the 1996 fiscalyear. The economy's performance during the third quarter willbe of critical importance to investor psychology this summer becauseit will probably determine whether the Federal Reserve decidesto hike short-term interest rates. The Fed can avoid tighteningin response to one strong quarter because output growth has beenweak or erratic for over a year. But with the unemployment rateat 5.4%, inflation already under upward pressure because of oiland food price shocks, and the stock market seemingly obliviousto all risks, it will be difficult to avoid at least one modestmonetary tightening at either the early July or late August FOMCmeeting. The American forecasting community expects the second quarterto represent the growth peak of 1996 but there is no consensusabout the growth rate for the second half. Pessimists believethat the economy will loose growth momentum quickly because ofthe adverse effect of higher oil and food prices on consumer realincome, the impact of rising bond yields on demand for housingand a general slowdown in business fixed investment after twoyears of robust gains. There will probably also be a sharp riseof imports and deterioration of the trade account because of inventoryrestocking in many tradable goods sectors. The growth optimists accept that retail spending will slow andthat the trade deficit will widen but they still project outputgrowth to remain in excess of 3.0% because of robust businessinvestment, steady growth of residential construction, a largeswing in corporate demand for inventories and a rebound in governmentexpenditures as federal agencies rush to spend unexpected appropriationsprovided by the budget compromise announced a few weeks ago. Under the new budget, federal agencies will be able to engagein $291 billion of discretionary spending during the April toSeptember period compared to $244 billion during the first halfof the current fiscal year. Several recent economic data reports have strengthened thearguments of the optimists. The latest Manpower EmploymentSurvey is projecting a moderate uptick of employment growth duringthe second quarter and is optimistic about the third quarter aswell. In April, non-defense capital goods orders excluding aircraftenjoyed their strongest growth rate in several months. The recentdecline in oil prices suggests that consumer inflation will easeduring the summer while the year on year growth rate of the CPIhas run so far ahead of the consumption deflator that real householdincome is not as weak as the CPI may suggest. The resilienceof the stock market continues to boost household wealth and ishaving positive spillover effects on sectors of the economy sensitiveto discretionary spending. The government also appears to haveenjoyed a surprisingly large windfall in capital gains tax receiptsduring April while America's charities report that personal contributionsto them rose by 11% last year or the highest growth rate since1986. Nor is the stock market boom just increasing householdwealth. It also is boosting investment and job creation byincreasing the flow of capital to entrepreneurial firms throughinitial public offerings. In the first half of 1996, IPO activityappears likely to expand at a $60 billion annual rate comparedto $29.7 billion last year and a previous peak of $41.7 billionduring 1993. Despite the allegations of many economic commentators that FederalReserve policy is restrictive, the growth of IPO activity as wellas bank lending to small and medium sized companies makes it clearthat the overall financial environment is quite stimulative. Commercial banks enjoy strong balance sheets and are competingto make new loans. The mutual fund boom is encouraging an upsurgein securitized capital formation through new stock and bond issues. Investors are more willing to assume risks because they haveenjoyed healthy capital gains on their existing equity portfolios. In fact, the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP hasitself expanded to 90.4% or the highest level ever recorded inAmerican history. The previous all time peak was 81% in 1929and the post-war peak was 78% in 1972. As a result of healthyprofit growth in the corporate sector since 1991, the stock market'sp/e multiple is still at moderate levels (16 using 1996 profits)but the ratios of price to book value and price to replacementcost (Tobin's Q) have risen to record levels. Federal ReserveChairman Alan Greenspan has downplayed the significance of theseratios by stressing that book value cannot adequately measurethe impact of America's investment in technology and human capitalon potential corporate earnings power but the fact remains thatfirms are enjoying such rich valuation ratios that they have avery strong incentive to boost investment. As a result, itis not surprising that the most distinguishing feature of thecurrent business cycle has been its supply side dimension. The economy enjoyed a healthy recovery after 1993 because ofan upsurge of capital investment which is causing the economy'spotential manufacturing capacity to expand at a 4.5% annual ratecompared to 2.0-2.5% in the early 1990's. A recovery with suchstrong investment leadership enjoys self-reinforcing momentumbecause it boosts the economy's potential growth rate and thuslowers the risk of inflation even as demand increases. The problemfor policy-makers is that official output data does not yet showany productivity pay-off from the recent investment boom, so theycontinue to perceive the economy's optimal growth rate to be onlyabout 2.0-2.5%. There is not yet a consensus at the Federal Reserve on the needto tighten monetary policy, but opinion will move in that directionif May and June data confirm that final demand is expanding ata steady rate and that the manufacturing sector is shifting froma sub-cycle of inventory liquidation to accumulation. Excludingfood and oil, the economy's inflation performance is still excellentbut if output growth remains above 3.0% through year end, theunemployment rate will drop to 5.0% and provoke increasing anxietyabout the danger of increased pressure on wages and prices. Therisk of tightening will fade only if there is such pronouncedweakness in retail sales that the FOMC can ignore the resilienceof other sectors or if there is a sudden precipitous correctionin equity prices. Political factors could delay any new Fed tightening until August. The Senate has not yet been able to confirm the reappointmentof Alan Greenspan as Fed Chairman or the appointment of two newGovernors because of a filibuster by Senator Harkin of Iowa. The two new appointees may also be reluctant to launch their Fedcareers by tightening immediately. But if third quarter growthforecasts solidify in the 3.0-3.5% range, there will be at leasta 75% chance of monetary tightening at the August FOMC meeting. The other factor which could encourage U.S. monetary tighteningand depress bond markets this summer is the growing confidenceamong forecasters that 1997 will be the most robust year for theworld economy since 1988. According to the latest IMF forecast,world output should expand by 4.3% during 1998 compared to 3.8%this year, 3.5% during 1995, and 1.5-2.4% during the early 1990's. As a result of its below consensus forecast of only 1.8% and2.2% U.S. output growth during 1996 and 1997, the IMF is projectingjust 2.0% and 2.6% output growth in all the industrial countriesduring this year and next year, but it expects output growth inthe developing countries to rise to 6.4% from 6.3% during 1995and 5.9% during 1995. The countries in transition from communismalso should enjoy growth rates of 2.5% and 3.8% during 1995 and1996 compared to large output losses during the early 1990's. As the IMF is significantly undersestimating U.S. output growth,the world economy should enjoy a growth rate in excess of 4.0%this year and over 4.5% next year. Most Wall Street people still view the world economy largely fromthe perspective of the G-7 countries but the fact is they nowaccount for only about 55% of world output compared to 40% forthe developing countries and 5% for the transition economies. As a result of the high growth differentials between the developingcountries and industrial countries, the G-7 share of world outputwill decline steadily during the next decade. The fact is thedeveloping countries have about 70% of the world's land area and85% of its population compared to 45% of its output and 15% ofits stock market capitalization. The gaps between human resourcesand output should decline significantly as the developing countriescontinue their transition to market oriented economic systems. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017320 WT01-B13-139IA018-000196-B048-8http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/bondalter1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171451 text/html 11489HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:10:52 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:24:52 GMTContent-length: 11303Content-type: text/html Will Bond Market Perceptions Alter Economic And Political Reality? The Weekly Money Report May 6, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The major risk now confronting the U.S. financial markets is that bond yields will rise sharply in response to both evidence of economic recovery and the increasingly populist tone of the 1996 election campaign. Most forecasters have clearly underestimated the U.S. economy's resilience while congressional Republicans are so alarmed about their low standing in the opinion polls that they have decided to counter-attack by proposing an immediate reduction in the gasoline tax. If the bidding war in Washington continues to escalate, investors will become concerned about expansion of the federal deficit and enactment of new regulatory entitlements, such as a higher minimum wage, at a time when the demand for labor is already starting to encourage faster wage growth. The overall cyclical condition of the U.S. economy is the best since the 1960's, but there is widespread dissatisfaction with perceived changes in the composition of national income. The profit share of GDP is still well below its peak in the 1950's and 1960's, but many people believe that the post-1991 economic expansion has benefited only a small elite of senior executives and stockholders, not the great mass of the American people. As a result the U.S. economy will be caught between two colliding forces this summer; a bond market which distrusts output growth in excess of 2.0% and a bidding competition in Washington to redistribute income at the expense of corporate profits and the federal deficit. Since perceptions are reality in both the bond market and politics, bond investors must now confront a perplexing dilemma. If they start to discount a robust economy and Democratic takeover of the Congress, bond yields will rise so sharply that the economy could stall this autumn and help set the stage for a Dole victory. In such a scenario, bond yields could drop from 8.0% this summer back to 5.5% next year. If, by contrast, bond yields peak close to 7.0% or soon decline, the economy will lose momentum only gradually and the odds of Democratic victories in November will improve. If the Democrats regain control of the Congress, bond yields will remain in the 6.5-7.5% range in late 1996 even if output growth slows to 1.5-2.0%. Election campaigns always encourage politicians to make promises about the economy which they regret later, but the stakes in the 1996 election are unprecedented in the modern era. No Democratic President has won two consecutive election victories since Franklin Roosevelt. The Republicans have not controlled the Congress for two consecutive terms, since the days of Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover. As a result, both parties perceive great opportunities and risks in the current election. The President has done a masterful job of borrowing much of the Republican rhetoric about reducing the size of government while playing upon the theme of economic insecurity through populist proposals, such as boosting the minimum wage. As is apparent with his stands on Tort Reform and the balanced budget, he is remarkably adept at shifting between the imagery of a New Democrat and an Old Democrat on an issue-by-issue basis. In fact, a recent media search by The New York Times found that President Clinton did not refer to the minimum wage once when his party controlled the Congress, but he has endorsed a minimum wage hike nearly fifty times since the Republicans took over the Congress in early 1995. The minimum wage has fallen so sharply in real terms since the 1980's that an increase will pose only modest risks for employment creation, but the markets regard it as a bad omen of the policies which could follow in 1997 if the Democrats win back control of the Congress. As a result, it is not surprising that Dr. Al Wojinlower refers to the current American economic scene as one of "glum prosperity". The U.S. economy expanded at a 2.8% annual rate during the first quarter compared to wide-spread expectations that output growth would be only 1.5-2.0%. Domestic final sales rose at a 4.1% annual rate compared to 0.6% during the fourth quarter of 1995, 2.6% during the third quarter, and 2.2% during the second quarter. The uptick in domestic final sales was led by a 14.5% growth rate in business spending on new equipment, 5.8% growth in business spending on structures, and 3.5% growth in consumer spending. After falling steadily for several quarters, federal government spending also rebounded at a 6.7% annual rate compared to a 12.8% decline during the fourth quarter. As a result of auto inventory liquidation, non-farm business inventories grew at only a $12.8 billion annual rate compared to $19.5 billion during the fourth quarter of 1995, $36 billion during the middle quarters of 1995, and $54.5 billion during the first quarter of 1995. If we exclude autos, though, real business inventories rose at a $36.9 billion annual rate last quarter compared to $19.1 billion during the fourth quarter of 1995 and $44.5 billion during the third quarter. The underlying strength of domestic final demand suggests that the economy should continue to expand at a 3.0-3.5% annual rate through the middle quarters of 1996. There will be renewed weakness in federal spending during the second quarter and inventory rebuilding will boost the trade deficit, but steady growth of private final demand, coupled with a swing in the corporate inventory cycle, should still produce output growth in excess of 3.0%. The best confirmation that the inventory cycle has turned is the purchasing agent index. It rose back over 50 in April, or its highest level since June, 1995, in response to stronger orders, output, and backlogs. The April employment report was weak after hefty job gains during the first quarter, but some of this weakness appears to reflect seasonal problems with the timing of the survey. The April Conference Board survey of consumer perceptions of the job market was much more upbeat. Only 21.3% of households reported that jobs were hard to get compared to 26.5% during March and 23.4% during February. The economy's surprising resilience during the first quarter has already provoked a new debate about when the Fed might feel compelled to tighten monetary policy again. It is doubtful that the Fed will want to move as early as its late May meeting, but some analysts are now speculating about a rate hike in July or one year after the Fed first began easing policy in response to the 1995 slowdown. There is no consensus at the Fed about when to act because there are as many divisions about the economic outlook on the FOMC as there are in the private sector. Some governors perceive that the economy is structurally vulnerable to weakness because of the high level of consumer debt, while the majority perceive that the economy is expanding at a moderate non-inflationary rate. They will not want to tighten until they see clear signs that output growth will remain above 2.5% on a sustained basis and push utilization rates to levels which might encourage higher inflation. The evidence on the inflation outlook itself is mixed. There have been large price increases for food and fuel during recent weeks because of exogenous shocks, such as poor weather and low inventories. Such price shocks are occurring independently of the global business cycle, but they could alter the inflation outlook if they began to influence corporate price and wage behavior. Traditional cyclical measures of inflation pressure, such as the purchasing agent price index, are still subdued, but if the output growth remains close to 3.0% they are bound to revive in the near future. The first quarter employment cost index report also contained the first hints of wage escalation in the U.S. economy. Wages and salaries in the private sector rose at a 3.3% annual rate compared to gains of only 2.8-2.9% during the previous four quarters. The uptick in wages was partly offset by slower growth of benefits after a long period in which benefit costs exceeded wage gains. But with the unemployment rate at 5.4%, the risk is high that wages will continue to escalate because of business competition for labor. As a result of the low level of surplus capacity in the U.S. economy, there is clearly a case for monetary tightening as early as the July FOMC meeting, but there will not be a consensus on the FOMC for action without evidence that output growth will be sustained at a level above 2.5% and that industrial commodity prices are rising. If the purchasing agent price index shoots up to 50% or higher during the next two months, and the Blue Chip Survey of the economic consensus projects a new median forecast of 3.0-3.5% output growth through the second half, the Fed is virtually certain to hike money market yields 25 basis points in July. But if the purchasing agent price index is still in the 40-45 range and forecasters remain ambiguous about the growth outlook, the Fed could defer a decision until later in the summer. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016570 WT01-B13-140IA018-000196-B048-21http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/usoutputgrowth1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171459 text/html 9205HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:10:59 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:42 GMTContent-length: 9020Content-type: text/html Will U.S. Output Growth Exceed 3.0% During the Second Quarter? The Weekly Money Report March 25, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The performance of the U.S. financial markets during the next few quarters will be driven by the interaction between business cycle developments and the unfolding of the 1996 election campaign. Monetary policy will be expansionary in most G-7 countries, but bond yields could fluctuate in a wide range because of changing investor perception of political and economic risk. The large rise in U.S. bond yields since January suggests the market already is discounting several developments, including a moderate upturn in the economy, no further progress in resolving the fiscal deadlock in Washington, and a high probability of President Clinton winning re-election. European bond yields have risen partly in response to U.S. developments and partly because of investor apprehension about how the governments of Germany and France will resolve the contradictions in their program for European monetary union. Japanese bond yields have risen because of continuing evidence that the Japanese economy has bottomed as well as investor concern about the cost of future bank bail-outs on the government's fiscal deficit. The uptick in bond yields during February and March was so sudden that some pundits began to make comparisons with the bond market collapse of 1994, but it is doubtful that the cyclical revival in the U.S. economy this spring and summer will be as robust as the upturn which pushed U.S. bond yields over 8.0% two years ago. In 1994, the economy enjoyed a spurt to 3.5% output growth from 2.2% because of 3.0% growth in personal consumption, 9.2% growth in business fixed investment and an inventory swing worth 0.6% of GDP. In 1996, the economy will probably enjoy 2.4% growth in consumer spending, 5.0-6.0% growth in business investment, and a stabilization of corporate inventories. But while output growth for the year as a whole will probably average only 2.5%, there could be a spurt to growth rates as high as 3.0- 3.5% during the second and third quarter, as the manufacturing sector shifts from inventory liquidation to inventory accumulation. The 1994 rebound in the economy produced a large rise in capacity utilization rates and industrial commodity prices, so the Federal Reserve hiked U.S. short-term interest rates from 3.0% to 6.0%. If the coming rebound in output stabilizes with growth rates of 2.0-2.5% after one or two moderately stronger quarters, it will not have as dramatic an impact on commodity prices as the 1994 upturn. Capacity utilization rates have dropped back to 82.0% from 85.0% last year while new capacity is expanding at a 4.0% annual rate compared to only 2.0-2.5% during the early 1990's. There is a risk that the low level of unemployment will encourage some escalation of wage growth but the flexibility of the U.S. labor market will probably cause changes in wage compensation to occur gradually. Unemployment has been at 4.0% in several mid-western states since 1994 and firms have still been successful at restraining costs. In 1996, productivity also should improve as output growth recovers. It is possible that the coming turn in the inventory cycle could produce such large income gains that consumer spending will rise sharply rather than moderately, but several factors suggest that the economy does not have the pent-up demand which existed after three years of sluggish growth between 1991 and 1994. The ratio of consumer debt to income has risen sharply and consumer delinquency rates on credit cards are back at the highs of 1990. While the delinquency rate on the total stock of consumer debt remains very subdued, the uptick in the delinquency rate on cards could encourage some consumer finance companies to impose tighter credit standards after a prolonged period in which lending conditions became progressively easier. As Federal Reserve Governor Larry Lindsey has warned, such a change in the credit environment could reduce the spending power of lower middle class households who lack discretionary income. The potentially new positive factor for consumer spending is the huge wealth gains which the household sector has enjoyed from the appreciation of equity prices. The capitalization of the U.S.- equity market has risen to $6.7 trillion or 87.5% of GDP compared to a seventy year average of 48% of GDP. Households own about two-thirds of all U.S. corporate equity, with one-third held in the form of mutual funds, IRA's, or defined benefit pension plans and two-thirds owned directly. Econometric research shows only a weak link between aggregate consumer spending and stock market gains because about 90% of U.S. corporate equity is owned by less than 5% of the households. But the capital gains of the past year have been so large that they should encourage healthy growth of demand for upmarket consumer goods as well as stronger retail spending in states with large concentrations of retired people, such as Florida. In 1992, households over the age of 65 owned 41.4% of publicly traded U.S. corporate equity despite the fact that they account for only 21.8% of all households. Households in the 45-54 year range, by contrast, own 18.07% of all U.S. equity and account for 16.42% of the population. It is popular in the investment community to describe senior citizens as people living on fixed incomes, but the spectacular performance of the stock market compared to real wages during recent years suggests that this label is misapplied. In the 1990's, it is people in their 20's and 30's, not the elderly, who are living on fixed incomes. If the rebound in the economy this spring does not push the purchasing agent index for inflation and other sensitive measures of industrial prices sharply higher, the Federal Reserve will probably permit short-term interest rates to remain at current levels through the summer and autumn. It might decide to tighten in late 1996 if stronger growth in the world economy threatens to give a significant boost to commodity prices but the recovery in Europe and Japan is so weak that it will probably not generate major pressure on commodity prices until 1997. In contrast to U.S. industry, the European corporate sector has not yet reduced inventories significantly while final sales remain weak. Japan enjoyed healthy growth of final sales during the final quarter of 1995, but inventory levels are high and the government has not yet completed enactment of a rescue program for the banks. Large tax hikes are also scheduled for 1997. It should be noted as well that the bank rescue program now before the Japanese Diet is focused solely on the 8 trillion yen of bad debt in the Jusen. There are numerous other non-bank financial intermediaries with problem loans approaching 40 trillion yen. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013820 WT01-B13-141IA018-000196-B048-32http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/socialsecurity.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171508 text/html 3091HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:11:07 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:29 GMTContent-length: 2906Content-type: text/html Investing Social Security in Mutual Funds The Weekly Money Report March 14, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. A Memo From David Hale A preliminary version of the coming White House report on social security reform is available by calling Debbie Hamilton at 312-499-1760. It contains proposals for radical changes in the investment policies of the social security system. Among the alternatives mentioned are investing social security funds directly in the equity market or turning over the assets for deployment in individually controlled retirement accounts. There was no consensus in the study group taskforce about how to proceed, so this report will not lead to any immediate legislative proposals. But after the 1996 elections there could be significant changes in the social security system's investment policies with potentially benign consequences for the mutual fund industry. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013810 WT01-B13-142IA018-000196-B048-51http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/usyieldcurve1.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171522 text/html 12024HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:11:22 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:51 GMTContent-length: 11838Content-type: text/html Is The U.S. Yield Curve Discounting Increased Political Risk? The Weekly Money Report February 29, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The yield on long-term U.S. Treasury bonds has increased by nearly 40 basis points since early January despite Fed easing and continued evidence of sluggish economic growth in the United States. The steepening of the yield curve reflects a variety of economic and political developments. Retailers have reported a stronger tone to consumer spending since January and thus the risk of the fourth quarter slowdown evolving into a recession has been greatly reduced. The weakness of Senator Robert Dole in the early primaries has lowered the odds of any new breakthrough in the budget talks in Washington while the success of Patrick Buchanan has provoked new anxieties about the ability of the Republicans to retain their congressional majorities in this autumn's election. The yen has rallied sharply because of Japanese corporations repatriating capital at the end of the March fiscal year and increasing evidence that the Japanese economy has stabilized. While the European economy is clearly weak, German investors are demanding increased yield premiums to compensate for the risk that Chancellor Kohl and President Chirac will pursue monetary union despite the failure of both countries to achieve the Maastricht targets for reduction of their government deficits. The only clearly positive news for the bond market during the past week was the decision of President Clinton to re-appoint Alan Greenspan as Fed Chairman as well as to fill the existing vacancies with competent and credible economists widely perceived to have mainstream views about the role of the Federal Reserve in economic policy. The failure of the White House and Congress to agree on a fiscal package has been a major disappointment to investors because in the autumn of 1995 there appeared to be an unprecedented opportunity for long-term deficit reduction through cuts in Medicare entitlement programs. If the Republicans retain control of Congress, there will be a second opportunity to pursue some form of deficit reduction in 1997 but forecasts about next year's fiscal policy are speculative at best. The most popular Republican presidential candidates so far have been Steve Forbes and Patrick Buchanan, neither of whom has stressed balancing the budget as a policy priority. Ironically, if they force the Republican Party to adopt a more populist fiscal policy of tax cuts and increased federal spending to promote job security, President Clinton could emerge as the champion of fiscal conservatism this autumn. The primary consolation for the bond market from this year's budget gridlock is that the Republicans will probably be able to impose $10-15 billion of targeted spending cuts in the continuing resolutions still moving through Congress and thus lower the fiscal 1996 deficit to $120-130 billion. While investors have long been apprehensive about the ability of a man as old as Senator Robert Dole to be an effective presidential candidate, the fragmentation of the Republican Party in the early primary elections has still come as a shock to the financial markets. It creates several potential risks. First, the Republican Party could become so badly divided that it will lose control of the Congress this autumn, not just the opportunity to regain the White House. Secondly, the issue of deficit reduction has faded completely from the political debate because of the popularity of Steve Forbes and Patrick Buchanan. Forbes is running on Reaganite themes, such as cutting taxes, while Buchanan is campaigning against free trade and an unregulated labor market. The candidate most closely identified with the Congressional Contract with America, Senator Phil Gramm, was the first to drop out. Thirdly, investors are apprehensive that Buchanan's successes will encourage other candidates to move in a populist direction by advocating more restrictive trade policies or large increases in marginal income tax rates to punish highly paid executives responsible for job shedding at large corporations. Senator Robert Dole has some advisors sympathetic to Buchanan's positions on trade and they have already encouraged him to make speeches attacking the American corporate sector. If the Democrats were to regain control of the House, Rep. Richard Gephardt would become the House speaker and probably use his new position to develop a Democratic version of the Buchanan agenda for his own presidential campaign in 2000. Patrick Buchanan is such a divisive candidate that it will be impossible for him to win the Republican nomination, but his primary victories are exposing the social contradictions in America's recent economic performance and thus provoking a debate about income distribution, corporate responsibility, and other issues which the Republicans are often uncomfortable discussing. The U.S. economy has significantly out-performed all other industrial countries in job creation since the 1970's. During the past sixteen years, the U.S. economy has created 28 million new jobs and reduced its unemployment rate to 5.7% while the unemployment rate in many European countries is twice as high. The ratio of long-term unemployed (unemployed longer than one year) to total unemployment is also only 12% in the U.S. compared to 40% in Germany and 35% in France. During the half century since the end of the Second World War, the U.S. economy has produced an expansion of private affluence on a scale unprecented since the industrial revolution began. In 1950, fewer than one million Americans earned as much as $60,000 in today's money. By 1967, slightly more than one million Americans had incomes of $100,000 per annum on the basis of 1993 constant dollars. Despite the volatile business cycles of the 1970's and early 1980's, this number expanded to 2.7 million by 1980 and to 5.6 million by 1993. In fact, over one million Americans had incomes above $200,000 per annum by 1993. But the price of this flexibility has been an increase in job insecurity and erosion in the real wages of less skilled workers since the 1970's. The U.S. economy has out-performed all other industrial countries in job creation during recent years because it enjoys far more price and regulatory flexibility in its labor market than other countries. Almost 20 million Americans change their job every year and even during the recession of the early 1990's only about 3 million did so because of employment termination. American firms are far more willing to hire than European firms because the cost of layoffs is much lower than in Europe. According to a recent research report from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the duration of jobs for most categories of American workers has been remarkably stable since 1973. But there has been a major increase in the rate of permanent dismissals at companies compared to temporary layoffs. In the 1960's, permanent dismissals accounted for only about 30-35% of new unemployment compared to 40-45% in 1993. The share of temporary layoffs, by contrast, has declined from just over 20% to about 17%. Job insecurity has been an especially striking feature of employment at the large Fortune 500 companies which were once considered to be the country's most stable employers. Since 1979, their total employment has declined from 16.5 million jobs to 11.5 million jobs, with most of the job losses occurring in the U.S. itself. The growth of small and medium sized firms has provided many alternative forms of employment but some workers have had to accept lower pay when making such transitions. Start-up firms have much higher failure rates than old established companies and thus contribute to the sense of insecurity among people leaving job at large firms. Patrick Buchanan alleges that U.S. firms have been transferring jobs to foreign countries in pursuit of lower wages but employment data for U.S. multinationals suggests that the technological factors which have forced cuts in U.S. manufacturing employment have been operative in other countries as well. Between 1979 and 1989, American firms reduced their employment of foreign production workers by 2.3 million jobs while creating 1.2 million new jobs in non-production departments, such as marketing and distribution. The expansion of U.S. companies in foreign markets is making them more formidable global competitors and thus boosting U.S. exports. It is not merely transferring jobs between countries on a zero sum basis. The introduction of new and more sophisticated forms of technology into the workplace has also produced greater income inequality based on education. Since 1979, the real wages of high school graduates have fallen by 21% while the earnings of people with advanced technical degrees have often increased significantly. Firms also have tried to help their employers avoid high effective marginal tax rates by expanding benefits more aggressively than wage and salary income. During the past fifteen years, the government's employment cost index has increased by about 22.0% in real terms while real average hourly earnings have fallen by 8%. The biggest gains in employment costs were concentrated in benefits (up 38% in real terms), not take-home pay. Benefits have expanded from 16% of compensation in the early 1980's to over 18.0% today. As a result, workers which are employed by small firms without non-taxable benefit packages have suffered a much greater erosion of real income than people employed by firms with health care, pensions, and other non-taxable forms of compensation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013070 WT01-B13-143IA018-000196-B048-66http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/weekly_report/hasdollarpeaked.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171529 text/html 12978HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:11:30 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Sep-96 16:25:26 GMTContent-length: 12792Content-type: text/html Has The Dollar Peaked? The Weekly Money Report January 31, 1996 By David D. Hale Global economic strategist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The U.S. dollar has eased against both the Japanese yen and German mark since January because of a mixture of economic and political factors. First, there are signs that the U.S. investors are exporting capital aggressively again. In January, retail investors purchased almost $8 billion of international funds or the highest level since early 1994. If these trends were to be sustained, total capital outflows from the U.S. during 1996 could rise to $150-200 billion at annual rates. During 1995, U.S. investors purchased foreign equities at a rate of $4.1 billion during the first quarter, $10.2 billion during the second quarter, and $21.5 billion during the third quarter compared to $47 billion during 1994 and $63 billion during 1993. American demand for foreign bonds also has been expanding. In 1995, U.S. investors purchased foreign bonds at a rate of $3.8 billion during the first quarter, $12.7 billion during the second quarter and $13.8 billion during the third quarter. Pension capital outflows have been steady at about $35 billion per annum during recent years but retail investment demand for foreign securities has fluctuated in a wide range. In 1995, the growing U.S. demand for foreign securities was offset by foreign purchases of American securities by both private and official investors. Foreign investors bought U.S. equities at a rate of $5.8 billion during the second quarter and $5.2 billion during the third quarter after selling $3.5 billion during the first quarter. Foreign investors were much more enthusiastic buyers of U.S. Treasury bonds last year. Their purchases were $32.9 billion during the first quarter, $43.5 billion during the second quarter, and $46.9 billion during the third quarter. A large share of these purchases were probably official intervention to support the dollar. Japan, for example, purchased $31.4 billion of U.S. government securities during the first three quarters of 1995 despite a cautious attitude towards the dollar by Tokyo's big life insurance companies. But the U.S. bond market rally also attracted many foreign buyers to corporate bonds, not just government securities. Foreign purchases of U.S. corporate bonds were $14.4 billion during the first quarter, $13.1 billion during the second quarter, and $13.2 billion during the third quarter. The problem for the U.S. capital account during 1996 is that American equity values are high relative to the rest of the world while the U.S. bond market is unlikely to produce returns as attractive as those which occurred during 1995. There is also far more human and organizational infrastructure on Wall Street promoting foreign investment than ever before in American history. The U.S. now has 367 international equity funds compared to 196 in 1993, 95 in 1990, and only 13 in 1984. The number of global equity funds has also expanded to 167 from 99 in 1992 and 16 in 1984. While global bond funds have attracted less money than international equity funds, their number also has expanded to 145 from 87 in 1992 and only 1 in 1984. As a result of the growth of America's international fund management industry and the significant out-performance of Wall Street compared to many foreign markets during recent years, American demand for foreign securities during 1996 could be much higher than foreign private demand for U.S. securities. The second factor which has depressed the dollar during recent weeks has been seasonal repatriation of capital to Japan and investor concerns about the Bank of Japan shifting away from its easy monetary policy. The new finance minister recently stated that the yields on pensioners' bank deposits were excessively low. New data for industrial production and retail sales also suggest that the Japanese economy has bottomed and begun to recover. As a result of these developments, the futures market is now suggesting that the Bank of Japan could raise short-term interest rates this summer despite the severe asset quality problems of many Japanese banks. The slump in interest rates futures and rally in the yen has become self-reinforcing during recent weeks by encouraging many foreign borrowers of yen, such as hedge funds, to reduce their yen liabilities. As a result, the Bank of Japan has intervened on a large scale during recent weeks in order to persuade investors that they will not permit the seasonal pressures for a stronger yen to go too far. As a result of the problems of the Japanese banking system, it is very doubtful that there will be any new monetary tightening in the near future but the yen could still hold in a trading range of 103 to 107 because of political factors, not just divergences in monetary cycles and business conditions. In January, U.S. manufacturing firms began to complain about dollar appreciation while the primary victories of Patrick Buchanan are reviving political focus on the trade deficit after a period in which it faded from Washington radar screens. Recent Japanese import and export data are also calling into question how much further the trade surplus will contract if the yen stays in a range of 100-110. Many Japanese firms are profitable at yen rates of 100-110 and their exports would probably rise sharply if the yen fell back to 110-120. As recently as three months ago, by contrast, many analysts were suggesting the trade surplus would fall sharply if the yen simply held at 105 to the dollar. Persistence of a large Japanese trade surplus is potentially bullish for world financial markets because it provides a source of surplus liquidity but the yen will not weaken dramatically if the surplus remains at high levels or expands further unless Japanese investors export capital far more aggressively. Japanese investors have been boosting their purchases of Australian and European bonds during recent months but they continue to be cautious towards the dollar. Recent political developments in the U.S. will probably reinforce this caution, especially if Mr. Buchanan goes into the Republican convention with a third or more of the delegates. The third factor which has depressed the dollar is global bond yield differentials. The German mark has rallied against the dollar because German bond yields have backed up as much as U.S. bond yields during recent weeks while the German economy is so weak that most investors expect further Bundesbank easing. At present, Germany is offering nominal bond yields of 6.2% with a prospective inflation rate of 1.5-2.0% while U.S. bond yields are 6.4% despite a prospective inflation rate closer to 3.0%. French and British real long-term interest rates are also 4.0-5.0% on the basis of current bond yields and prospective inflation performance. These yield differentials have helped to boost investor demand for European currencies. In the second quarter, several factors could help to encourage stronger demand for the dollar. First, the U.S. economy should improve and lessen investor concern about the risk of a recession depressing corporate profits. Secondly, the repatriation of capital to Japan should slow, if not reverse, while many investment institutions may respond to the start of the new fiscal year by diversifying more of their portfolios into foreign securities. Recent proposals to shift a large share of pension fund assets to non-life insurance company managers also should set the stage at some point for larger capital outflows from Japan. Thirdly, European currencies could suffer during the second quarter from investor concern about the Russian presidential election in June. The opinion polls suggest that the most likely winner is the communist candidate, Mr. Gennady Zyuganov. He has tired to reassure foreign investors that he will not reverse recent economic reforms but most Russian liberals believe that he is a front man for members of the old Nomenklatura who will do significant damage to Russia's emerging market economy. Mr. Zyuganov's party also favors restoring stronger links with the former Republics of the Soviet Union and opposing the entry of the countries of eastern Europe into NATO. As the IMF recently provided Mr. Boris Yeltsin with a $9 billion loan and he still controls the machinery of government, it is possible that he will be able to make a comeback in time for the election. But as a result of his health problems and low level of public approval, investors will have to assign a high risk to the probability of either Mr. Zyuganov winning the election or Mr. Yeltsin inventing some political excuse to delay the election (such as new military action in the Chechen Republic or a sudden decision to merge Belarus back into Russia). The first major test of market perceptions of the Russian political situation will come in April when Morgan Guaranty plans to offer a Russian Eurobond to foreign investors. If the Eurobond offering goes well, the foreign exchange market may conclude that investors are already discounting a Zyuganov victory. But as Russia has not had an open election for its head of state since 1613, it is difficult to believe that the coming presidential election will not produce some news events potentially damaging to the currencies of the countries close to Russia, including the German mark. To summarize, the large rise in U.S. bond yields since late January appears to reflect a mixture of economic and political factors, including the decreased risk of a full scale recession, new pessimism about the prospects for a fiscal compromise in Washington and investor anxiety about what fragmentation of the Republican Party in recent primaries portends for this November's presidential and congressional elections. Investors are especially concerned that Patrick Buchanan's success could help to set the stage for the election of a Democratic House majority which would then embrace themes such as economic nationalism and greater federal regulation of the labor market. The firmer tone to retail sales since January suggests the U.S. economy should soon complete its inventory adjustment and return to a growth rate of 2.0-3.0% during the second quarter. But if bond yields continue to rise in response to America's new political risks, the upturn in housing could stall and depress consumer spending on furniture and appliances at a time when fiscal policy will be restrictive and monetary policy will be the primary engine for restoring growth. Rising bond yields also could depress equity prices after a market rally so broad based that U.S. corporations now have a market capitalization of $6.6 trillion or a level equal to 87.5% of GDP compared to a previous peak of 81.0% of GDP in 1929. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015700 WT01-B13-144IA018-000196-B048-75http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/benefit2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171538 text/html 8488HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:11:38 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 11-Oct-96 15:24:16 GMTContent-length: 8306Content-type: text/html Will Investors Or The Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? (continued page 2) Will Investors Or The Government Benefit From Inflation Adjusted Treasury Bonds? (continued) The need for state and local governments to play a greater role combating thecauses of America's new income inequality at a time when the federal governmentis promoting devolution of other programs suggests that governors andlegislatures are going to face more formidable challenges during the decadeahead than at any other time in the modern era. Their policies in sectors suchas education will not simply affect the economy of their state. They will alsohave a major impact on the wage and employment trends which are driving thenational debate about trade policy, tax policy and federal regulation of thelabor market. Indeed, it would not be an exaggeration to say that the struggleover America's place in the new global economic order will depend as much onthe policies of state governments as the national government. The strength of the national economy and the growth of tax receipts shouldpermit state governments to manage these challenges during 1996 and 1997. Butwhen the U.S. economy experiences another recession, state governments willhave to confront the triple challenge of faltering tax receipts, increasedspending on the unemployed and the impact of new federal block grant system onthe capacity of Washington to help them fund social programs. In such ascenario, the deficits of state governments could rise sharply and force themto curtail spending on capital investment and other services, includingeducation. How will state governments cope with the fiscal hazards posed by devolution andrecession during the late 1990's? There will be no simple answers because theU.S. no longer enjoys a broad social consensus about the role of government ateither the federal or state level. But one obvious solution which could appealto both the political left and right would be for state governments to raisemoney by privatizing various assets which could be operated more effectively bythe private sector. During the past decade, privatization has been a dominant theme for economicreformers in both the old industrial countries and the developing countries.The British government privatized its utilities, water systems and airportsduring the 1980's. China, Thailand, Indonesia and the Philippines areencouraging the private sector to develop an extensive network of toll roads.Many Asian countries are also privatizing ports, electric systems, and phonecompanies. Argentina privatized its utility companies during the early 1980'sand is about to privatize its water companies. In the U.S. private companiessupply about 85% of electricity but the public sector still owns practicallyall of the airports and waterworks. Toll roads played an important role inAmerica's early infrastructure development but today they account for onlyabout ten percent of the national highway system. In 1994, toll roadscollected about $4.6 billion of revenue compared to $71.4 billion of governmentreceipts from highway user taxes. While it is difficult to put a precise valueon state and local government enterprises, the Reason Foundation has produced areport suggesting they have a potential market value of about $227 billion. A few cities, such as Indianapolis, have promoted the privatization of publicservices on the grounds of efficiency but the overall rate of change in theU.S. has been very modest compared to other industrial countries because stateand local governments have not been confronting fiscal problems on a scalelarge enough to require dramatic action. The U.S. federal tax system alsosubsidizes public ownership of enterprises, such as airports and water systems,by permitting state and local governments to sell tax exempt securities. Despite the great policy changes occurring in Washington today, state and localgovernments enjoy a healthy financial position as a result of both theeconomy's benign performance and the large increase in federal assistance whichoccurred during the Bush administration. But they should not permit theircurrent surpluses to lull them into complacency about the challenges which lieahead. If the Republicans retain control of Congress, there will be continuingpressure to lower the federal deficit through reduced financial assistance tothe states. If they win the White House, the odds would also increase of adramatic overhaul of the federal tax system which could jeopardize existing taxallowances, such as the exemption on state and local government securities, asa quid pro quo for reducing marginal income tax rates. If the Democrats win,they will move more slowly to curtail federal spending but they will also beunable to resist the demographic pressure for cuts in discretionary spendingprograms over the long-term. Devolution and the movement towards block grantswill be manageable for the states during periods of economic growth but whenthe economy finally experiences a recession, they will have to finance largeincreases in social spending without the support which has traditionally comefrom the federal government. If the federal tax allowance for state and localsecurities are eliminated, they will also have to pay higher interest rates ontheir bonds. There is no way to predict exactly when these pressures will converge in a newcrisis. The timing of any future economic shock will depend upon political andbusiness cycle factors which are still unfolding. But the basic thrust ofpublic policy is very clear. The federal government will attempt to cope withthe coming upsurge in its entitlement spending for the elderly by shifting moreresponsibilities onto the states. The states will be able to cope withdevolution when the economy is prosperous but the caps on federal block grantswill cause future recessions to increase the pressure on their fiscal positionsby more than other economic downturns in the modern era. As a result, the oddsare high that devolution will someday be looked back upon as the first stage ofa more comprehensive restructuring of the American public sector whichculminated in the widespread privatization of state and local governmententerprises during the early years of the 21st century. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023170 WT01-B13-145IA018-000196-B048-91http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/doleboost2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171548 text/html 9423HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:11:46 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 13-Sep-96 19:58:51 GMTContent-length: 9241Content-type: text/html Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? (continued) Will The Dole Economic Program Boost U.S. Interest Rates? (continued) Finally, if the Dole-Kemp team takes over the White House and the Republicans retain control of the White House, there would be a far greater likelihood of radical reform in the nation's hitherto uncontrolled entitlement programs than if the nation continues with its current mix of divided government or a return to full Democratic control over the executive and legislative branches. The Republicans would be more willing to impose limitations on the growth of Medicare spending. There is also strong support in the Republican congressional caucus for privatization of the social security system. The experience of other countries suggests that privatization of the social security system could have a very benign impact on U.S. interest rates by encouraging a rise in the household savings rate. At present, most of the nation's new private savings are invested in pension funds. Until recently, the bulk of these retirement savings were held in the form of defined benefit plans. Under such plans, corporations made annual contributions to their pension plan in order to create the pool of savings needed to deliver a guaranteed income stream to retired workers. During the past decade, though, there has been a major shift underway to defined contribution plans, in which corporations and workers contribute to a retirement savings program whose benefits depend upon the return earned by the assets. Under this form of retirement savings, individuals have a choice of the assets in which their retirement funds are invested whereas under a defined benefit plan they have an income claim which is independent of the return earned by the fund's assets. The defined benefit plans penalized the national savings rate during 1980's. As the stock market appreciated, some corporations developed overfunded pension plans which attracted corporate raiders. Other corporations responded to this threat by reducing their contributions and lowering the national savings rate. The defined contribution plans, by contrast, carry no such penalty for either the corporation or the worker. An individual can save as much as he wants even if he achieves his wealth accumulation target ahead of schedule because of booming equity prices or high interest rates on his fixed income assets. As a result of the tremendous growth occurring in defined contribution pension plans, the stock market boom of the past few years has not depressed the household savings rate. Various forms of defined contribution plans now account for almost one half of all pension fund savings in the U.S. and probably about one third of the three billion dollars of assets in the mutual fund industry. If retirement savings were still dominated by defined benefit pension plans, the great equity bull market would have produced both a slump in pension contributions and the national savings rate rather than the modest uptick which has occurred since 1994. There are many possible models for how the U.S. might privatize its social security system. Countries as diverse as Chile, Britain and Australia have already made major strides in the direction of government mandated retirement savings with managment of the funds by the private sector. The basic goal of any reform program would probably be to provide every U.S. citizen with a compulsorary retirement savings program which would be invested in a variety of potential investment products subject to careful government supervision. If introduced to the U.S., such a retirement savings account would function very much like a defined contribution pension plan. The individual would have an opportunity to invest his retirement savings in a variety of equity and fixed income assets whereas all social security assets are currently invested in short maturity government debt. It is quite possible that an individual would respond to a booming stock market by reducing his pension fund contributions but, as in 1995, he might decide to maintain his flow of savings despite the rise in capital values. Under a defined benefit plan, by contrast, the corporations would automatically curtail contributions if a rising stock market pushed asset values above the fund's actuarial target. The current social security system has even more perverse side-effects on private savings and the federal deficit than defined benefit pension plans. It promises a guaranteed income to every American citizen while investing the government's tax receipts in some of the lowest yielding assets available in the financial markets. If social security assets had been invested in equities and bonds at practically any point during the past half century, the government would have been able to choose between boosting social security payments or reducing the level of payroll taxation needed to finance the system. All the industrial nations will confront great fiscal challenges during the 21st Century because of the aging of their populations. Two thirds of all the people who have ever lived to the age of 65 in the history of mankind are alive today and life expectancy is still increasing. As the U.S. enjoys both a higher birth rate and greater tolerance for immigration than other industrial countries, it will face a much less profound problem in meeting this challenge than countries such as Japan and Germany. But despite its demographic advantages, even the U.S. will have to confront difficult choices over taxation, the level of benefits, and the appropriate age of retirement during the early decades of the 21st century. Despite the fact that Mr. Robert Dole already qualifies for social security and that President Clinton is a member of the baby boom generation which will produce major strains in the social security system's financial health, neither dares to discuss the issue of privatization because the public has not yet been educated about the choices which lie ahead. The White House has appointed a taskforce on social security reform but the membership is so divided they will probably delay their report until after this November's election. The U.S. Treasury recently announced plans to introduce inflation adjusted government bonds in part because it believes such an instrument will be popular for the retirement savings programs of the baby boom generation. But while inflation proof bonds would be useful assets for a privatized social security system, there is no explicit link between their introduction and social security reform. Since Mr. Dole has hinted that he will be only a one term president while Mr. Clinton will not be allowed to seek a third term, both would be well positioned to take the risk of promoting a major debate about the nation's system of retirement savings. But on the basis of general philosophical attitudes towards the issue of entitlements in the two major political parties, a Republican White House and Congress are more likely to enact far-reaching social security reforms than a divided government or one dominated solely by the Democrats. As the critical determinant of the level of U.S. interest rates in the year 2000 will be how social security reform affects the U.S. savings rate, not whether the Congress approves the Dole or Clinton economic programs, a Republican victory in November should not be viewed as negative for the U.S. bond market. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1021750 WT01-B13-146IA018-000196-B048-106http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/feddev2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171603 text/html 12758HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:12:03 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Sep-96 04:23:12 GMTContent-length: 12575Content-type: text/html Will Federal Devolution Set the Stage for a State and LocalPrivatization Boom in the Next U.S. Recession? (continued page 2) Will Federal Devolution Set the Stage for a State and LocalPrivatization Boom in the Next U.S. Recession? (continued) Fifth, the U.S. has enjoyed a five year bull market in stocks and bonds whichhas produced tremendous gains in household wealth as well as opportunities forentrepreneurial companies to raise capital. At the peak in June, the ratio ofstock market capitalization to GDP in the U.S. was about $7 trillion or 91% ofGDP. This was the highest since 1929, when the market was worth about 81% ofGDP. The stock market boom has added $2 billion to household net worth since1984. It also has permitted an extraordinary boom in new equity publicofferings and corporate fund raising through the sale of non-investment gradebonds. The number of equity I.P.O.'s was 428 during the first half of 1996compared to 470 during 1995, 599 during 1994, and a peak of 689 during 1993.These I.P.O.'s raised about $27.2 billion during the first half of 1996compared to $27.7 billion last year, $27.7 billion during 1994 and $39.2billion during 1993. The peak for I.P.O. financing during the 1980's, bycontrast, was $17.7 billion during 1986. The search for higher yields also hashelped to revitalize the so-called junk bond market. In the first half of1996, Wall Street sold 108 new non-investment grade bond offering compared to159 during 1995, 190 during 1994, and 343 during 1993. The funds raised were$20 billion during the first half of 1996, $28.8 billion during 1995, $231.5billion during 1994, and $54.4 billion during 1993. The previous peak innon-investment grade bond financing was 218 deals worth $30.5 billion during1986. The ability of small and medium sized companies to obtain so muchcapital from the stock market has helped to encourage the high growth rate ofinvestment and employment since 1993. The stock market boom has also been accompanied by a dramatic expansion of themutual fund industry and new forms of retirement savings, such as definedcontribution pension plans which could encourage an impovement in the nationalsavings rate. The mutual fund industry now has assets of over $3 trillioncompared to $4.2 trillion in the banking system and nearly one third of mutualfund assets are in long-term savings programs. There is some evidence thatdefined contribution pension plans have a more positive impact on householdsavings during periods of rising equity prices than the traditional definedbenefit pension plans. Under defined contribution plans, there is no penaltyfor households to maintain a steady flow of savings into their retirementprograms as asset prices rise whereas corporations which overfund their pensionplans penalize profits and attract corporate raiders. In 1995, the householdsavings rate in the U.S. rose despite the boom in equity prices. The uptick inthe savings rate may have resulted from the shift towards greater use ofdefined contribution pension system. The growth of defined contibution savingscould accelerate further if the White House and Congress ever agree toprivatize social security. Sixth, the U.S. economy has been a major economic beneficiary of the end of thecold war and the acceptance of liberal economic ideas by many formerlycommunist or mercantilist countries. The U.S. sends about one third of itsexports to developing countries and during the past five years these marketshave accounted for over two thirds of all export growth. In 1995, this exportgrowth slowed because of the financial crisis in Mexico and its spillovereffects on other Latin American countries. But the IMF-U.S. Treasury rescueprogram for Mexico helped to stabilize her financial system and has set thestage for a recovery this year. The ability of Mexico to avoid default alsohelped to lessen the impact of her crises on other developing countries,especially in Latin America. Finally, the general mix of macroeconomic policy in all the major industrialnations since 1992 has been supportive of non-inflationary growth. Europeangovernments have been attempting to reduce their budget deficits by trimmingtheir public spending. The counterpart to this deficit reduction has been alarge decline in the level of both short-term and long-term interest rates.Japan has been an outlier to the process of deficit reduction because of theimpact of her banking crisis on the economy. But the Bank of Japan hasnevertheless cut short-term interest rates to only 50 basis points in order tohelp prop up the financial system. The current level of interest rates inJapan is the lowest to occur in any industrial country since the GreatDepression of the 1930's. The challenge now confronting Federal Reserve policy makers is to sustain theexpansion by finding a rate of growth which is consistent with the economy'sunderlying supply side potential. There are many points of view on the levelof growth which is optimal for the economy but the Federal Reserve perceivesthat the number is about 2.0-2.5% once the economy achieves full employment.As the economy enjoyed 4.0-5.0% output growth during the second quarter and isprobably expanding at a 3.0-3.5% annual rate during the current quarter, theodds are high that there could be Federal Reserve tightening during the nextfew months to slow the economy's rate of growth. In fact, a rate hike duringlate August is very likely unless the upcoming data for employment costs showsa reversal of the uptick which became apparent during the first quarter. As inflation expectations are still under control, it is doubtful that the Fedwill raise interest rates by more than 50 basis points this year but there willbe no way to predict the peak until the economy actually slows. Anotherwildcard in the outlook is the lending policies of the credit card companies.The credit card companies have been so permissive in permitting low incomehouseholds to gain access to cards that their stock of non-performing loans hasrisen sharply. If they suddenly curtail access to cards by imposing morestringent lending quality screens, they will depress consumer spending by lowerincome Americans (who account for about 10% of the total). A policy of Federal Reserve fine tuning will not cause any sudden or abruptchanges in the economy's performance this autumn but it could produce acorrection in the equity market. In fact, the equity market has been veryturbulent during the past four weeks because of investor concern about bothmonetary policy and the economic policy risks poised by this autumn's election. Investors are concerned about monetary tightening because they fear it couldset the stage for a profit squeeze next year. With wages rising in response totight labor markets, corporations will find it more difficult to sustain theirprofit margins, especially if Fed tightening slows the economy's growth rate.In 1994, by contrast, the Fed had tightened to reduce upward pressure oncommodity prices, not wages. Rising commodity prices redistributed incomewithin the corporate sector whereas rising wages reduce the profit share ofnational income. Investor confidence also has been depressed by the extremely poor performanceof Robert Dole in the opinion polls. Wall Street has long perceived PresidentClinton to be a superior campaigner but they had expected Dole to benefit fromClinton's scandals in the "emerging market" state of Arkansas as well as hisown retirement from the Senate. With Mr. Dole still 15-20 points behind in theopinion polls, investors are becoming apprehensive about the risk of theRepublicans losing control of the Congress, not just the race for the WhiteHouse. The prospect of the Republicans losing control of the Congress is disturbing toWall Street for several reasons. First, the 1996 election poses a unique historic challenge for both parties.No Democratic president has won two consecutive elections since FranklinRoosevelt in the 1930's. The Republican Party has not controlled the Congressfor two consecutive terms since the 1920's. If the Republicans lose controlagain in 1996, it will suggest that the public is turning away from theirthemes of deficit reduction, slowing growth of entitlement spending, andpromoting lower marginal income tax rates. Secondly, there has been a profound change in the character of the DemocraticParty in the Congress as a result of recent Republican victories. TheRepublican Party now has 77 of the 125 house seats of the old southernConfederacy compared to 48 in 1992, 34 in 1972 and 6 in 1960. On the basis ofpending Democratic retirements, the Republicans may even be able to claimcontrol over two thirds of the seats in the south by next year even if theylose their overall majority. As a result of the Republican takeover of thesouth, the Democrats now depend far more upon the urban centers of thenortheast, the middle west and California for their congressional membership.This geographic shift in the composition of the parties suggests that futureDemocratic committee chairman would be far more supportive of federal spendingprograms and other forms of government intervention in the economy than boththe current Republican chairmen and past Democratic chairmen. Thirdly, if the Democrats win a majority in the House, their new speaker wouldbe Richard Gephardt. After flirting with the many "New Democratic" politicalthemes during the mid-1980's, Rep. Gephardt has devoted most of the past decadeto espousing protectionist trade policies, higher marginal income tax rates,and other forms of government intervention in the economy. As a result of the ideological polarization which has occurred in thecongressional membership of both major political parties, a Democratic victoryin this November's congressional races would probably have three immediateeffects on the economy. It would encourage investors to sell both U.S. bonds and the U.S. dollar. It would probably cause all investors to reduce their exposure to Mexico aswell as other emerging market countries which might be vulnerable tocongressional demands for more restrictive trade polices. It would probably encourage many U.S. companies to defer decisions about newinvestment and hiring until they had more visibility on how the election wouldaffect public policy in such critical areas as taxation and labor marketregulation. Ironically, such caution might cause bond yields to fall duringearly 1997, when lower investment depressed the economy, but in late 1996 theweakness of bond prices would itself help to set the stage for the economicslowdown. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020000 WT01-B13-147IA018-000196-B048-123http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/respond2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171616 text/html 13547HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:12:15 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Sep-96 04:23:38 GMTContent-length: 13364Content-type: text/html How Will Investors Respond to the U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? (continued) How Will Investors Respond to the U.S. Government's Inflation Adjusted Bond? (continued) The Treasury is also asking for debate about the structure ofthe new securities. Should it offer a zero coupon bond or a securitywhich provides current income? In the case of a bond with currentincome, should the indexation for inflation occur monthly, quarterly,or annually and how long should the lag be with the inflationrate? In Britain, there is an eight month indexation lag andit is perceived to reduce the attractiveness of index linked securities. The one issue which the Treasury has not proposed for debateis the tax treatment of the bonds. It intends to tax both thereal return and the inflation adjustment component of the newinstruments despite the fact that Britain, Canada and other Commonwealthcountries have exempted the inflation adjustment from taxation. Senior officials in the Clinton administration are aware of thetax differential with the other countries but they cannot introducea tax allowance for the inflation component of the bond returnwithout obtaining Congressional permission. As a result of theintense partisan environment in Washington following this winter'sacrimony over fiscal policy, they are reluctant to seek congressionalcooperation in adding a tax allowance. The decision to tax theinflation component of the return will greatly reduce the appealof the index linked securities for taxable investors, such ashigh income individuals, but it will not discourage demand frompension funds and other tax exempt retirement savings programs. The Treasury has not yet volunteered an opinion on the yield whichthe new index linked bonds will have to offer because it willobviously depend upon market conditions at the time of issue. At present, the UK government's index linked bond is offeringa real yield of 3.9%, the Australian and Canadian index linkedbonds offer real yields of 4.5-5.0% and New Zealand index linkeddebt offers a real yield of 5.9%. The government of the UnitedStates should be able to sell securities at a lower yield thanher Majesty's governments in London, Ottawa, Canberra and Wellington,but it is doubtful that the yield will be much below the yieldavailable on the UK securities for two reasons. First, the U.S.government wants to tax the security's inflation adjustment whereasHer Majesty's governments in other English speaking countriesdo not impose any tax. Secondly, American investors have enjoyedsuch high returns on conventional financial assets during recentyears that they will probably not be attracted to a low yieldinflation adjusted security until there is more widespread pessimismabout the outlook for inflation itself. The real yield on U.S.equities during the 20th century has averaged about 6.8% whilethe real yield during the past decade has been close to 10.2%. The real yield on U.S. bonds during the past century has averagedclose to 3.0% but real interest rates were so high during the1980's that many investors now believe they should earn a realyield on bonds of at least 4.0-6.0% excluding capital gains. Since 1992, the yields on long-term Treasury securities have fluctuatedbetween 5.5% and 8.25% while the annual CPI inflation rate hasaveraged 3.0%, 2.8% and 2.6%. The real total return on U.S. governmentbonds since 1986 has also been 5.14%. In its early stages, the new index linked security will probablyappeal to four categories of investors. First, it will be ofinterest to pension funds which want to obtain an inflation-adjustedasset which they can use for matching with long-term liabilities. Secondly, the instrument will appeal to investment contrarianswhom believe that Wall Street has become overly optimistic aboutinflation and that the move towards expansionary monetary policynow underway in most G-7 countries will produce a burst of highercommodity prices next year. Since the U.S. Treasury's indexlinked bond has the potential to be more liquid and tradable thanthe index linked bonds of other countries, it could also helpto attract capital from inflation wary investors all over theworld. Thirdly, many Wall Street firms will probably use theindex-linked bonds to create new hybrid securities offering arbitrageagainst other potential inflation hedges, such as gold, commodities,and real estate. The Treasury may also produce an instrumentwith strip features which could emerge as a popular way for tradersto play on the market's changing perceptions of inflation. WallStreet has not yet developed a nickname for the index linked bonds,but it is not difficult to imagine labels such as the "Clintonstrips" or "Rubin Zeros" becoming popular in thefinancial media. Finally, retail investment service organizationswill probalby use the index linked bonds to develop inflationadjusted annuities and other retirement oriented products. When the UK government introduced index linked bonds, it was perceivedthat the major loser in institutional asset allocation modelswould be real estate. As a result of Britain's high inflationrate after 1950, property had come to play an increasingly importantrole in the portfolio of many British pension funds and insurancecompanies. Because of the long upturn in the UK economy after1982, the index linked bonds did not prevent a significant boomin British commercial and residential real estate during the midand late 1980's. But as a result of the poor performance of Britishproperty since 1989, the odds are high that many institutionswill increase the weighting of index linked bonds at the expenseof property and other traditional inflation hedge assets in thefuture. A similar trend could occur in the U.S. once institutionsbecame more comfortable with index-linked securities. The U.S. Treasury has been debating the introduction of indexlinked bonds for many years. After the Thatcher government introducedthem in 1981, many American economists suggested that they wouldbe a useful innovation in government finance for the U.S. Treasuryas well. In the early 1980's, the interaction of large budgetdeficits, restrictive monetary policy, and financial deregulationproduced real yields on U.S. government bonds as high as 8-9%,so it was widely perceived that the Treasury would be able tosave money by introducing index linked bonds. Many economic commentatorsalso stressed that the introduction of index linked bonds woulddeny government the benefits of future inflation in reducing itsdebt servicing costs and thus remove one of the great moral hazardrisks in economic policy. But Wall Street was opposed to theintroduction of index linked bonds and Donald Regan did not wantto challenge the dealer community. He might also have been uncomfortableabout possible comparisons with the D-mark denominated securitieswhich the Treasury had briefly introduced during the Carter administrationin order to bolster investor confidence in the dollar. The Treasury probably has several motives for introducing indexlinked bonds today. First, bond yields have recently increased by almost 100 basispoints because of investor anxiety about a revival of the economyand the failure of congressional efforts to reduce the federaldeficit. The Treasury hopes that it will be able to reduce itsfunding costs by offering a security which is indexed for inflation. Secondly, the index linked bonds will provide a new yardstickfor measuring inflation expectations in the financial markets. At present, policy makers attempt to gauge inflationary psychologyby focusing on variables such as commodity prices, gold, the Australiandollar, and the slope of the yield curve but none of these indicatorsis as pure a proxy for inflation expectations as an instrumentwhich will be directly linked to the CPI, the GDP deflator, orsome comparable inflation index. Thirdly, the Treasury views the index linked bond as an instrumentwhich could be attractive to the baby boomers now accumulatingsavings for retirement through defined contribution pension funds,401-K plans, Individual Retirement Accounts, and so on. The U.S.mutual fund industry now has over $3 trillion of assets comparedto $4.2 trillion of assets in the banking system and nearly onethird of the mutual fund industry's assets are in long-term retirementsavings programs. As the baby boom generation moves into itslate 40's and 50's, it will be increasing its allocation of capitalto long-term retirement savings programs which would be a naturalmarket for an inflation indexed security. If the federal governmentever decides to privatize the social security system through thecreation of Chilean style household retirement accounts, suchsavings programs also would be a potentially important marketfor index linked bonds. At present, social security assets areinvested in short maturity government instruments with yieldswhich correlate with those in the marketplace. They provide noexplicit guarantees against inflation despite the fact that socialsecurity payments are indexed for inflation. As a result of the good performance of inflation in the U.S. economyduring recent years, the introduction of U.S. Treasury index linkeddebt will have a less dramatic impact on the investment communitythan would have been the case during the 1970's or 1980's. Butthe yield which emerges on the index linked bonds will graduallybecome an important benchmark for evaluating the portfolio returnson both traditional investment products as well as those focusedspecifically on beating inflation. What remains to be seen is whether the U.S. Treasury will actuallybe able to reduce its funding costs by introducing index linkedbonds. Cynics have already argued that the decision to offerindex linked debts is a confirmation that inflation has bottomedand that the government is accepting a liability which will proveto be quite expensive in future years. But cynicism aside, thereal problem facing the Treasury is that investors have earnedsuch high returns form both equities and conventional debt securitiesduring recent years that they may not be prepared to accept alow real yield on a taxable index linked bond until they see clearevidence of accelerating inflation and a correction in other financialasset markets. At present, there is little sign of such a sentimentshift occurring. Despite the recent uptick in oil and food prices,investors have remained remarkably complacent about the risk ofhigher inflation. As a result, the Treasury should consider hedgingits new funding strategy with other financial alternatives. Insteadof offering the public only a security indexed to the inflationrate, it should introduce new instruments indexed to both theinflation rate and the S&P 500. Once it has established amarket for both securities, the Treasury could then fine tunethe issuance of new supply to reflect changing investor perceptionsof the economic outlook. On the basis of current investor attitude,it is doubtful that the Treasury will be able to achieve significantsavings by offering instruments indexed only to the CPI. Butby offering instruments for hedging against both inflation andstock market risk, it should be able to both reduce governmentborrowing costs and create useful instruments for helping thebaby boom generation cope with the coming transition to a privatizedsocial security system. David D. Hale Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1017330 WT01-B13-148IA018-000196-B048-140http://www.kemper.com:80/lite/curious/global_economy/mutualfundboom2.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171626 text/html 8532HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:12:24 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 06-Sep-96 04:23:25 GMTContent-length: 8350Content-type: text/html Economic Implications of the Mutual Fund Boom (continued page 2) Economic Implications of the Mutual Fund Boom (continued) While low interest rates helped to ignite the mutual fund boom of the early 1990's, several other factors are now helping to sustain it. First, the industry has been steadily expanding its range of products. There are now 2211 equity funds compared to 1127 in 1990 and 471 in 1984. In the equity sector, there are now 352 aggressive growth funds, 699 general growth funds, 481 growth and income funds, 33 precious metal funds, 112 equity income funds, 367 international equity funds (excludes U.S.) and 167 global equity funds (includes U.S.). In the fixed income sector, there are now 2,544 bond funds compared to 1,235 in 1990 and 349 in 1994. There are 332 government bond funds, 99 high yield corporate bond funds, 306 long-term municipal bond funds, and hundreds of other bond funds offering different combinations of yield and risk. In the money market sector, there are 672 taxable money market funds, 158 national tax exempt money market funds, and 167 state tax exempt money market funds. Despite the proliferation of new funds, though, assets in the industry are becoming more concentrated. The top five fund management groups now account for 36% of industry assets compared to 29% in 1984. These organizations are spending heavily on marketing and thus increasing consumer awareness of new mutual fund products. Secondly, the expansion of the mutual fund industry has coincided with a dramatic expansion of U.S. stock market capitalization. In January, the market capitalization of America's 7,551 listed companies was about $6.63 trillion compared to $5 trillion in January, 1994 (6,925 companies) and $3,957 trillion in January, 1992 (5,608 companies). The ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP has risen to 87.5% compared to a previous all time high of 81.0% in 1929 and a post war peak of 79.0% in 1968. The all time trough of stock market capitalization to GDP was 16.0% in 1941 while in the post-war era it was 30.0% in 1974 and 1982. The average ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP since 1926 has been 48.0%. Rising equity prices have had a self-reinforcing impact on mutual fund demand by encouraging greater risk-taking in the household sector. Some stock market pundits regard the sharp rise in the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP as a sign of speculative overheating but evidence of serious excesses is inconclusive. The market's price/earnings ratio is only about 16-17 compared to 26 in 1991 and levels in the 15-19 range during the late 1960's, when interest rates were previously at current levels. Aside from the ratio of stock market capitalization to GDP, the two measures of equity valuation which appear to be at extreme levels are dividend yields and Tobin's Q (the ratio of stock market value to asset replacement costs). The U.S. equity market now offers a dividend yield of only 2.6% compared to a previous trough of 2.7% in 1972 and an average of 4.0% during the 1980's. The ratio of equity prices to asset replacement costs has risen to 1.47 from a previous peak of 1.08 in 1965 and an average of .56 during the 1980's. But there are four explanations for the stock market's valuation level which suggest that the U.S. equity market may not be over-extended. First, inflation expectations have been falling steadily during recent years and economic forecasters are now projecting that it will remain subdued through at least 1997. Secondly, despite low inflation, the return on U.S. corporate capital has risen above 10% during the past two years for the first time since the late 1960's. The gains in profitability have resulted from expanded productivity and thus also contributed to the low inflation evironment in the economy. Thirdly, it is difficult for traditional measures of book value and asset replacement cost to capture the earnings potential which companies have as a result of new developments in technology and investment in human capital. As U.S. firms dominate many high technology sectors and technology has been an important market theme since 1994, book value has been a less dominant criteria for investment decision making. Finally, the end of the cold war has created a global market economy with 6 billion people compared to the 1.5 billion living in market oriented economies before 1989. In fact, if we add the foreign sales of U.S. multinational firms to GDP in order to compute a ratio of stock market capitalization to American controlled output, the ratio of stock market capitalization to output drops from 87.5% to 75%. American firms now have $1.5 trillion of foreign sales excluding exports and this number should expand rapidly as they diversify into new high growth developing countries. Thirdly, the mutual fund industry is benefiting from the high growth of retirement oriented savings products, such as Individual Retirement Accounts, 401-K plans, and various forms of defined contribution pension plans. In 1994, such retirement savings accounted for $716 billion of the industry's $2.1 trillion of assets. IRA programs had $362 billion of assets while defined contribution pension plans had $236 billion of assets. As a growing number of companies are shifting from defined benefit pension plans to defined contribution plans, the retirement savings held in mutual funds should expand at a steady rate in the future. In the late 1970's, Peter Drucker had produced a book contending that the U.S. was evolving towards a pension fund form of socialism, in which retirement plans would own most of the U.S. industry and alter worker attitudes towards business. But this argument was misfocused because the defined benefit plans which prevailed in that period offered the workers guaranteed returns, not the right to choose between a variety of funds with potentially divergent returns. Today, retirement plans are continuing to expand their ownership of the stock market but they are not producing a passive form of pension fund socialism. The U.S. is instead embarking upon an unprecedented experiment in the democratization of bond and equity ownership through a mixture of mutual funds, defined contribution pension plans, and direct ownership of securities. The New York Stock Exchange recently published a study estimating that 51.3 million Americans now own shares directly or through retirement savings programs compared to 42.9 million in 1989, 20 million in 1965 and 6 million during the early 1950's. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1013370 WT01-B13-149IA018-000196-B048-245http://www.kemper.com:80/about/intheprime/intheprime.html 198.152.185.42 19970106171737 text/html 7499HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:13:38 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 08-Nov-96 23:24:59 GMTContent-length: 7317Content-type: text/html  In the Prime: Show Topics A new WETA series underwritten by Kemper Funds management According to the National Council on Aging, someone will turn 50 every 7.5 seconds from now until 2014. But what does it mean to be a mid-lifer? What are the options? The possibilities? The realities? Mid-life is a time of dramatic change. Today's mid-life generation is uniquely positioned to experience this time as no generation has before -- they are healthier than their parents were; they have more choices; and they will live longer. In the Prime explores being in the prime of life today. Part of a multimedia project from WETA, Washington, D.C., In the Prime is a 26-part, weekly, half-hour television series that can be seen on public television stations nationwide (check local listings). Hosted by veteran journalist Deborah Potter, In the Prime presents personal profiles, commentaries, and studio discussions with experts to address issues such as love, career, family, money, retirement, responsibility, mortality, and the many approaches to a physically and spiritually healthy life. The very idea of mid-life is an evolving one. Since 1900, the average life expectancy has grown more than it had in the previous 2,000 years, according to Dr. Robert Butler of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City. Not so very long ago, people could well expect to die by the age of 50. Today retirement age is creeping upward. Now instead of retiring at 65, some people are continuing to work; others have set a much earlier retirement goal and leave the work world at 50 or 55 to pursue a dream -- from sailing around the world to returning to school, to moving to a rural setting from a city. "Today the mentality of being 50 is more like being 40 was years ago," says Phylis Geller, executive producer of the series, and senior vice president of cultural programming and new media for WETA, Washington, D.C. "It's a whole new environment with so many exciting options. In the Prime is a sort of road map that will present all of the avenues for today's mid-lifers." In the Prime introduces viewers to some of the people who have chosen to see the second half of their lives in terms of freedom and opportunity, rather than resignation and regret. Together with guests as varied as comedian Tom Smothers, Sydney Biddle Barrows (the "Mayflower Madam"), poet Judith Viorst, financial adviser John McIntyre, The New Yorker writer Brendan Gill, restaurateur Nora Pouillon, feminist author Letty Cottin Pogrebin, spiritual philosopher Deepak Chopra, and many others, Potter reviews the life choices associated with being over 45. "What people are pursuing at mid-life is different from what they pursued in their youth. They often begin to look inward and sense that it's time to shift their focus to more fundamental things," says senior producer Phil O'Connor. The series reviews how people assess themselves as they approach mid-life; how they evaluate where they are in terms of their early expectations and how they see their future; how they approach romantic relationships, both old and new; and how they look at nonretirement, divorce, creativity, and work. In the Prime looks at the possibilities for mid-lifers in the current climate of corporate America, at the capacity to learn after a certain age, and at facing serious illness and the alternative treatments to traditional Western medicine, and explores what it means to be a true adult. Host Deborah Potter has more than 20 years of experience in broadcast journalism. She served as the Washington correspondent for CNN from 1991 to 1994, and was with CBS News for 13 years as White House, State Department, and congressional correspondent. The television series is part of a multimedia project that includes print, online, and video components. In the Prime is a production of WETA, Washington, D.C., with funding provided by Kemper Funds. Executive producer is Phylis Geller; Phil O'Connor is senior producer. Associate producers are Anna Chen and Janice Holland. WETA, Washington, D.C., is the third largest producer of programs for public television, including the award-winning series The Civil War, Baseball, In Performance at the White House, and The Kennedy Center Presents. Other cultural programming series debuting this fall include The West and National Geographic's Inside the White House. Sharon Percy Rockefeller is president and CEO of WETA. In the Prime weekly show topics Where and when you can find In the Prime in your area Videotapes Available At A Discount WETA's In the Prime Web site © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022610-A WT01-B13-150IA018-000197-B001-177http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/inflation_tamed.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172218 text/html 5385HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:18:15 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:01 GMTContent-length: 5203Content-type: text/html Inflation: Tamed! Is it true? Can it be possible that inflation - the beast that once intimidated us all - has been tamed? Citing persistently low levels of inflation even during recent strong economic growth, many economists including Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Chief Economist John Silvia believe that the Federal Reserve Board has largely succeeded in controlling inflation. If it's true that the lion will roar no more (or at least for the foreseeable future), there may be some issues that you need to rethink. At its highest in the last 45 years, consumer price inflation was 14.6 percent in March 1980. You would have needed almost 15 percent just to have forward motion in either the return on your investments or in a salary increase. Now, with inflation averaging about 3.5 percent in the last five years, you don't need double-digits to make the kind of progress that you did during high inflation periods. True, the numbers are punier, but low inflation may mean that you can keep more of what you earn. And that may be just about it. Residential real estate's ability to keep up with what was then the high rate of inflation in the 1970s and 1980s provided many homeowners with a nest egg they could live in. But the absence of inflation in today's environment begs the question: If housing keeps pace with inflation and inflation has been de-fanged to about 3 percent, how will tomorrow's nest eggs be built? According to Silvia, many Americans are substituting financial assets for real estate assets as their prime way of building net worth. Rather than being counseled to stretch themselves to buy a home today, younger Americans are now being urged to invest. But savvy shoppers are learning to postpone their buying as long as they can. That's a departure from the 1970s and 1980s when Americans bought as soon as they could rather than run the risk of paying higher prices later. Silvia says the low inflation environment has made it possible for discounters like Wal-Mart and Home Depot to exist. "You have to have stable prices in order for someone to come in and make a business out of discounting those prices," he says. Borrowing makes some sense when you can borrow today and pay your creditor with dollars that will be worth less tomorrow. That's not true in 1996, especially if your borrowing takes the form of charging to a 19.8 percent credit card account at a time when inflation is averaging 3 percent. You're providing your lender with a very high, very real return of approximately 16.8 percent. While it may seem to be under control for now, inflation continues to represent a risk for investors. Even if the U.S. economy continued in its current 3 percent inflation bliss for the next 20 years, the purchasing power of $1 would be reduced to 55 cents by 2016. That's why investment experts continue to recommend investments that have historically outpaced inflation. This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014300 WT01-B13-151IA018-000197-B001-195http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/understand_consumer.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172229 text/html 6216HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:18:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:21 GMTContent-length: 6034Content-type: text/html Understanding Consumer Psychology By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Psychology is a key consideration to financial market and economicanalysis. In fact, psychology is a required course for undergraduatestudents in economics. Consumer purchases of homes and autos rise whenhouseholds feel good about their jobs and their future. In contrast,when consumers are uncertain, auto and home sales weaken. Psychology isalso key to business spending. Survey results on business optimism showthat firms buy more equipment and hire more workers when theirconfidence is fairly high that the economy will continue to grow. One psychological indicator, the monthly University of Michigan'sConsumer Sentiment Index, is considered a leading indicator of thedirection of the economy. When the consumer is reported to be"cautious," for example, the economy may be headed for a slowdown. Forbusiness sentiment, surveys by organizations such as the ConferenceBoard offer a reliable view of hiring plans and capital spendingintentions. Consumer psychology, however, can be tricky. Purchasing in the UnitedStates does not rise and fall solely with the spirits of the Americanconsumers. Because Americans are conditioned to watch for sales, buyingactivity can often be skewed by price. As an example, let's consider the advertising and promotion techniquesused by auto manufacturers. For years, the U.S. auto industry sold autosby offering rebates. What happened? Consumers caught on quickly andstarted to insist on rebates before they would buy. Auto companies werethen forced to use more frequent rebates and broaden the availability ofautos sold with rebates. Today, the U.S. economy has a similar problem. For several years now,the inflation rate has fallen steadily. Consumers have come to expectit. As a result, housing markets have become dependent on prospectivehome buyers waiting for a decline in mortgage rates. Across the board,consumers will tend to postpone purchases because they expect inflationto fall, not rise. Sales of consumer durables such as furniture, carpetsand even autos all have seen the impact of this changed consumerpsychology. How different this is from the buy-now (before prices riseagain) psychology of the 1970s! But consumers cannot help but react to economic news. In the second half of 1995, the economy slowed down. Employment growth, inparticular, fell off. Seeing this, consumers became less confident abouttheir jobs - which, in turn, set off a chain reaction. Reducedconfidence in job security prompted some consumers to reduce spending.Business optimism also turned cautious as economic weakness in Mexicoand the consumer spending slowdown reduced profit and salesexpectations. Job security, not wages, became a key focus of households. As the country moves through this stage of the economic cycle, anotherfactor is influencing consumer psychology today. Consumer expectationstoward retirement also have changed, as most Americans expect that theywill have to provide more and more of their own retirement income. Lessfinancial support will come via Social Security benefits. To be prepared, U.S. householdshave started to raise their savings rates in recent years. This changehas shifted consumer budgets toward more investment in financial assets(for example: mutual funds, equities, bank deposits, life insurance) andless spending on real assets (consumer goods). Where consumer confidence goes from here depends upon employmentprospects and interest rate trends. For as long as employment growth ispositive, consumer psychology will probably remain positive butcautious. Positive consumer sentiment should suggest continued economicgrowth. The pace of growth, however, is likely to reflect Americans'new-found caution on job security. Dr. John Silvia Biography This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009660 WT01-B13-152IA018-000197-B001-209http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/gamefedfund.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172236 text/html 5143HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:18:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:35 GMTContent-length: 4961Content-type: text/html The Game Of Federal Funding In a roundabout way, when you invest in a U.S. government mutual fund,you participate in funding the operations of the U.S. government.Securities that government mutual funds invest in include securitiesissued by the U.S. Treasury, its agencies and instrumentalities. "Think of the federal government as a corporation, and the U.S. Treasuryas the corporation's treasurer," says Kemper Portfolio Strategist RobSchumacher. "The government has business to do (projects to spend moneyon such as defense, social programs and so on) and the treasurer is incharge of making sure that the necessary resources are available." How much money does the country need to run? In 1996, the budgetproposal is for $1.6 trillion. Payroll and corporate taxes provide someofwhat's needed. But because the country's spending has exceeded itsrevenueevery year since 1969, the government borrows heavily to pay for all ofwhat it wants to do. In fact, the U.S. government securities market isthe largest securities market in the world. In a typical week (we'll usethe week starting February 5, 1996 as an example), the U.S. Treasurywillborrow more than $19 billion to meet its maturing obligations andprojected cash needs. Although opinions differ about the appropriateness of Uncle Sam'sspending habits, its system for raising funds is impressive. (AsSchumacher says, "When you owe people several trillion dollars, you haveto have a very efficient method of making sure that you can meet yourobligations.") Unlike what other borrowers might encounter, the government has noproblem raising funds because the securities the U.S. Treasury issuesare direct obligations of the U.S. Treasury - they're backed by the"full faith and credit" of the United States. Mutual funds, institutionsand individuals are among the groups willing to invest in thesesecurities. (Of course, mutual fund shares are not guaranteed.) In order to meet its financing requirements (which include makinginterest payments due on its debt), the Treasury auctions securities ofvarying maturities. Most of the funds are borrowed for a short time, and13-week and26-week Treasury bills are auctioned every week. Treasuries of longermaturities are auctioned less frequently. Perhaps the greatest variable in the process is the price that thegovernment will have to pay for funds it borrows. This "price" isinfluenced by interest rates as set by the Federal Reserve Board and theopen market. And, Schumacher says, it's in the monitoring of interest rates where theprofessional management of a government income mutual fund can providevalue to fund shareholders. "What are interest rates going to do? Whatmaturity Treasury securities should the fund be investing in for maximumperformance?" According to Schumacher, "These are the questions theprofessional manager deals with every day." To obtain a Kemper fixed-income funds prospectus, please callShareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 or requestone now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009680 WT01-B13-153IA018-000197-B001-221http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/longshortrates.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172245 text/html 5806HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:18:46 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:08 GMTContent-length: 5624Content-type: text/html The Long And Short Of Interest Rates By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Interest rates come in several different sizes: short, intermediate andlong. They also have different "flavors": the rates that are availableon U.S. Treasury, corporate and municipal securities. Finally, ratesreflect the push and pull of different forces: growth, inflation,deficits and currency fluctuations. The behavior of interest rates is of more than academic interest.Investors in money market funds and fixed-income funds, for example, owndifferent types of securities with different maturities. Whether short-and long-term interest rates move together or apart will determine therelative performance of these funds. First, let's take a look at the various sizes of interest rates.Short-term rates refer to rates on instruments such as bank loans orU.S. Treasury bills that are fewer than two years in maturity. Rates oninstruments between two and seven years in maturity are consideredintermediate term; long-term rates are those paid on instruments thatare seven or more years to maturity. Securities with a longer timeexposure have a greater possibility of inflation, recession or default. Interest rates also vary by the flavor of the security. Because they areoften tax-exempt, municipal securities (which are issued by state andlocal governments and agencies) tend to offer lower interest rates thangovernment or corporate securities. Corporate securities are consideredmore risky than governments and therefore interest rates on corporatestend to be higher than those on governments. In 1994, a fascinating year for watching interest rates, we saw a divergence in the performance of both different sizeand flavor interest rates. Short rates such as the prime rate charged onbank loans responded as the Federal Reserve Board steadily increased therates it charged on the overnight lending of reserves. When the FederalReserve raises the rates it charges banks, that affects the returns aninvestor can expect on securities. Long rates rose along with short rates as long-term (bond) investorsbelieved that the Fed was raising short rates in response toexpectations of stronger growth and higher inflation. But while shortand intermediate rates tend to be driven by Fed policy, long rates reactto an array of investor expectations - expectations of currencystability and fiscal deficits as well as of economic growth andinflation. The difference in factors that determine rates was clearly evident bythe fourth quarter of 1994. The Fed was still raising short rates. But,by then, long rates had stabilized and even started to decline. Why? Themarket expectations that influence long rates had changed. Financialmarkets started to expect that economic growth would slow and inflationwould not rise. Short rates, on the other hand, continued to react tothe Fed's actions. Interest rate flavors acted differently as well. Rates on corporatesecurities, in particular, did not rise as much Treasuries. Corporatecredit quality was expected to improve as the economy looked strongerand therefore the traditional difference between what an investor mightearn on a corporate versus a Treasury security narrowed even as interestrates, in general, rose. Municipal rates, meanwhile, reflected therelative supply/demand of their own market more than the overall shiftof economic expectations. Dr. John Silvia Biography This article was excerpted from the Spring/Summer 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009690 WT01-B13-154IA018-000197-B001-231http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/risks_investing.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172257 text/html 5936HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:18:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:56 GMTContent-length: 5754Content-type: text/html The Risks Of Investing By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. The daily news is filled with economic reports that could conceivablyaffect the value of your investments. What should keep you up at nightand what can you afford to ignore? We'll attempt to turn the lights onsome of the risks that could threaten your sleep. Risks are inherent in all our activities. As individuals and asinvestors, we must understand those risks particularly as they apply toan economic forecast. At Kemper, our outlook is for steady economicgrowth without a rapid rise in inflation. But what are the risks associated with this forecast? How can werecognize the risks? If risks become realities, what are we likely tosee? Three risks to our forecast are associated with inflationexpectations, the dollar and consumer confidence. Inflation expectations are a key factor influencing the trend inlong-term interest rates. Recent data suggest that Americans expectinflation to rise at a rate of three percent or so. The risk is thatinflation could rise by more than that. You've probably heard or read the news that prices on commodities,particularly those used in the production of goods for consumers andbusinesses, have risen recently. Prices paid and prices received bypurchasing managers have been higher in recent months. Energy prices arealso up. If these commodity prices are perceived as becoming widespread or beginto filter into consumer products, then inflation expectations may rise.Investors can be expected to start to factor higher inflation into theirpricing and they'll require higher interest rates to compensate for therisk of such higher inflation. If that happens, interest rates couldrise higher than our forecast expects and this could reduce economicgrowth more than expected. Another recent economic newsmaker has been the value of the U.S. dollar.For some time, financial markets were concerned about the dollar'sdepreciation against the Japanese yen. Dollar fluctuations are normal. Each year the dollar appreciates againstsome currencies while it depreciates against other currencies. What happens if the dollar continues to depreciate against the samecurrency? This depreciation would tend to discourageforeign investors from buying U.S. securities - particularly U.S.Treasury bonds. When foreigners think the dollar is weak, they expect tobe compensated with higher interest rates. When higher rates have to bepaid and the U.S. Treasury's cost of borrowing rises, interest ratesrise across the board. This hinders both U.S. economic growth and investmentperformance. Consumer confidence is a third risk. From 1991 through mid-1994, consumerconfidence rose in an environment of improving job growth and lowerinterest rates. Spending by consumers represents approximately two-thirds of totalspending in the economy - so you can see that consumer confidence isimportant. But when interest rates are rising and job growth is slowing,there is a risk that consumer confidence will falter. A decline inconsumer confidence, then, has the result of slowing growth further. Over the next year, these three risks - inflation, the dollar andconsumer confidence - do not appear sufficiently high to threatencontinued economic growth. Consider them benign boogiemen. But the threat they represent can change over time and, of course,non-economic risks (such as politics and war) can make them evenscarier. Because the risk profile of the economy for 1996 remains lowand the probability of continued economic growth high, we think that nowis a good time for you to get your sleep. Dr. John Silvia Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009700 WT01-B13-155IA018-000197-B001-243http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/healthcd.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172305 text/html 6231HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:52 GMTContent-length: 6049Content-type: text/html Health Care Debate Will Shift the Burden By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Concerns about the availability and financing of health care in the future are the primary focus of government and household planning today. For investors, the health care debate provides added emphasis to the need for retirement planning and the need for investment vehicles to provide for health care expenditures associated with retirement funding. Let's review the two different sets of pressures that are forcing today's debate on the future of health care. Budget deficit reduction at the federal government level is the first pressure. The task of reducing federal deficits to somewhere close to balanced over the next seven years requires the government to slow down the growth of its spending on health care. Programs such as Medicare will still grow but the rate of growth must be reduced. Although the elderly will be responsible for paying higher Medicare premiums, their responsibility will equal less than one-third of their Medicare bill, with the other two-thirds of the bill continuing to be paid for by taxpayers. Reducing the pace of federal spending on health care, then, means that more of the burden of retirees' health care must be borne by retirees themselves. Higher co-payments and alternative ways of delivering health care are among the solutions to be considered. Demographics are the second pressure forcing the debate. The baby boom will soon start its inevitable march into retirement, and this will balloon the demand for Medicare services. Certainly the federal taxpayer cannot support the baby boom at the same level of retiree health benefits as is being done for the current generation of retirees. Future retirees will have to provide more for their own health care. The United States is not alone in insisting on this. The retirement financing burden has already forced change in pension programs in Germany and Sweden. As in other countries, the political transition can be expected to meet resistance, however. The elderly, a strong voting bloc in the U.S., will continue to fight for the preservation of retiree benefits, and there are many politicians who are willing to play along in the interest of gathering votes. How will health care be funded? Retirement planning has been developed to meet funding needs. As a result of federal deficit reduction, the present Baby Boomers and Generation Xers need to increase the amount they invest from their current income to provide for a retirement that assumes a greater responsibility for their health care costs. Knowing that their retirement has to provide for everyday living and health care expenses, will workers today try to set aside incrementally more for the future? Yes, at least that's my expectation. Proposals for expanded Individual Retirement Account (IRA) and 401(k) programs also reflect this thinking. The rational individual, if he or she wants to enjoy the retirement standard of living that others enjoyed before cuts in federal benefits, would be expected to increase investment now. Private funding by individuals must make up the shortfall in public funding for retirement. Without increased private funding, the quality of the retirement experience will indeed diminish for future retirees. Present retirees benefited from an unusual coincidence of generous government benefits, demographics and unexpected health care improvements. Future generations will not likely benefit from at least the first two. However, we are starting to see some innovations designed with tomorrow's retiree in mind. Through the development of new payment systems and pricing policies, health care providers such as hospitals, insurers and doctors also have started to alter their means of helping patients finance their health care. Dr. John Silvia Biography This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1996 KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014310 WT01-B13-156IA018-000197-B001-256http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/onlyinam.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172313 text/html 5952HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:14 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:36 GMTContent-length: 5770Content-type: text/html Only in America: Income Mobility By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Mobility is a characteristic of American life. We love our cars. We "go away" to college. We change homes and careers several times in our lives. However, it is income and class mobility that truly differentiates the American way of life from the rest of the globe. America was settled by people from all lands who sought a "better life" for their subsequent generations relative to the life that was possible in the "old country." Our parents ingrained in us that we could "do better." Official U.S. Treasury data* illustrate the income mobility of Americans. A recent study divided households into five groups (quintiles). One conclusion from the study: In the three lowest quintiles, one-third or fewer of the taxpayers in the quintile at the beginning of the sample period were in the same quintile at the end of the sample period just nine years later. Two out of three taxpayers had improved their earnings sufficiently to move out of the bottom earning quintile. Income mobility can be dramatic. More taxpayers in the bottom quintile moved to the top quintile over the nine-year period than stayed in the bottom quintile. Only 14 percent of households in the lowest quintile at the start of this study remained in the lowest quintile 9 years later at the end of the study. One quarter (25 percent) entered the middle class (the third percentile). That's in just nine years! Think about the mobility between generations! What's the explanation for this mobility? Education and freedom, two aspects of American life that we take for granted, are really quite unique in the world and are key to mobility. Rigid social societies, such as Mexico or Iran, have seen violent revolutions as a consequence of angry people who felt trapped in their position. In the United States, access to high school education and the many levels of college education offer people of all ages the opportunity to gather skills necessary for a better job (i.e., income mobility). Freedom allows people, once they have skills, to apply anywhere they want for a job that uses their skills. In some countries, individuals can make money but still not move out of their class. This is true of Indian and Chinese entrepreneurs in southeast Asia and Africa. In the U.S., where people can relocate, change jobs within a career and change careers, labor mobility reduces the average cost of labor and the average level of unemployment. Education and freedom are unique to the American experience because it is so accessible to everyone -- especially because it has the ability to make the greatest impact on those in the lowest quintile. My own career is an example of this. My father never went to high school, my mother graduated from high school but never thought of college. But because I had the advantage of my parents' savings, a scholarship and federal loans, I was able to go to college and beyond that to get my doctorate in economics. Then I exercised my freedom to make a choice by applying for and getting a faculty position at Indiana University. Then I was free again to move to Chicago and work at Kemper. With Kemper, shareholders are attempting to provide mutual funds to provide for the American dream of income mobility for their children. It's our job -- and one we take seriously -- to help them realize that dream. *Household Income Mobility During the 1980s: A Statistical Assessment Based on Tax Return Data, Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1992. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. Dr. John Silvia Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014320 WT01-B13-157IA018-000197-B001-267http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/whatsosp.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172320 text/html 3935HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:47 GMTContent-length: 3753Content-type: text/html What's So Special About 6 Percent? To market-watchers, plenty. A 6 percent yield on a 30-year Treasury bond is a benchmark for the economy. A higher cost of borrowing (when yields exceed 6 percent) limits the possibilities for corporations and consumers. Long-term yields have been as high as 8 percent in 1990, 1992 and 1994 -- which experts do not like to see. Why should Treasuries, which represent insignificant risk, yield 8 percent when the historical average return on stocks* -- an inherently riskier investment -- is 10 percent? So, what's so special about 6 percent? Why not 5 percent or even less? Naturally, the lower the interest rates, the better for the economy. However, 6 percent is about as low as 30-year bonds have gone since they were introduced in 1977. (The yield was at its lowest, 5.78 percent, in the fall of 1993.) John Silvia, chief economist for Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., is among those who look for the 6 percent barrier to be broken over the long run. "Interest rates seem low to us because of recent history," Silvia says. "But when you consider our real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of approximately 2.5 percent and our approximate 3 percent inflation rate, rates ought to be about 5.5 or 5.75 percent. That's assuming that the Federal Reserve maintains its focus on reducing inflation over time and that the federal budget deficit is eliminated over the next several years. Investors earning above 6 percent are getting a fair return given these possible outcomes." *From 1928 through 1995, the Standard & Poor's 500 returned an annual rate of 10.14 percent, according to Towers Data Systems. The S&P 500 is an unmanaged index that's generally considered representative of the U.S. stock market. To obtain a copy of this information, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014330 WT01-B13-158IA018-000197-B001-276http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/presidents.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172330 text/html 2633HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:30 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 20:48:25 GMTContent-length: 2449Content-type: text/html Presidents And The Stock Market Past performance is no guarantee of future results -- but history can provide yet another way to consider the presidential prospects. In the table below, we've used Towers Data Systems data to review how the stock market performed in each presidential term since 1929. The Standard & Poor's 500, an unmanaged index of common stocks that's generally considered representative of the U.S. stock market, served as our proxy for stock market performance. This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014350 WT01-B13-159IA018-000197-B001-293http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/howmarkets.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172340 text/html 11156HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:40 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 07-Dec-96 00:23:54 GMTContent-length: 10971Content-type: text/html How The Markets React 8:30 A.M. EASTERN STANDARD TIME, THE FIRST FRIDAY OF EVERY MONTH: The Bureau of Labor Statistics, a division of the Labor Department, releases an employment situation report that regularly influences the behavior of both the bond and equity markets in which mutual funds invest. Using the data included in the report -- the unemployment rate, the size of nonfarm payrolls, average workweek and hourly earnings -- investors, economists and others make additional estimates about other aspects of the economy for which data are not yet available. These computations take place almost instantaneously and, within 15 minutes of the release of the report, the bond markets react to what the "news" is saying abut the economy. By the time the stock markets open, within the hour, equity investors' reaction also will be apparent. With the help of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Chief Economist John Silvia, we've prepared a quick review of how information can be derived from the employment conditions report. December 6, 1996: THE EMPLOYMENT SITUATION FOR NOVEMBER 1996 For more information about any one of these economic measures, just click on the gear or read below. Unemployment rate Economists believe that the unemployment rate associated with "full employment" is 6 percent -- when fewer than 6 percent of the population is unemployed, wages tend to rise as employers bid for scarce labor. November 1996 level: 5.4% Change: +0.2 The number of people employed The number of people employed is a measure of the economy's strength. November 1996 level: 120 million Change: +118,000 Consumer confidence (measured by the University of Michigan index) Confidence tends to rise and fall with employment news. November 1996 level: 98.9 Change: +2.4% Where people are employed Manufacturing November 1996 level: 18.2 million Change: +9,000 Construction November 1996 level: 5.4 million Change: +14,000 Services November 1996 level: 96.0 million Change: +96,000 Government November 1996 level: 19.5 million Change: -22,000 Detail on the sectors that are hiring is especially important to the stock markets. Tax revenue The employment level will affect the amount of revenue to be generated by income taxes. November 1996 level: $918 billion Change: +0.6% (estimate) Hours worked An increase in the average hours worked in a week can indicate a business upturn -- employers usually extend the number of hours their current employees work as a prelude to hiring more. November 1996 level: 34.5 / week Change: +0.2% Industrial production (measured by an index) Actual production figures are available later in the month, but early insights can be gained by reviewing the number of hours worked in the manufacturing sector. November 1996 level: 1.23 Change: +0.4% (estimate) Capacity utilization This rate, the subject of its own report later in the month, seeks to measure the operating capacity of factories. At full capacity -- generally believed to be around 82 percent -- inflation has historically tended to rise. November 1996 level: 83.4% Change: +0.2% (estimate) How much workers are paid With the total number of workers known, the next logical question is "How much are they being paid?" -- and do these hourly earnings represent an increase or a decrease? November 1996 level: $413.66 / week Change: +$5.49 Personal income The level of earnings will determine the amount that people have to spend on necessities and luxuries. November 1996 level: $6.6 trillion Change: +0.4% (estimate) Consumer spending Consumer spending accounts for two-thirds of the United States' gross domestic product (GDP). Once employment totals are known, market observers can make some educated guesses about income and consumption. November 1996 level: $5.6 trillion Change: +0.5% (estimate) Retail sales Strong retail sales, including auto sales, can contribute to corporate profits, which pleases stock market investors. Bond market investors worry that strong sales can lead to an inflationary economy. November 1996 level: $214 billion Change: +0.4% (estimate) Housing starts When growth is anticipated, builders make more plans. Economic weakness or higher interest rates discourage building plans. November 1996 level: 1.46 million Change: -2.0% (estimate) Gross domestic product (GDP) Market observers track the change in gross domestic product (GDP) -- the dollar value of all goods and services produced in the United States -- as a measure of how fast the economy is growing. The Federal Reserve Board says it considers 2.5 percent to 3 percent an acceptable, noninflationary growth rate. Official GDP numbers are released and revised continually, but the employment conditions report makes it possible to do a quick calculation: Multiplying the number of people working X the average hours worked has produced a rough GDP that has historically been quite close to the GDP data released weeks and months later. September 1996 level: $6.9 trillion Change: +2.0% 3rd quarter (estimate) Federal Reserve Board policy Based on the rough GDP and inflation data that's derived, the Federal Reserve Board will not raise rates. Bond markets Because the value of fixed-income investments can be jeopardized by inflation, bond markets will be mixed in their reaction to signs of a slowing economy and rising inflation. Silvia's analysis of the December 6, 1996, report: Bond rates will stay fairly steady in a narrow trading range. Stock markets Equity investors are encouraged by news that can support corporate profits. But while they favor a healthy economy, they, too, worry about inflation's potential to erode value. Silvia's analysis of the December 6, 1996, report: The report of large wage increases along with slower but still positive growth suggests a more cautious outlook on profits. Interest rates The current short-term federal funds rate is 5.26%. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014340-F WT01-B13-160IA018-000197-B001-302http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/market_indices.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172349 text/html 5874HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:49 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 11-Dec-96 20:36:56 GMTContent-length: 5689Content-type: text/html Market Indices When assessing the return of your mutual fund investment, you mustconsider it in context of the markets in which the fund strives toperform. The most widely quoted measure of the performance of the financialmarkets is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Unfortunately, "the Dow"may provide very little insight on how your mutual fund investment isprogressing. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is a group of 30 blue chipindustrial stocks. More useful to you will be the performance of the particular index -- anunmanaged group of similar investments -- that your mutual fund uses asa benchmark for its investment objective. Comparing your fund against its index can be enlightening. Note, though,that a fund's return will depend upon its specific investments. Tounderstand why your fund outperformed or underperformed its index, itmay also be helpful to compare the composition of your fund's portfoliowith the composition of the index over the same period of time.Significant performance differences may arise if your fund and the indexwere invested in different companies and industries throughout theperiod. Other factors, such as cash flows in and out of a fund and feesand expenses, may affect the relationship between fund performance andthe index. The Consumer Price Index is generally considered representative of thelevel of inflation. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is an unmanaged index that's generallyconsidered representative of the U.S. stock market. The FT/S&P Actuaries World Index is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies. The Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index is representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backed securities. The Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index is an unmanagedindex that's generally considered representative of intermediate andlong-term government and investment grade corporate debt securities. The Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index includes approximately 15,000 bonds. The Morgan Stanley Capital International EAFE is an unmanaged indexthat's generally considered representative of international markets. The Russell 1000 Growth Index is comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth and represents the universe of stocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select. The Russell 2000 Growth Index is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2,000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell 3000 Index. The Standard & Poor's 500 Stock Index is an unmanaged index that'sgenerally considered representative of the U.S. stock market. The Salomon Brothers World Government Bond Index is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries. The Wilshire Large Company Growth Index is an unmanaged index that'sgenerally considered representative of the market for stocks of largergrowth companies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return onequity and dividend payout). View the returns of each index for the last 10 years and year-to-date (through the most recent quarter end). © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010180 WT01-B13-161IA018-000197-B001-316http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/prepared_volatility.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172358 text/html 6498HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:19:59 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 21-Aug-96 14:22:06 GMTContent-length: 6313Content-type: text/html Are You Prepared For More Volatility? If investing in the stock market involved one single, uninterruptedclimb in prices, there would be no risk involved. But stock pricescannot be counted on to rise and certainly not in an orderly way. Theysurge and they fall. The range that the stock market covers in a given year - the differencebetween its high and low for the year - is a measure of a year'svolatility. Over the 1978 to 1994 period, "average" volatility of theStandard & Poor's 500 was about 25 percent, according to an analysis byKemper's Quantitative Research Department. (The S&P 500 is an unmanagedindex that's generally considered representative of the domestic stockmarket.) Yet since 1992, markets have been much less volatile. For example, volatility in the stock market, as represented bythe Dow Jones Industrial Average, was at a 95-year low in 1995, according to Barron's. What's the significance of this? Kemper Portfolio Strategist Tom Regnerworries that such low levels of volatility have given investors -especially new investors - unrealistic expectations about the degrees towhich their equity investments can fluctuate. Because the market hashistorically been more volatile than its most recent performance, youmay want to give some thought to its potential for renewed volatilityand the impact volatility could have on your investments. The following are a few suggestions on how you might prepare forheightened stock market volatility: You could diversify. When you're concerned about your exposure in onemarket, exposure to another market can help reduce the impact ofvolatility. Instead of subjecting 100 percent of your portfolio towhat's going on in one market, a portion of your portfolio will movewith influences of a separate market. Two other broad markets to invest in are the fixed-income markets andinternational markets. Obviously, both represent their own risks andpotential rewards - and these markets can be volatile at times, as well.For instance, the international markets present risks associated withcurrency exchange rate fluctuations. However, you can help reduce theriskiness of your investment strategy when you reduce your dependency ona single market. You could try to avoid volatility by moving some or a portion of yourinvestment in the stock market into a cash-type investment that seeks tomaintain the stability of the principal. A money market fund, forexample, is designed for investors who want to avoid the fluctuationsthat are typical of the stock and bond markets. Although there can be noassurance that it will, a money market fund seeks to maintain a stablenet asset value of $1.00 per share. Money market funds are neitherinsured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government. Moving into such an investment can help limit your exposure to thedownside of volatility. The trade-off, however, is that you also will beremoved from benefiting when and if the market's volatility turns in theinvestor's favor. You could welcome volatility. Volatility has the potential to rewardthe regular investor. Investors who prearrange to invest a fixed amountinto a mutual fund every month - regardless of the fund's share price -can benefit from dips. How? When prices are low, your fixed investmentwill buy more shares than could be bought when prices are high. Here'sthe catch, however: The assumption is that the share price will bounceback up and that you will still be invested if it does. A program of regular investment cannot assure a profit or protectagainst a loss in a declining market. Since this strategy (called dollarcost averaging) involves continuing contributions regardless offluctuating share values, you'll need to consider your financial abilityto continue the program through periods of low price levels. For moreinformation on establishing a Kemper automatic investment program, please call Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus, please call Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 or request one now. Theprospectus contains more complete information including management feesand expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. This article was excerpted from the Spring/Summer 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009820 WT01-B13-162IA018-000197-B002-3http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/forecast.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172407 text/html 6409HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:20:08 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 27-Aug-96 22:46:05 GMTContent-length: 6226Content-type: text/html A Weather Forecast For International Markets At a time when many investors are looking overseas for their investment returns, some markets offer more promising weather than others. Dennis Ferro, director of international equities for Zurich Investment Management Limited, provides the following forecast for three markets likely to enjoy favorable conditions and three markets that you might want to avoid. (And, at all times, you'll want to follow this advisory: investment in international securities presents special risk considerations including exchange rates, government regulations and differences in liquidity. Be sure to talk to your financial representative for what's appropriate for your circumstances.) One of the smallest foreign markets, Ireland in 1996 has several appeals. Moderate inflation should provide a conducive environment for its good quality, reasonably financed companies to become increasingly competitive on a global scale. Specifically, investors are attracted to its financial services, food processing and specialized manufacturing industries. Ireland's labor force is one of its significant competitive advantages: Workers are well educated and have a good work ethic. While there has been a correlation between the performance of the Irish market and the United Kingdom, Ireland's flexible work force and financial incentives have made it an attractive alternative. The Netherlands is an example of a foreign market whose positive fiscal policy has supported corporate progress. Both inflation and unemployment have been relatively low, and several solid companies have succeeded in building strong international businesses. Dutch companies are especially dominant in commercial publishing, electronics and growing software development and computer applications for European corporate needs. Having suffered a recession for the last five years, Japan should be the comeback story of 1996. The government is addressing its myriad problems (including banking, deregulation and trade), and many corporations have initiated steps to heighten their competitiveness. Increased corporate confidence in the system should result in a resumption of industrial production and capital expenditures - the very events needed for the economy's recovery. The health of Japan, the largest foreign market with a broad base of industries and strong infrastructure, has a direct effect on southeast Asia. Its improvement, then, could help the economies of Malaysia and Singapore. Concerns about inflation have kept German monetary policy tight for years. Consequently, interest rates have not fallen at the same pace that economic activity has. Opportunities in Germany's stock market tend to be large cyclical companies and financial institutions. German companies' ability to compete and expand profit margins is inhibited by relatively high compensation levels. This, combined with a strong deutsche mark, make it difficult for Germany's export industries to compete against products produced by countries with lower average wages. Just a few years ago, Russia represented untold potential. Many practicalities - including the government's taxation and regulation - have frustrated foreign investors, and growth has yet to occur as was predicted. IBM's recent cancellation of a manufacturing facility is just one sign that Russia is a market best avoided by the faint of heart. Dramatic rallies draw investors to Latin American markets - but their volatility can also discourage investment. Brazil is an example of a market that has been strong recently, buoyed by an expanding economy heavily dependent on foreign financial support from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. While the country has a developing manufacturing base and a strong resource sector, it is sensitive to export demand and global commodity prices. The health of Brazil's banking system remains suspect, and difficult political decisions must be made if continued progress is to occur. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014450 WT01-B13-163IA018-000197-B003-164http://www.kemper.com:80/aboutacrobat.html 198.152.185.42 19970106173042 text/html 5101HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:26:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:19:22 GMTContent-length: 4919Content-type: text/html About Adobe Acrobat Files Some documents on Kemper.com are available to you online in the AdobeAcrobat Portable Document Format (.pdf). We make them available in thisformat so the document you view or print on your own printer issimilar to the printed piece that you wouldreceive from your financial representative or Kemper ShareholderServices. Adobe Acrobat files are universally available -- whether you're usinga Windows, DOS, Macintosh or Unix system, you can view and print the fileusing the free Acrobat Reader. In order to access these or any otherAdobe Acrobat file available on Kemper.com, you will need to GetAcrobat if it is not yet installed on your computer's hard drive.Copying the Acrobat Reader should take no more than a few minutes. Once it'sinstalled on your hard drive, you will be able to click on all AdobeAcrobat files and easily view or print. Within the Acrobat Reader you can: Scroll through the pages of the document Print parts or all of the document Zoom in and out Search for words After installing Adobe Acrobat on your hard drive, configure your Webbrowser to use the Reader for .pdf files. You can either do itimmediately by setting up your viewer options (accessible via HelperApps in Netscape,for example) to associate the file type "application/pdf" with theAcrobat Reader. Or, you could wait until the first time that youdownload a .pdf file, when your browser will prompt you through thisprocess. Download the Acrobat Reader from Adobe's web site. Adobe's public anonymous ftp server - ftp.adobe.com- also has Acrobat Readers for various systems. Note: Occasionally the Adobe web site and ftp site are busy withrequests. At such times, you may have difficulty connecting to Adobe'ssites. If you have difficulty connecting to Adobe, try some of the followingmirror ftp sites which also have the Acrobat Reader software for Windowsand Macintosh. Windows ftp://ftp.ncsa.uiuc.edu/Web/Mosaic/Windows/viewers/ftp://ftp.uu.net/networking/info-service/www/ncsa/Mosaic/Windows/viewers/acroread.exe-split/(split into 6 parts) Macintosh See Various Info-Mac and UMichigan Mac archive sites including INFO-MACHyperArchive ftp://mirror.apple.com/mirrors/Info-Mac.Archive/_Application/ftp://ftp.uu.net/systems/mac/info-mac/app/adobe-acrobat-reader-21.hqx-split/(split file) http://www.umich.edu/~archive/mac/util/text/ © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010920 WT01-B13-164IA018-000197-B005-114http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/contact_other.html 198.152.185.42 19970106173930 text/html 2805HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:35:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:33:26 GMTContent-length: 2623Content-type: text/html Contact Kemper Call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 between 7 a.m. and 6pm. Central Time Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. For up-to-date Kemper Fund and account information 24 hours a day, sevendays a week, call our automated telephone response system, KemperACCESS. By calling 1-800-972-3060 on a touch-tone telephone, you can receive thefollowing information: Account balance Most recent transactions Dividend earnings Current yields and returns Current net asset values. Selected account transactions also are available. Kemper Funds P.O. Box 419151 Kansas City, MO 64141-6151 © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1011460 WT01-B13-165IA018-000197-B005-125http://www.kemper.com:80/about/aboutzki.html 198.152.185.42 19970106173938 text/html 5114HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:35:39 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:21:58 GMTContent-length: 4932Content-type: text/html About Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Kemper Funds originated in 1948, when five entrepreneurs formed a mutual fund to capitalize on a technologicalbreakthrough called television. They started Television Shares Management Corporation, and introduced their firstmutual fund, the Television Fund - which focused on the success and technological advances related to the televisionindustry. Over the years, that fund evolved to what is now known as Kemper TechnologyFund. In 1963, Television Shares Management Corporation was repositioned for broader appeal, taking on the new corporatename Supervised Investors Services, Inc. ("SIS"). Through the 1960s, the company introduced three more mutual funds-- Balanced Income Fund (now known as Kemper Total Return Fund) which invested in bothstocks and bonds, Supervised Investors Growth Fund (now Kemper Growth Fund) and Summit Fund(now Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund). In 1970, Kemper Corporation acquired all the outstanding stock of SIS, and successfully combined the predominantlyfixed-income expertise of Kemper with the solid equity management of SIS. Through the 1970s, the company diversifiedits product line, adding Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund, aninvestment-grade bond fund, and Kemper Money Market Fund, one of the nation's firstmoney market funds. SIS became Kemper Financial Services, Inc. in 1976. That same year, Kemper pioneered a fully managed tax-exemptincome fund, Kemper Municipal Bond Fund -- the nation's first municipal bond fund. Kemper was also one of the first in the industry to offer government securities portfolios. More recently, Kemperintroduced its Retirement Fund Series, which combines zero-coupon bonds and equitysecurities, and Kemper Value+Growth Fund, which combines both value and growth stocksin the same portfolio using the expertise of two separate and distinct investment managers. In January 1996, Kemper Financial Services became part of the Zurich family and, in March 1996, took the name ZurichKemper Investments, Inc. ("ZKI"). As investment manager of the Kemper Funds, ZKI is one of the nation's largest assetmanagers. The Kemper Funds family is comprised of more than 70 portfolios including growth- and value-style equityfunds, international funds, U.S. government and corporate bond funds, municipal bond funds, money market funds andclosed-end funds. Together, this adds up to over $45 billion in assets and more than 3 million shareholder accounts. You may download a Kemper Funds prospectus now, request one from your financialrepresentative or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. The prospectuses contain more completeinformation including management fees and expenses. Please read them carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015660 WT01-B13-166IA018-000197-B005-139http://www.kemper.com:80/about/introkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106173950 text/html 11307HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:35:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:22:30 GMTContent-length: 11124Content-type: text/html Introducing Kemper Funds Kemper Funds strive to provide high-quality asset management based on teamwork,a clearly defined investment style and thorough research. Below, you'll findsome general information about the types of funds managed by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. and our investmentphilosophy. Kemper Money Funds feature a conservative approach to money management,emphasizing stability of principal, competitive long-term returns and easyliquidity. And Kemper Money Funds can be used for a variety of purposes -- anemergency fund, rainy day savings, short-term investment goals, or a temporary"parking place" for your money while you decide where to invest. With more than$5 billion in assets under management and a track record spanning more than 20years, Kemper Money Funds offer investors the confidence that comes withexperience. Kemper Money Funds offer a choice of threeportfolios: Kemper Money Market Fund invests primarilyin short-term, high-quality obligations of major banks and corporations. Kemper Government Money Fund adds an extradegree of safety by investing only in U.S. Treasury securities and otherobligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies andrelated repurchase agreements. Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund offers currentincome that is exempt from federal income taxes* by investing in short-term,high-quality municipal securities. A Kemper Money Funds investment also offers a variety of access features,including checkwriting and the MoneyPLUS cash management feature. Consult theprospectus for details, including fees for theMoneyPLUS feature, or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. We believe few fund companies can match Kemper's time-tested experience,research capabilities and presence in today's sophisticated bond market. Kemperhas spent over 20 years managing income mutual funds. That's longer than 94% ofall mutual fund companies. ** In the high yield arena alone, Kemper manages over $3.5 billion. And with over$8 billion in U.S. government funds assets, Kemper is a prominent presence inthe government securities marketplace. In managing the Income Funds, we emphasize credit andsector analysis, seeking to balance a competitive current yield withopportunities for total return. Subject to the particular policies of aportfolio, our management team employs flexibility to shift among corporate,treasury and mortgage-backed securities as opportunities and market conditionswarrant and as applicable portfolio policies and restrictions permit. Recognizing the need for investments that offer tax-free income*, Kemper createdAmerica's first tax-free mutual fund, Kemper MunicipalBond Fund, back in 1976. Today, Kemper manages over $5.0 billion oftax-free mutual fund assets. In managing its tax-free investments, Kemper emphasizes quality. Each of theportfolios holds at least 90% of assets in investment-grade bonds. Of the more than 500 companies that offer mutual funds, more than 80% don't havea single equity fund that's over 25 years old, according to Lipper AnalyticalServices, Inc. (as of 12/31/95). Kemper has three -- and each has providedinvestors with outstanding long-term performance. Kemper Capital Growth Funds also offer style diversification,from two separate and distinctly specialized investment managers: growth-stylemanagement from Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., and value-style management fromDreman Value Advisors, Inc.*** Of course, there is no guarantee that aparticular management style will be successful. On the growth side, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. emphasizes "growth at theright price." Using a disciplined team approach, Kemper analysts usefundamental research to identify quality growth companies whose stocks areselling at reasonable prices and whose earnings are growing faster than themarket average. Characteristics of these companies include strong management,industry leadership, a high return on equity, a low dividend/high reinvestmentrate and recession resistance. Stocks must pass an intensive screening processbased on relative price/earnings ratios, relative profitability, present valuesand momentum characteristics. In evaluating value stocks, Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. focuses on companiesthat are out of favor with investors because the market underestimates theirvalue or overlooks their potential. Stocks become undervalued as a result ofoverreaction by investors to unfavorable news about a company, industry or thestock market in general. Or, they can become undervalued as a result of amarket decline, poor economic conditions, tax-loss selling or actual oranticipated unfavorable developments affecting the company. Because the companyis out of favor, its stock trades at a price/earning ratio (P/E) that is lowerthan its potential might suggest. P/Es of value stocks are generally lower thanthe overall market and lower than growth stock P/Es. Few investors have 100 percent of their funds in stocks or 100 percent in thebond market. Deciding how much to invest in each -- an ongoing process calledasset allocation -- could be the most important investment decision you'll make. An important consideration is how soon will you need your invested dollars. Afinancial representative can help you answer that question, as well as otherconsiderations such as your specific investment objectives and risk tolerance. When you have, Kemper Horizon Fund can help by providing three diversifiedportfolios of equity and fixed income securities designed for investors withdifferent investment horizons. Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio emphasizes growth ofcapital with income generation as a secondary objective. Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio seeks a balance of growthand income with moderate risk. And Kemper Horizon 5Portfolio seeks income while your capital is being preserved, with growth ofcapital as a secondary objective. For more information, download a prospectus now. Kemper's London-based management team has a worldwide network of investmentcontacts that provides greater access to foreign markets. This allows for abetter understanding of each market, and a closer examination of growth rates,market niches, balance sheets, and even local issues. Our global researchefforts for Kemper International and Global Fundscover hundreds of foreign companies, as well as contact with banks, investmenthouses and economists worldwide. Returns and net asset values fluctuate. Shares are not insured or guaranteedand are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or less thanoriginal cost. Kemper Money Market Fund seeks to maintain a net asset value of$1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that it will. Money Fund sharesare not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higher ratedsecurities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and Kemper High YieldFund). For portfolios that invest internationally (principally KemperInternational Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund and Kemper Diversified IncomeFund) there are special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity that mayadversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fully discussed inthe funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity andKemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Funds) presents greater risk of loss thaninvestment in large companies. Concentration in certain market sectors(Kemper-Dreman High Return) presents special risk considerations. * Except as otherwise described in the prospectus, income from tax-free fundsmay be subject to state and local taxes and, for some investors, the alternativeminimum tax. ** Source: Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. 12/31/95 *** Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. ("DVA") is Kemper's value-style equity manager. DVA's philosophy was founded by David Dreman, a pioneer of "contrarian" (out offavor) style investing. Dreman is a columnist for Forbes magazine andthe author of several investment books. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015670 WT01-B13-167IA018-000197-B005-155http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kemper_firsts.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174001 text/html 3476HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:36:03 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:22:34 GMTContent-length: 3294Content-type: text/html Kemper Firsts Kemper has been an industry leader in developing innovative mutual fund concepts: Kemper Money Market Fund was one of the nation's first money marketfunds. (1974) Kemper Municipal Bond Fund was the nation's first municipal bond mutual fund. (1976) Kemper Investment Portfolios was one of the first 12-b1 fund families,enabling investors to invest 100 percent of their money upfront and paythe cost of distribution over time. (1984). KemFlex was one of the first sophisticated retirement plan recordkeepingsystems to be introduced by a mutual fund distributor, therebysimplifying plan administration and reducing plan cost. (1988) Kemper addressed the long-term goals - and security concerns - of manyinvestors with the introduction of the Kemper Retirement Fund series,which guarantees the return of original investments at a set date ifheld until maturity and dividends are reinvested. (Investors who redeemprior to maturity or do not reinvest dividends do not benefit from theguarantee.) (1990) With PREFERRED K, Kemper created an integrated turnkey approach forimplementing cost-effective 401(k) programs. (1991) Kemper introduced a worldwide fund with the guaranteed return of theoriginal investment at maturity - Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund. (Investorswho redeem prior to maturity or do not reinvest dividends do not benefitfrom the guarantee). (1994) © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016220 WT01-B13-168IA018-000197-B005-163http://www.kemper.com:80/about/logowear/logowear.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174008 text/html 5979HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:36:09 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 01-Oct-96 21:19:34 GMTContent-length: 5796Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog By popular demand, Kemper Funds logo wear is now available. For more information or to place an order, call . Ask for the Kemper Order Desk at (847) 490-3636 (8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Mon-Fri CST). You can also print an Adobe Acrobat version of our order form (55k) and fax it to (847) 490-8199 or mail it to: CLUB COLORS Attn: Kemper Orders 455 E. State Parkway #101 Schaumburg, IL 60173 (If you have not previously installed Adobe Acrobat Reader, the software required to view the form, you can download a free copy now.) A. Totes Umbrella (#KM1870) $10.95 Manual open, executive umbrella has case, wood handle and Kemper Funds logo tastefully imprinted on single panel. B. Coffee Mug (#KM1813) $ 4.59 Start your day with this ceramic 11 oz. mug featuring a metallic gold logo imprint. Each individually boxed. C. Travel Mug (#KM1812) $ 2.99 Deluxe 15 oz. durable plastic mug goes anywhere you do. With easy-sip lid and imprinted Kemper Funds logo. D. Stuffed Teddy Bear (#KM1850) $ 7.25 Plush stuffed animal sports an imprinted Kemper Funds logo shirt. Bear stands approximately 8 inches tall. E. Two Tone Twill Cap (#KM1502-00) $ 8.95 Pro style and durable construction are the highlights of embroidered headwear. With adjustable strap. F. Mock T-Shirt (#KM1009-00) $14.95 Simple style highlights this quality 100% cotton mock T-shirt with the richly embroidered logo. M-XXL. G. Twill/Ultra Suede Cap (#KM1504-29) $10.95 Natural twill is uniquely accented by hunter green ultra suede bill and embroidered patch. Leather strap. H. Lined Windshirt (#KM1308-29) $29.95 Fully-lined nylon taslon shell provides protection against the elements. Generous cut. Embroidered logo. S-XXL. Add $2 for XXL on all apparel items. I. Striped Collar Polo Shirt (#KM1003-00) $29.95 Enjoy the look and feel of fine resort wear with this 100% cotton jersey polo featuring embroidered logo. S-XXL. J. Herringbone Polo Shirt (#KM1012-99) $29.95 The textured appeal of herringbone fabric adds a subtle richness to this popular style. Embroidered logo. S-XXL. K. Solid Polo Shirt (#KM1001-00) $24.95 This super soft and extra heavyweight sport shirt is the best cotton basic you'll find anywhere. Embroidered. S-XXL. L. Logo Golf Balls (#KM1832) $28.90 Titleist DT2 golf balls by the dozen. Kemper Funds logo. M. Player's Jacket (#KM1310-59) $49.95 Comfortable cotton poplin jacket has all the essentials - snap close storm flap, slant pockets and full cotton lining. Embroidered. S-XXL. N. Pique Rugby Shirt (#KM1021-29) $34.95 An updated look in rugby shirts: the striping is tone on tone and the quality is top of the line. Twill neck taping and placket. S-XXL. Embroidered logo. O. Belding Golf Bag (#KE1710-GB) $179.95 Specially made Belding Bushwacker golf bag is constructed of light-weight, high tech fabric richly embroidered with the Kemper Funds logo. Features multiple carrycompartments. 8.5" © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022440 WT01-B13-169IA019-000202-B031-88http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/compareindices.html 198.152.185.42 19970106181002 text/html 3686HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 18:06:02 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 21:54:49 GMTContent-length: 3504Content-type: text/html Compare Market Indices Which broad market indices would you like to compare? Select a broad market index you'd like to compare: Consumer Price IndexDow Jones Industrial AverageFT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - EuropeLehman Brothers Aggregate BondLehman Brothers Government/Corporate BondLehman Brothers Municipal BondMorgan Stanley Capital International EAFERussell 1000 GrowthRussell 2000 GrowthStandard & Poor's 500Salomon Brothers World Government BondWilshire Large Company Growth Select another broad market index to compare it with: Consumer Price IndexDow Jones Industrial AverageFT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - EuropeLehman Brothers Aggregate BondLehman Brothers Government/Corporate BondLehman Brothers Municipal BondMorgan Stanley Capital International EAFERussell 1000 GrowthRussell 2000 GrowthStandard & Poor's 500Salomon Brothers World Government BondWilshire Large Company Growth © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. WT01-B13-170IA019-000202-B032-134http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/fundsvsindices.html 198.152.185.42 19970106181715 text/html 6847HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 18:13:16 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 21:55:27 GMTContent-length: 6665Content-type: text/html Compare Kemper Funds vs. Market Indices When assessing the return of your mutual fund investment, you shouldconsider it in context of the markets in which the fund strives toperform. The most widely quoted measure of the performance of the financialmarkets is the Dow Jones Industrial Average. Unfortunately, "the Dow"may provide very little insight on how your mutual fund investment isprogressing. The Dow Jones Industrial Average is a group of 30 blue chipindustrial stocks. More useful to you will be the performance of the particular index - anunmanaged group of similar investments - that your mutual fund uses asa benchmark for its investment objective. Comparing your fund against its index can be enlightening. Note, though,that a fund's return will depend upon its specific investments. Tounderstand why your fund outperformed or underperformed its index, itmay also be helpful to compare the composition of your fund's portfoliowith the composition of the index over the same period of time.Significant performance differences may arise if your fund and the indexwere invested in different companies and industries throughout theperiod. Other factors, such as cash flows in and out of a fund and feesand expenses, may affect the relationship between fund performance andthe index. Which broad market index would you like to compare your fund's performance against? (The graph will present the comparativetotal returns for Class A shares of your fund for the last 10 years and year-to-date, through the most recent quarter end, unadjusted for a sales charge. Multiple classes not available for Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund and Kemper Retirement Fund;fund performance shown.) Select a Kemper fund: Kemper Europe FundKemper Global Income FundKemper International FundKemper Growth FundKemper-Dreman Small Cap Value FundKemper Quantitative Equity FundKemper Small Capitalization Equity FundKemper Technology FundKemper Value+Growth FundKemper Blue Chip FundKemper-Dreman Contrarian FundKemper-Dreman High Return FundKemper Horizon 20+ PortfolioKemper Horizon 10+ PortfolioKemper Horizon 5 PortfolioKemper Total Return FundKemper Retirement Fund - Series IKemper Retirement Fund - Series IIKemper Retirement Fund - Series IIIKemper Retirement Fund - Series IVKemper Retirement Fund - Series VKemper Retirement Fund - Series VIKemper Worldwide 2004 FundKemper Intermediate Municipal Bond FundKemper Municipal Bond FundKemper California Tax-Free Income FundKemper Florida Tax-Free Income FundKemper Michigan Tax-Free Income FundKemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income FundKemper New York Tax-Free Income FundKemper Ohio Tax-Free Income FundKemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income FundKemper Texas Tax-Free Income FundKemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government FundKemper Diversified Income FundKemper High Yield FundKemper Income and Capital Preservation FundKemper Short-Intermediate Government FundKemper U.S. Government Securities FundKemper U.S. Mortgage Fund Select an index whose returns you'd like to compare the Kemperfund's returns (unadjusted for a sales charge) against: Consumer Price IndexDow Jones Industrial AverageFT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - EuropeLehman Brothers Aggregate BondLehman Brothers Government/Corporate BondLehman Brothers Municipal BondMorgan Stanley Capital International EAFERussell 1000 GrowthRussell 2000 GrowthStandard & Poor's 500Salomon Brothers World Government BondWilshire Large Company Growth © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011000 WT01-B13-171IA019-000202-B027-282http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/readyretire/readyretire.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175131 text/html 13476HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:47:30 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 27-Aug-96 15:05:45 GMTContent-length: 13292Content-type: text/html Are You Ready To Retire? Is there a specific financial planning topic you'd like to know more about? Just search Kemper.com by keyword You're entering a new phase of your life that could last up to 20 or 30 years - that may be as long as you spent working! If you've done even a little preparation for the big event, you know how many decisions and choices are involved. Moreover, the decisions you make at this point in your life could affect how well you live in retirement. Take a moment to complete the Retirement Readiness Test. Answer the questions and then we'll calculate your "readiness" rating. Have you contacted the Social Security Administration to determine your expected benefits? Yes (10 pts) No (0 pts) Have you decided to take Social Security benefits immediately or defer them? Immediately (5 pts) Defer benefits (5 pts) Haven't decided (0 pts) Have you decided where you will live? Yes (8 pts) Have it narrowed down (4 pts) No (0 pts) Are you planning to sell your home? If so, will you take the one-time capital gains exclusion? Selling Yes, we're taking the exclusion (8 pts) What exclusion? (0 pts) Not selling (8 pts) Haven't decided (2 pts) When did you last review your life and health insurance? 3 months (12 pts) Within the last year or two (6 pts) 3 years ago or longer (2 pts) When did you last update your will? within 6 months (12 pts) 1 year (8 pts) 3 years (5 pts) More than 5 years (2 pts) Don't have a will (0 pts) If married, is your spouse retired or planning to retire? Retired (8 pts) Planning to retire (4 pts) Haven't decided (2 pts) Have you determined how you will provide for long-term health care needs for you and your family? Yes (12 pts) Somewhat (8 pts) No (0 pts) Have you figured out how much income you'll need for a comfortable retirement? Yes (12 pts) Somewhat (5 pts) No (0 pts) Have you determined your net worth? If so, how recently? Within 6 months (12 pts) 1 year (8 pts) 3 years (5 pts) More than 5 years (2 pts) No (0 pts) How diversified are the assets that currently make up your "nest egg"? (Check as many as apply: 5 pts each) CDs IRAs Individual stocks Individual bonds Bank savings/money market account Checking/cash Inheritance/trust Other Mutual funds: Small company stock funds Large company stock funds Government bond funds Corporate bond funds Money market funds Tax-free bond funds Other stock funds Other bond funds Have you decided how to take your company pension? Yes; roll over to IRA (8 pts) Yes; take monthly payments (6 pts) Yes; take the distribution in cash (2 pts) No (4 pts) Don't have one (0 pts) What professional advisors have you sought out to help you make the transition to retirement? (Check as many as apply: 5 pts each) Attorney Financial rep/broker Insurance representative Estate planner Real estate agent Tax planner/preparer Other Have you thought about which hobbies, interests or work you will pursue in retirement? Yes (5 pts) No (0 pts) Are you actively gathering information about health, lifestyle, living arrangements, and financial aspects of retirement? Yes (10 pts) No (0 pts) Click here to see your score... and advice on how to improve your score next time. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020630 WT01-B13-172IA018-000197-B005-239http://www.kemper.com:80/about/teamkemper/teamkemper.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174100 text/html 5114HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:37:01 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 20:23:49 GMTContent-length: 4930Content-type: text/html Team Kemper Kemper Funds management proudly sponsors seven professional golfers participating in the 1996 PGA and Senior PGA Tours. While each golfer plays as an individual, each member of our "team" wears the Kemper Funds name on either their chest or on their hat. As you watch their progress this season, whether on television, in print publication coverage or in person, look for the Kemper Funds name. What does golfing have to do with mutual fund asset management? Team Kemper Funds is a group of hard-working professionals focused on perfecting the fundamental skills of their game, day after day. These golfers are dedicated to achieving the consistency that leads to exceptional results. Our sponsorship celebrates the world's most civilized game -- an emblem of the patient, dedicated effort that excellence requires. PGA Tour Schedule Senior PGA Tour Schedule Kemper Funds Logo Wear Catalog © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1017850-A WT01-B13-173IA018-000197-B005-252http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/wsj/wsj.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174111 text/html 3648HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:37:11 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 13-Nov-96 20:52:00 GMTContent-length: 3463Content-type: text/html  Growth or Value Investing? On the Horns of a Dilemma Of all the decisions you'll make about investing, this may be one of the biggest: Growth or Value? When it comes to stock investing, there are two ways to take the bull by the horns, two well-known styles of equity management -- growth and value. Both offer a long-term, disciplined approach to capital appreciation, but the two styles go about their business in fundamentally different ways. Growth or value? Is one style better than the other? It's an important decision, one that every investor should consider. And yet, many continue to seesaw between styles, an approach that too often misses the bull's-eye. Zurich Kemper Investments, the only asset manager in the U.S. with separate organizations to manage growth and value portfolios, offers new insights into this timeless question... The GROWTH Investing Strategy The VALUE Investing Strategy The GROWTH and VALUE Strategy Building a DIVERSIFIED Portfolio Growth Investing Hitch your wagon to the stocks of well-known, successful companies with rapidly growing earnings. Value Investing Wave the cape of the contrarian at undervalued, out-of-favor stocks poised for a turnaround. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1023560 WT01-B13-174IA018-000197-B005-262http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/letter.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174123 text/html 5996HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:37:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 18-Oct-96 14:12:18 GMTContent-length: 5814Content-type: text/html Letter To Shareholders October 15, 1996 Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. President, Chief Investment and Executive Officer Concerns about rising interest rates, thepossibility of higher price inflation and Federal Reserve tighteningof credit continue to contribute to considerable market volatility. But whilethe professional investors tend to debate every economic release,individuals who invest in mutual funds for the long term have beenwise to stay the course. Indeed, several recent economic measuresare quite reassuring and argue in favor of a continued healthyeconomy with low inflation. The economy expanded at a 4.2% annual rate in the second quarter,the fastest pace since the second quarter of 1994. This robustgrowth is welcome in general but has tended to roil markets, whichfear strong growth will lead to overheating and inflationary pressures.So far, however, such fears have been largely unwarranted. Withthe exception of food prices, whose increases were weather-related,there have been no significant signs of inflationary pressures.As it has so often recently, the economy is in the process ofslowing itself down. While the Federal Reserve Board stands byready to attempt to moderate economic growth with either interestrate cuts or increases, such intervention can run the risk ofgoing too far in one direction. It appears that our economy todayis self-regulating. Based on these snapshots of the economy, then, we look for a relativelycalmer remainder of the year. Our forecast calls for growth to slowdown in the fourth quarter, to result in an advanceof about 2.5% for the entire year. Assuming that bond and stockmarket investors concur that there is no chance of an overheatingeconomy or significantly rising interest rates, the markets shouldrelax, as well. Our market forecast 10 months into the year is not much differentfrom what we forecasted in January. The bond market, which isclimbing back from a decline this year, may produce a 5% totalreturn in 1996. The stock market, after the correction is completed,may advance 10% to 15% for the year. Naturally, future market conditionscannot be predicted with assurance. In addition, we are projecting that long-term (30-year) interestrates will hover in the 6.5% to 7.0% range. Short-term interestrates may drop below their current levels. Finally, we would besurprised if the Federal Reserve Board moved to adjust interestrates either way more than 25 basis points for the remainder ofthe year. Given the economic environment, we do not look for an upset inthe upcoming presidential election. Much more interesting willbe which party wins the most congressional seats. If the Democratsregain control of Congress, a bond market selloff could be expected. While U.S. markets are expected to provide modest returns, wecontinue to advocate the benefits of diversification into alternatemarkets. Many overseas markets are forecasted to grow at a ratewell above our 2.5% growth expectation for the U.S., and thereare many equity and fixed-income opportunities abroad. The valueof the U.S. dollar, always a concern to international investors,will probably not strengthen much against other currencies forthe foreseeable future. Thank you for your continued support. We appreciate the opportunity to serve your investmentneeds. Stephen B. Timbers is president, chief executive and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI and its affiliates manage approximately $79 billion in assets, including $45 billionin retail mutual funds. Timbers is a graduate of Yale University and holds an M.B.A. from Harvard University. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1002180-S WT01-B13-175IA018-000197-B005-277http://www.kemper.com:80/about/friendslist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174132 text/html 3066HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:37:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:51:21 GMTContent-length: 2882Content-type: text/html  Friends Kemper Funds is the proud sponsor of several educational institutions, cultural organizations, charitable, civic and health and welfare organizations. Many of these organizations are groups to which our employees also contribute their time and money. AIDS Walk 7 American Cancer Society Easter Seals Juvenile Diabetes Foundation WETA Kemper Funds Group has provided sole corporate support for In the Prime,a multimedia project produced by WETA, the third largest producer of programs for publictelevision. In the Prime addresses a wide variety of subjects of interest to the baby boomer generation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014230-A WT01-B13-176IA018-000197-B005-290http://www.kemper.com:80/about/neighborslist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174140 text/html 2966HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:37:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:22:39 GMTContent-length: 2784Content-type: text/html  Neighbors Kemper Funds management considers sports sponsorship an important element in its public relations.Sponsorships give Kemper added exposure in its target market and helps build brand loyalty in ourhome base of Chicago and in Kansas City, the home of 400 Kemper employees. Chicago Bears Chicago Bulls Chicago Cubs Chicago White Sox DePaul Basketball Ellsworth Bicycles Kane County Cougars Kansas City Royals © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014240 WT01-B13-177IA018-000197-B006-5http://www.kemper.com:80/about/chicagomap.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174156 text/html 4132HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:37:54 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 22:01:23 GMTContent-length: 3950Content-type: text/html  Free Chicago Map Just complete this form for a free map of downtown Chicago. Your First Name: Your Last Name: Street Address: or P.O. Box City: State: ZIP: Telephone Number: (in case we have a problem processing your request) We're happy to serve as your guide to our hometown -- no strings attached. Check this box if you'd also be interested in receiving a publication that describes each Kemper fund and Kemper Funds' most recent quarterly performance. Thanks for your interest and look for your map within about a week! © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016490 WT01-B13-178IA018-000197-B006-18http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/high_return.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174206 text/html 13770HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:38:05 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 13587Content-type: text/html Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund Seeks a high rate of total return byinvesting primarily in the common stocks of larger listed companies witha record of earnings and dividends, low price-earnings ratios,reasonable returns on equity and sound finances believed to haveintrinsic value. Federal National Mortgage Assoc., Atlantic Richfield, Amoco, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., UST, Philip Morris, Columbia Gas Systems Inc., Nationsbank, Humana, Hanson PLC $437,000,000 KDHAX KDHBX KDHCX 3/18/88 9/11/95 9/11/95 17.61% 16.78% 16.77% 10.86% 12.78% 15.77% 23.08% 26.46% 29.46% 17.27% - - 16.92% 26.99% 29.84% # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. For Class C shares, performance isadjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within the year. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015230-B WT01-B13-179IA018-000197-B006-29http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/bluechip.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174215 text/html 13526HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:38:15 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:44 GMTContent-length: 13343Content-type: text/html Kemper Blue Chip Fund Seeks growth of capital and of incomeby investing primarily in common stocks of well-capitalized, establishedcompanies having a market capitalization of at least $1 billion. Ryder System, Eli Lilly & Co., Harris Corp., Mobil, Sundstrand Corp., ITT Hartford Group, Perkin-Elmer Corp., Great Western Financial, Crown Cork & Seal Co., BF Goodrich $245,000,000 KBCAX KBCBX KBCCX 11/23/87 5/31/94 5/31/94 20.09% 19.30% 19.29% 13.18% 15.30% 18.29% 18.94% 22.24% 25.24% 10.70% - - 11.26% 18.93% 20.18% # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## Thesefigures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Blue Chip Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015210-B WT01-B13-180IA018-000197-B006-39http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/growth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174225 text/html 13824HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:38:24 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 13641Content-type: text/html Kemper Growth Fund Seeks long-term growth of capital byinvesting in a diversified portfolio of primarily common stocks issuedby established companies with potential for long-term capitalgrowth. Ceridian Corp., Paging Network, General Re Corp., Viacom, Advanta Corp., Tele Communications Inc., Lone Star Steakhouse, Cisco Systems, Cadence Design, Autozone $2,739,000,000 KGRAX KGRBX KGRCX 4/4/66 5/31/94 5/31/94 14.96% 14.11% 14.22% 8.38% 10.11% 13.22% 12.75% 15.47% 18.65% 9.84% - - 14.15% - - 12.67% 16.31% 17.53% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Growth Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015290-B WT01-B13-181IA018-000197-B006-50http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/international.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174233 text/html 14041HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:38:34 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 13858Content-type: text/html Kemper International Fund Seeks total return, a combination ofcapital growth and income, principally through an internationallydiversified portfolio of equity securities. The fund may also invest inother types of foreign securities including fixed-incomesecurities. Ciba-Geigy, Roche Holdings, Astra AB, British Petroleum, Reed International Geographic Distribution of Common Stocks:Japan 26%, United Kingdom 12%, Netherlands 12%, Switzerland 6%, France 5%, Ireland 5%, Canada 5%, Hong Kong 4%, Spain 4%, Germany 3% $471,000,000 KITAX KITBX KITCX 5/21/81 5/31/94 5/31/94 10.28% 9.49% 9.49% 3.93% 5.49% 8.49% 4.27% 6.65% 9.65% 7.85% - - 8.65% - - 12.16% 6.81% 7.97% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper International Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015370-B WT01-B13-182IA018-000197-B006-57http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/contrarian.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174243 text/html 13752HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:38:43 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 13569Content-type: text/html Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund Seeks long-term growth of capital with current income as a secondaryobjective by investing primarily in the common stocks of larger listedcompanies with a record of earnings and dividends, low price-earningsratios, reasonable returns on equity and sound finances believed to haveintrinsic value. Chase Manhattan Corp., Exxon, Allstate Corp., Mobil, Glaxo Holdings, SLMA, Boeing, General Electric, Philip Morris, Westinghouse Electrical $65,000,000 KDCAX KDCBX KDCCX 3/18/88 9/11/95 9/11/95 5.95% 5.31% 5.22% -0.15% 1.31% 4.22% 10.72% 13.57% 16.48% 12.84% - - 11.99% 14.87% 17.59% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a fullannual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For Class C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC forshares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015220-B WT01-B13-183IA018-000197-B006-66http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/smallcap.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174257 text/html 13476HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:38:58 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 13293Content-type: text/html Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Seeks long-term growth of capital byinvesting primarily in the common stocks of smaller companies with marketcapitalizations ranging from $100 million to $1 billion, consideredundervalued and having a record of earnings, low price-earnings ratios,reasonable returns on equity and sound finances believed to have intrinsicvalue. KCS Energy, Bally Entertainment, Blount International, Imperial Credit Industries, PHH Corp., Atlantic Tele-Network, Quanex Corp., Tesoro Petroleum, Mueller Industries, Fleetwood Enterprises, $172,000,000 KDSAX KDSBX KDSCX 5/22/92 9/11/95 9/11/95 22.08% 21.28% 21.56% 15.10% 17.28% 20.56% 14.86% 17.92% 21.20% 17.62% 14.31% 17.37% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class Bshares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For Class C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one quarter. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015330-B WT01-B13-184IA018-000197-B006-76http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/muni_bond.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174305 text/html 15236HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:39:05 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:48 GMTContent-length: 15053Content-type: text/html Kemper Municipal Bond Fund America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! Seeks as high a level of current income exemptfrom federal incometaxes as is consistent with preservation of capital by investing inmunicipal bonds and tax-exempt notes primarily rated investmentgrade. Cash and Equivalents 2%, US Government Secured 11%, General Obligations 14%, Revenue Bonds 73% $3,327,000,000 17.6 years 7.7 years KMBAX KMBBX KMBCX 4/20/76 5/31/94 5/31/94 4.83% 4.19% 4.20% 7.68%* 6.66%* 6.68%* 0.58% -0.18% -0.17% -3.97% -4.05% -1.14% 1.22% 1.97% 4.99% 6.50% - - 7.50% - - 7.68% 4.65% 6.01% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Municipal Bond Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. *Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% federal income tax rate. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015070-B WT01-B13-185IA018-000197-B006-111http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr961031.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174338 text/html 4754HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:39:39 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 19-Dec-96 20:51:29 GMTContent-length: 4570Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Group Joins Schwab's Institutional OneSource October 31, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/537-1801 Steve Radis, 312/537-8393 KEMPER FUNDS GROUP JOINS SCHWAB'S INSTITUTIONAL ONESOURCE CHICAGO (October 31) --Kemper Funds management today announcedthat it has signed an agreement with Charles Schwab & Co.to offer Class A shares of 22 mutual funds at net asset valuethrough Schwab's Institutional OneSource program. Kemper recentlybegan offering its funds to advisors at net asset value throughFidelity's Institutional FundsNetwork and Jack White & Co.'sNoFee Network, and is currently in negotiations with several otherfund "supermarket" programs. "Schwab's Institutional OneSource was the next logical stepfor us in gaining a stronger foothold in the burgeoning fee-basedadvisory channel," said John Norris, first vice presidentand head of the registered investment advisor unit at Kemper Distributors,Inc., the principal underwriter and distributor for the KemperFunds. "In order to be well-positioned in the future, weneed to form relationships with established distribution outletsthat cater to this very important and growing segment of our business.Schwab is a market leader in providing registered investment advisorswith superior back-office services, so it was very natural forus to gravitate toward them." Norris emphasized that Kemper remains fully committed to sellingits funds through investment professionals. "We believe inthe power of financial advice and we will continue to expand distributionrelationships with programs where financial advisors are providingtheir services to customers." Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), is the investment advisorto the Kemper Funds, which consists of 30 open-end funds withover 70 portfolios and seven closed-end funds. Kemper Funds hasnearly $45 billion in assets. ZKI is part of Zurich InsuranceGroup, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland,that provides services in life and property-casualty insurance,reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. For a prospectus containing more complete information on KemperFunds, including management fees and expenses, contact your financialrepresentative or call Kemper at 1-800-621-1048. Please read theprospectus carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1020390 WT01-B13-186IA018-000197-B006-120http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr962308.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174345 text/html 10827HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:39:46 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 18-Sep-96 20:23:07 GMTContent-length: 10641Content-type: text/html KEMPER FUNDS SURVEY FINDS TWO OUT OF THREE "EMPTY NESTERS"GAIN $5,000+ ANNUAL BOOST WHEN KIDS FLY THE COOP; DESPITE CONCERNS  ABOUT THE FUTURE, FEW DIVERTING MOST OF"PARENTAL BONUS" TO RETIREMENT SAVINGS August 23, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 KEMPER FUNDS SURVEY FINDS TWO OUT OF THREE "EMPTY NESTERS"GAIN $5,000+ ANNUAL BOOST WHEN KIDS FLY THE COOP; DESPITE CONCERNS ABOUT THE FUTURE, FEW DIVERTING MOST OF"PARENTAL BONUS" TO RETIREMENT SAVINGS CHICAGO (August 23) - After decades of paying for theirchildren's food, clothing, education, sports equipment, dancelessons and orthodontia, a vast majority of "empty nesters"enjoyed a significant monetary boost after their children lefthome, yet few are diverting most of this "parental bonus"to their own retirement savings, according to the recent surveyKemper Funds/Age Wave Lifestage Monitor: A National Surveyof Empty Nest Couples. The Kemper Funds/Age Wave Lifestage Monitor in March polled bymail 1,007 married Americans between the ages of 40 and 59, withincomes of more than $50,000 and whose children had left homeand become financially independent within the past four years. "For many years, Americans have been telling us that they'vehad to sacrifice their own retirement savings needs in part tomeet the financial needs of their children," said WilliamE. Chapman II, president of Kemper Retirement Plans Group. "Soit's somewhat surprising that once that hurdle is removed, few were willingto divert the lion's share of that income boost into retirementsavings -- despite the fact that most expressed concern about the amount of money they had saved for retirement so far." A vast majority (84.5%) of empty nesters surveyed reported thatthey received a parental bonus - a boost in income - once theirchildren left home, finished school and became financially independent.Of those, two-thirds (66.8%) reported having a boost of incomeof $5,000 or more a year; approximately one-third (34.6%) reportedhaving a boost of more than $10,000 a year; a little less thanone third (29.6%) reported a boost of $1,000 to $4,999, while3.2% reported having a $1,000 or less annual boost. Even though well over half of those surveyed (60.4%) said theyhad not saved enough for retirement, few seem willing to use the"found" money that came as a result of their childrenbecoming financially independent for that purpose. Only 40.7%of those surveyed said that they were spending "all"or "most" of the parental bonus on retirement. A littlemore than half (55.7%) were earmarking only "some" forretirement savings, and 3.6% were using "none" for retirement. "Our survey uncovered that the parental bonus amounts toanywhere from a 10% to 20% boost annually," Chapman pointedout. "If you pause a moment to think about it, that amountsignificantly exceeds projected wage increases expected this year.What's more, the wage and salary increases are an even smallerpercentage once you take into account taxes. Empty nesters maybe missing a golden opportunity to make up for lost time if they'renot directing this parental bonus to their retirement savings." Chapman advises that when children leave home, it's a good timefor parents to reassess their financial goals, savings and investmentplans. "Most Americans understand that a change in lifestyle-- be it getting married, changing jobs, buying a home, or retiring- requires that they re-examine and modify their financial goalsand objectives. Like those lifestages, having your children leavehome is a critical time for this reassessment." A significant portion of the parental bonus is being divertedto debt payments and travel. About one in five (18.4%) of thosesurveyed who reported a boost in income when their children lefthome said they were spending "all" or "most"of the parental bonus paying off debts, and 11.7% were spending"all" or "most" on traveling. Of those who reported some excess income after their childrenleft, the following number of respondents spent at least "some"of the parental bonus on: entertainment/dining (100%) charitable giving (87.5%) traveling (81.4%) "buying things we couldn't afford before" (74.7%) hobbies (70.4%) helping children with expenses (69.5%) remodeling their home (62.9%) grandchildren (58.8%) retirement savings (55.7%) paying off debts (49.3%) Home, sweet home Few empty nesters are willing to trade in their home for a smallerversion after their children left home. Only 11.8% of respondentsreported moving to a smaller home. Of those who did move, only14.4% said they did so because they wanted more money to invest;38.1% said they moved because they didn't need the space of theirformer residence. Empty nesters welcome boomerang children, but aren't yetsandwiched "One explanation as to why empty nesters are reluctant tomove to a smaller home is that they may not be convinced thatthose kids are gone for good," Chapman noted. In fact, one third (33.7%) of empty nesters surveyed have experiencedboomerang children - who leave their parents' home for a briefperiod, but return at some point thereafter. And as mentionedearlier, about three-quarters of the respondents said they wereusing some of the parental bonus "to help their childrenout" after they had flown the coop. But contrary to the predictions of some demographers, most emptynesters haven't yet felt the crunch of the "sandwich,"in which they are simultaneously responsible for the well-beingof both their children and their parents or other elderly relatives.Less than one-quarter (22.2%) reported that they were caregiversfor elderly relatives. Of those who are caregivers, very few (13.4%)are financially responsible for those elderly relatives. Interestingly,roughly two-thirds (63.4%) of respondents who said they were caregiversalso reported that they managed their elderly relatives' financialaffairs. Lots of toys for tots, less money for ABCs Among those empty nesters surveyed, 59.6% reported having grandchildren.Of those with grandchildren, 20.8% reported spending more than$1,000 on annual savings for their grandchildren's education orinvestments. More than double that amount (45.1%) spent $1,000per year on toys, clothes and entertainment for their grandkids. "Grandparents often are more motivated by their grandchildren'sgratitude to indulge their most immediate needs and desires, ratherthan to provide for their grandchildren's future financial needs,"Chapman said. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America, having more than $78 billion in assets undermanagement. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds,which consists of 36 open-end funds with over 70 portfolios andseven closed-end funds. It has nearly $45 billion in assets andthree million shareholder accounts. ZKI is part of Zurich InsuranceGroup, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland,that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsuranceand asset management in more than 45 countries. Age Wave Communications Corporation (AWCC), an Age Wave, Inc.company, is America's leading lifechange, targeted marketers focusingon the baby boom and current mature market. AWCC works with leadingcompanies in the United States and Europe to help them find andcommunicate to highly targeted market niches by focusing on consumerswhose product needs and wants have changed due to migration intoa new lifestage. Distribution of this press release must be preceded or accompanied byprospectuses for the Kemper Equity Funds, Kemper-Dreman Funds, Kemper Horizon Fund and Kemper Europe Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1019860 WT01-B13-187IA018-000197-B006-132http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr961908.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174354 text/html 5367HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:39:55 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 18-Sep-96 20:23:05 GMTContent-length: 5182Content-type: text/html KEMPER MONEY FUNDS BUILD A SOUTH PACIFIC HIDE-AWAY ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB August 19, 1996 For more information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER MONEY FUNDS BUILD A SOUTH PACIFIC HIDE-AWAY ON THE WORLD WIDE WEB CHICAGO (August 19) -- Have a question about money market funds? If you do, it's time to pay a visit to a mysterious millionairelocated at kempercash.com. This experienced investor, based ona private island in the South Pacific, guides visitors throughthe essentials of money market funds. "While islands in the South Pacific usually don't come tomind when you think about money funds, we thought this would bean unusual 'location' for our new web site," said Mike Harrington,the Kemper Funds Group senior vice president for money fund marketing. "Our goal was to create a relaxed site on an essential,yet overlooked, investment." Harrington added that while several large fund families, includingKemper Funds, have web sites featuring their entire investmentline-up, this is the first site that just focuses on a particularfund category. Drawing on his years of investment experience, the site's hostprovides comprehensive information on how to select a money fund. His "Financial Jargon to Plain English Dictionary,"which defines relevant terms such as commercial paper and repurchaseagreements, is designed to, "...help make you fluent whentalking about money fund investments." Current 7-day yieldsand competitive rankings for Kemper Money Market Fund, KemperGovernment Money Fund and Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund are available. The site also allows visitors to try two different investmentscenarios with Kemper Money Market Fund. Harrington stated that the site will be expanded to offer newfeatures and to reflect visitor feedback. The site just establishedreciprocal links with the IBC/Financial Data web site and willsoon add the Kemper Money Funds prospectus and an application. The prospectus for the Kemper Money Funds containing more completeinformation, including management fees and expenses, is availableby calling 800/537-6001. Investors should read it carefully before investingor sending money. Money funds seek to maintain a net asset valueof $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will. Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America, having more than $78 billion in assets under management. ZKI is theinvestment advisor to the Kemper Funds. The Kemper Family of Funds consists of 36 funds, with over 70portfolios, representing approximately $45 billion in assets and3 million shareholder accounts. Kemper Distributors, Inc., asubsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributorof the Kemper Funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1020150 WT01-B13-188IA018-000197-B006-141http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960606.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174405 text/html 4331HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:40:05 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:11 GMTContent-length: 4147Content-type: text/html Charles R. Manzoni, Jr. Joins Zurich Kemper As General Counsel June 6, 1996 For more information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Bob Schuerings, 312/499-8467 CHARLES R. MANZONI, JR. JOINS ZURICH KEMPER AS GENERAL COUNSEL CHICAGO (June 6) -- Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI)announced today that Charles R. Manzoni, Jr. joined the companyas executive vice president and general counsel. Manzoni willbe senior legal officer of ZKI, responsible for overseeing theactivities of ZKI's legal department and providing legal counselingto senior management of the $79 billion mutual fund and assetmanagement company. Manzoni reports to ZKI President and Chief Executive OfficerStephen B. Timbers. "Charlie brings nearly 25 years of experience to our company. His solid background and broad-based knowledge will be a greatbenefit to our company," said Timbers. "We are verypleased that he will be part of our team as we move into a newera for our company -- a time period filled with aggressive growthplans." Manzoni joins ZKI from the law firm of Gardner, Carton &Douglas in Chicago where he was a partner. His practice concentrationareas have been general corporate and federal securities laws,including general counseling, public and private financing, venturecapital financing, mergers and acquisitions, broker/dealer, investment adviser and investment company regulatorymatters. He received his law degree in 1972 from the Universityof Santa Clara. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America, having more than $79 billion in assets undermanagement. The company operates with three main business units:retail mutual funds, retirement plans and institutional assetmanagement. ZKI is the investment adviser to the Kemper Fundsand is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquarteredin Zurich, Switzerland, that provides services in life and property-casualtyinsurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countriesworldwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1017340 WT01-B13-189IA018-000197-B006-152http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960603.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174425 text/html 6436HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:40:14 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:10 GMTContent-length: 6252Content-type: text/html Patrick Adams Named Portfolio Manger Of Kemper Funds Flagship Growth Equity Fund June 3, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 PATRICK ADAMS NAMED PORTFOLIO MANAGER OF KEMPER FUNDS FLAGSHIP GROWTH EQUITY FUND CHICAGO (June 3) -- In a move designed to further strengthenits position as a leading equity mutual fund manager, Kemper Fundsmanagement today announced that Patrick S. Adams, 35, has beennamed portfolio manager of the $2.6 billion Kemper Growth Fund,the company's flagship growth equity mutual fund. Adams replaceschief investment officer for equities, Steven H. Reynolds, whohas been the Fund's interim manager since September 1995. Adamswill report directly to Reynolds. "We are thrilled to have a person of Pat's caliber at thehelm of our flagship growth equity fund," said Reynolds. "His experience as a growth manager and his impressive recordwill not only benefit our current Kemper Growth Fund shareholders,but will enhance our ability to provide consistent, quality, growth-styleinvestment management expertise." Adams joins Kemper from Founders Asset Management in Denver,Colo., where he managed the $400 million Founders Blue Chip Fundand the $160 million Founders Balanced Fund. Previously, he wasdirector of research and senior portfolio manager atFirst Of America Investment Corporation, the investment managerfor the Parkstone Group of Funds. From 1990 to 1992, he managedthe Parkstone Equity Fund, a $600 million growth fund. The addition of Adams to Kemper Funds' equity investment teamis the latest action by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI),the investment adviser to the Kemper Funds, in its plan to furtherstrengthen its equity investment capabilities. In August 1995,a company subsidiary acquired substantially all of the assetsof Dreman Value Management, L.P., enabling the company to provideretail and institutional clients with an enhanced product offeringthat includes the value style of equity investing. As part ofthe acquisition, Kemper assumed management responsibility forthe Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund. Shortly after the Dreman acquisition, Kemper hired veteran portfolio manager Steven Reynoldsfrom Alliance Capital Management to oversee and direct the company'sequity investment department. In addition to assuming responsibility for the Kemper-DremanFunds, the company has also expanded its equity product offeringconsiderably since August of 1995 by introducing three new funds:Kemper Value+Growth Fund,Kemper Horizon Fund andKemper Europe Fund. "These bold actions on the equity side of our investmentmanagement business support our company's strategic plan for growthand success, and we will continue to aggressively implement ourexpansion plan to help ensure our position as one of the leadingequity mutual fund managers in the industry," said StephenB. Timbers, chief executive officer and chief investment officerat ZKI. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., formerly known as Kemper FinancialServices, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquarteredin North America. Together with its affiliates, ZKI has morethan $79 billion in assets under management. The company operateswith three strategic business units: retail mutual funds, retirementplans and institutional asset management. ZKI is the investmentadviser to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group,a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, thatprovides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsuranceand asset management in more than 45 countries worldwide. Distribution of this press release must be preceded or accompanied byprospectuses for the Kemper Equity Funds, Kemper-Dreman Funds, Kemper Horizon Fund and Kemper Europe Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1017250 WT01-B13-190IA018-000197-B006-163http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960423.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174432 text/html 7555HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:40:34 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:08 GMTContent-length: 7371Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Marks 20th Anniversity of Nation's First Retail Municipal Bond Fund April 23, 1996 For more information: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 KEMPER FUNDS MARKS 20TH ANNIVERSARY OF NATION'S FIRST RETAIL MUNICIPALBOND FUND CHICAGO (April 23) -- Twenty years ago this month Kemper Financial Services launched the Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, the nation's first municipal bond fund designed for individual investors. The municipal bond mutual fund management was pioneered largely through the efforts and vision of the fund's first manager, the late Robert J. Butler. "Bob Butler was noted for his work in developing new investment products, including the Kemper Municipal Bond Fund. The introduction of a municipal bond fund tailored for individual investors represented a major innovation in tax-free investing and underscored Kemper's reputation as an innovator in the mutual fund arena," said Chris Mier, senior vice president and portfolio manager for all of Kemper's tax-free income funds. "The Kemper Municipal Bond Fund paved the way for wider participation in the tax-exempt market by individuals with small sums to invest." From its inception date on April 20, 1976, the Kemper Municipal Bond Fund has had only three portfolio managers -- Robert Butler (1976 - 1985), J. Patrick Beimford (1985 - 1992) and Chris Mier (1989 - present). Kemper manages 10 tax-free income funds, including an intermediate-term fund and eight single state funds, representing assets of more than $5 billion. The Municipal Bond Market: Then and Now Chris Mier, a 20-year veteran of the municipal bond market, points out a number of significant changes in the municipal bond industry during the past two decades. "While the municipal bond market has grown in size and sophistication, it is still a diffuse, over-the-counter market with no central trading arena. What has changed are the make-up of the market, the players, the technology and the sophistication of portfolio management practices." In particular, Mier cites: Market participants: "Twenty years ago, most muni bond investors typically were banks, bank trust departments and property-casualty insurers. Today, individual investors account for approximately two-thirds of muni bond holdings acting through mutual funds, trust departments and on their own behalf." Credit quality: "Increasingly, insurance has become a major feature of the municipal marketplace. In 1976, insurance on municipal bonds didn't exist. In 1995, more than 43 percent of new issuance came to the market insured." Market composition: "In 1976, tax-free investing was fairly simple. Plain vanilla general obligation bonds comprised roughly half of the municipal market. Changes in tax laws at the federal and state levels altered the ways in which municipalities and states finance their capital needs. At present, revenue bonds make up 62 percent of the muni bond market, and general obligation bonds now make up less than 38 percent." Technological advancements: "Price information is more readily available today, resulting in narrower bid-ask spreads and a more efficient market. Additionally, more professional investors are employing sophisticated analytical tools. Today, fund managers are focused on complex strategies involving management of duration, convexity and option-adjusted spreads in the marketplace. In the past, portfolio managers used a 'basis book' to calculate yields. Now they use desktop computer systems to compute duration and other financial information." The Future Over the next several years, Mier sees a continuation of some of the trends that have helped shape the municipal bond market over the previous 20 years. "Portfolio managers will make greater use of technology in order to employ more sophisticated trading techniques as well as sophisticated risk management and performance attribution tools," said Mier. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $79 billion in assets under management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end funds. It has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and $45 billion in assets. Kemper Distributors, Inc. (KDI), a subsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributor of the Kemper Funds. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. This press release must be preceded or accompanied by a Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds Prospectus. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016370 WT01-B13-191IA018-000197-B006-171http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960402.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174439 text/html 5882HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:40:41 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:06 GMTContent-length: 5698Content-type: text/html Zurich Kemper Investments Launches New Retirement Plans Unit April 2, 1996 For Further Information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 ZURICH KEMPER INVESTMENTS LAUNCHESNEW RETIREMENT PLANS UNIT CHICAGO (April 2) -- As part of a strategic plan to further strengthen its position as a leading provider of qualified retirement plan products and services, Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc.) has formed a new strategic business unit, Kemper Retirement Plans Group. "The formation of a separate, stand alone business unit to support and service qualified plans underscores our commitment to this increasingly important marketplace," said Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive officer and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Separately, the company announced that William E. Chapman II has been named president of the Kemper Retirement Plans unit. Chapman was formerly executive vice president of marketing and product management for Kemper. He has more than 30 years experience in the retirement plans business. "Bill Chapman is a seasoned veteran and an accomplished executive with a tremendous wealth of knowledge and expertise in the qualified plans arena," said Timbers. "Under his capable direction, we are confident that our retirement plan business will grow significantly and that in a few short years Kemper will be recognized as one of the leading providers of retirement plan products and services to businesses of all sizes." "Our vision is clear: by the year 2000, we expect to be the acknowledged leader in the retirement plan business in a much broader sense than we are today," said Chapman. "One of our first priorities is to increase our sales capability to support the broker-sold market and at the same time, hire salespeople to directly market to larger plan sponsors." Chapman cited several other factors that he believes will drive Kemper's success in the coming years. These factors include superior recordkeeping; innovative and broad use of technology to service the needs of participants, plan sponsors and administrators; and investment products that "make sense" to plan participants and address their investment needs and expectations. With more than 45 years of professional investment management experience, Kemper has long been a household name for investment products and services. Kemper is an experienced qualified plan provider who currently serves more than 8,000 plans and manages more than $4 billion in retirement plan assets. The company believes it was the first to dispatch a field sales force committed exclusively to supporting qualified plan sales, and also the first to establish a fully dedicated in-house retirement plan marketing staff to market the company's retirement plans. Kemper Retirement Plans is a unit of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI). ZKI is the investment manager for the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end portfolios. It has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and approximately $45 billion in retail assets. Prospectuses for the Kemper Funds are available from the principal underwriter, Kemper Distributors, Inc. They contain more complete information including fees and expenses and should be read carefully before investing or sending money. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1012360 WT01-B13-192IA018-000197-B006-183http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960328.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174449 text/html 5267HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:40:49 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:04 GMTContent-length: 5083Content-type: text/html Zurich Kemper Investments Announces Definitive AgreementTo Sell Invest Financial Corporation ToFirst American Corporation March 28, 1996 For Further Information: Bob Schuerings, 312/499-8467 ZURICH KEMPER INVESTMENTS ANNOUNCES DEFINITIVE AGREEMENTTO SELL INVEST FINANCIAL CORPORATION TOFIRST AMERICAN CORPORATION CHICAGO (Mar. 28) -- Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI) announcedtoday that it has signed a definitive agreement to sell its 96 percent ownership interest in its INVEST Financial Corporation subsidiary to FirstAmerican Corporation of Nashville, Tennessee. In a related transaction, INVEST has agreed to merge with Investment Center Group, Inc. of Bismarck, N.D., making INVEST the largest institution-based investment brokerage firm in the U.S. "This sale allows us to focus more of our energies and resources on our core business of investment management," said Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive officer and chief investment officer of Zurich Kemper Investments. Tampa, Florida-based INVEST, which was incorporated in 1982, is licensed as a broker-dealer in 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. The company has more than 800 registered INVEST centers at financial institutions in 45 states. "First American Corporation recognizes the value of INVEST maintaining its position as an independent firm that offers the highest quality investment products from leading mutual funds, insurance companies and other financial organizations," said Merlin R. Gackle, chairman, president and chief executive officer of INVEST. "We also share the philosophy that financial planning should be at the core of all relationships." INVEST sells through registered representatives, including licensed sales professionals and bank personnel who sell annuities, other insurance products, mutual funds, unit investment trusts, bonds and stocks. Consummation of the transaction is subject to certain regulatory approvals and other conditions. The transaction is expected to close in the second quarter. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $79 billion in assets under management. The company operates with three main business units: retail mutual funds, retirement plans and institutional asset management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries worldwide. First American Corporation (NASDAQ: FATN) is the third largest independent bank holding company headquartered in Tennessee. The corporation currently operates 172 banking offices. Through its subsidiaries, First American Corporation engages in a general commercial and retail banking business and provides personal and corporate trust, agency, and investment services. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014200 WT01-B13-193IA018-000197-B006-191http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960321.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174507 text/html 4883HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:41:08 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:03 GMTContent-length: 4699Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Announces New Chief Investment Officer For Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. March 21, 1996 For Further Information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER FUNDS ANNOUNCES NEW CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER FOR DREMAN VALUE ADVISORS, INC. CHICAGO (Mar. 21) -- Kemper Funds management today announced that Christian C. Bertelsen has been named chief investment officer for Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (DVA), the investment advisor to the Kemper-Dreman mutual funds, effective immediately. The announcement was made by James R. Neel, chief executive officer of DVA. As chief investment officer, Bertelsen, 52, will oversee more than $1.9 billion in retail and institutional assets and direct DVA's investment department, including portfolio management, research and trading. In addition, he will assume management responsibilities for the Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and DVA's separate accounts. Bertelsen will report directly to Neel. "With a background spanning nearly 30 years in the investment management business, Chris brings a wide breadth of experience to our company," said Neel. "We are extremely pleased to have a person of his caliber at the helm of our investment department. His expertise, leadership abilities and outstanding track record will further strengthen and enhance our investment capabilities." Before joining DVA, Bertelsen was a senior vice president and money manager for Eagle Asset Management, a subsidiary of Raymond James Financial, Inc. Prior to that, he spent seven years as senior vice president and head of Colonial Advisory Services, Inc.'s equity department. Bertelsen holds an M.B.A. in Finance and Marketing and a B.A. in History and Economics from Boston University. Based in New Jersey, Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (DVA) acquired substantially all the assets and business of Dreman Value Management L.P. in August, 1995. DVA is the investment advisor to the Kemper-Dreman Funds. DVA is a subsidiary of Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end funds, representing nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and $45 billion in assets. Kemper Distributors, Inc. (KDI), a subsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributor of the Kemper Funds. ZKI is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1012220 WT01-B13-194IA018-000197-B006-203http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/pr960320.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174515 text/html 4518HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:41:17 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:02 GMTContent-length: 4334Content-type: text/html Kemper Funds Forms New Distribution Unit For Fee-Based Advisors And Mutual Fund Wrap Programs March 20, 1996 For Further Information: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER FUNDS FORMS NEW DISTRIBUTION UNIT FOR FEE-BASED ADVISERS AND MUTUAL FUND WRAP PROGRAMS CHICAGO (Mar. 20) -- Kemper Funds management today announced the formation of a new distribution unit to focus on the growing fee-based adviser and mutual fund wrap marketplace. "While we are fully committed to selling our funds through the traditional channels of distribution, we recognize the increasingly important role of registered investment advisers and fee-based programs," said Jim Greenawalt, executive vice president, director of sales for Kemper Distributors, Inc., the principal underwriter and distributor for the Kemper Funds. "We have always believed in and have stressed the importance of investors working with professional financial advisers when it comes to making their investment decisions. And, as long as a customer is working directly with a financial adviser, we will be flexible with our pricing structure." Kemper has hired John A. Norris as a first vice president to head up the new registered investment adviser unit. Norris was previously a senior vice president at Cozad Asset Management, Inc. He will seek to form strategic alliances with various fee-based mutual fund wrap programs. "We expect to further strengthen our relationships with our key broker/dealer clients as they expand their fee-based activities," said Norris. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), formerly Kemper Financial Services, Inc., is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $79 billion in assets under management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries. Kemper Funds consists of 61 open-end portfolios and seven closed-end funds. It has nearly 3 million shareholder accounts and $45 billion in assets. Kemper Distributors, Inc. (KDI), a subsidiary of ZKI, is the principal underwriter and distributor of the Kemper Funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1011850 WT01-B13-195IA018-000197-B006-211http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/zurichacq.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174525 text/html 5791HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:41:25 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:19 GMTContent-length: 5607Content-type: text/html Zurich Insurance Group Completes Acquisition Of Kemper Corporation January 4, 1996 Contact: Zurich Insurance Group Elizabeth Ventura Centre ReSource Limited (312) 499-8831 or (212) 898-5050 Insurance Partners Own Blicksilver (212) 546-2240 or (212) 303-7603 after January 8, 1996 ZURICH INSURANCE GROUP COMPLETES ACQUISITION OF KEMPER CORPORATION CHICAGO (January 4, 1996) - Zurich Insurance Group and InsurancePartners today announced the completion of the acquisition of KemperCorporation (NYSE: KEM) of Long Grove, IL, in a merger transactionvalued at more than $2 billion. Kemper common stockholders will receivecash consideration of $49.80 per share in the merger. All approvals and transactions required by the merger agreement,including the spin-off of Kemper's securities brokerage operations andsales of a considerable part of its real estate holdings, werecompleted. As of the closing, Kemper Corporation will consist of FederalKemper Life Assurance Company, Kemper Investors Life Insurance Companyand certain real estate subsidiaries. Subsequent to the closing, the twolife insurance companies will operate under the trade name "ZurichKemper Life Insurance Companies." Zurich Insurance Group will own 80percent of Kemper Corporation and Insurance Partners will own 20percent. As part of the transaction, Zurich Insurance Group acquired KemperFinancial Services, Inc. (KFS). Following the merger, KFS is to berenamed "Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc." It is anticipated that ZurichKemper Investments will become the flagship operation for the Zurich'sU.S.-based investment fund and institutional asset managementactivities. Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Company will own 3 percent ofZurich Kemper Investments. Rolf Hüppi, chairman and chief executive officer of The Zurich InsuranceGroup said, "The completion of this transaction marks a significant steptoward implementing our financial services strategy. With theacquisition, Zurich will be able to move closer to our goal of deriving30 percent of our total revenues from life insurance operations andbuild a solid foundation for its worldwide asset management business."Mr. Hüppi continued, "We appreciate the efforts of the management andstaff of Kemper over the past months during this transition period." Kemper Corporation, a financial services holding company with principaloperations in asset management and life insurance, had approximately $98billion in life insurance premiums in force; KFS ranked as the nation's13th largest mutual fund family with $42 billion in mutual fund assetsunder management and managed $21 billion in institutional assets. Zurich Insurance Group is a leading, internationally recognized companyproviding services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and assetmanagement. Headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, the Group operatesoffices in more than 45 countries worldwide and offers customers globalcoverage in all lines of insurance. Zurich had worldwide premiumwritings of approximately $19.3 billion in 1994 and over $7.3 billion incapital and surplus at year-end 1994. Insurance Partners is a $540 million investment partnership formed inFebruary 1994 to sponsor acquisitions, recapitalizations,demutualizations and other structured transactions in theproperty/casualty, life and health insurance industries in the U.S. andabroad. Principal partners include Centre Reinsurance Holdings Limited;Keystone, Inc. (formerly The Robert M. Bass Group); and The ChaseManhattan Corporation. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010770 WT01-B13-196IA018-000197-B006-223http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/execplusplan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174535 text/html 6050HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:41:36 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:27:47 GMTContent-length: 5866Content-type: text/html Kemper Rolls Out Executive Plus - A Retirement Plan Solution For KeyExecutives November 28, 1995 For more information contact: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Bob Schuerings, 312/499-8467 KEMPER ROLLS OUT EXECUTIVE PLUS - A RETIREMENT PLAN SOLUTION FOR KEYEXECUTIVES CHICAGO (November 28) - Kemper today announced the introduction ofExecutive Plus, a new turnkey nonqualified deferred compensation programfor key executives that can offer a solution to the sometimesrestrictive requirements of qualified retirement plans. "Executive Plus is a retirement option for 401(k) plan sponsors lookingto provide additional tax-deferred investing opportunities to keyexecutives," said Ed Miner, first vice president of Kemper's qualifiedplans area. Last year's tax code changes lowered the maximumcompensation on which qualified plan benefits can be based to $150,000,making it difficult for executives to accumulate desired retirementassets in traditional qualified plans. Additionally, many sponsors havehad to further reduce executive 401(k) salary deferral levels below the$9,240 limit in order to pass nondiscrimination tests. "Under Executive Plus a participant may defer compensation on a pre-taxbasis until those dollars are needed for retirement. Contributions andany investment earnings generally are not taxable to the participantuntil they are received," Miner said. "In addition, the employer also may contribute to the nonqualified planon behalf of the participant. These contributions, as well ascompensation deferred by participants, are not tax-deductible until theyare paid to the participant, usually at retirement." Some of the benefits of Executive Plus include: A flexible plan agreement Safe harbor model rabbi trust Corporate trustee services through Trust Company of America, Inc. (Notaffiliated with Kemper. The trustee services will be provided through aseparate agreement with that company.) Convenient contribution submission options Accurate and efficient record keeping through the KemFlex system The Kemper Mutual Fund Family Opportunity for current Kemper qualified plan clients to combinenonqualified plan assets with assets in a Kemper qualified plan toproduce pricing breaks. Unlike qualified plans, nonqualified programs have no contributiondollar limits or employee coverage, eligibility or participationrequirements. As a result, their sponsors avoid complex reporting andcompliance testing necessary for qualified plans. Generally, reportinginvolves only a one-time filing with the Department of Labor. Planadoption is easier because a sponsor avoids many of the formal set-uprequirements of a qualified plan. Usually, nonqualified plans are sponsored by C corporations. Because theowners of S corporations, partnerships and sole proprietorships aretaxed as pass-through entities, nonqualified deferred compensation plansdo not provide effective deferral of compensation for owners of theseentities. Program costs vary by provider but typically involve fees for legalcounsel corporate trustee services and the plan's funding mechanism. Formore information about Executive Plus, employers should talk with theirfinancial representative or call Kemper Sales Support at 1-800-621-5027to order information. To obtain a Kemper Mutual Fund prospectus, please call KemperShareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. The prospectus contains morecomplete information including management fees and expenses. Please readit carefully before you invest or send money. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. is one of the nation's largest assetmanagers with approximately $44 billion in mutual fund assets undermanagement. It is a subsidiary of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM), aholding company with principal operations in asset management and lifeinsurance. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010670 WT01-B13-197IA018-000197-B006-233http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/dremanacq.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174544 text/html 5808HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:41:45 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:27:46 GMTContent-length: 5624Content-type: text/html Kemper Financial Completes AcquisitionOf Dreman Value Management Assets; Names President & CEO Of AcquiredOperations August 24, 1995 FOR MORE INFORMATION: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 KEMPER FINANCIAL COMPLETES ACQUISITIONOF DREMAN VALUE MANAGEMENT ASSETS; NAMES PRESIDENT & CEO OF ACQUIREDOPERATIONS CHICAGO (August 24) - Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), asubsidiary of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM) and the investment advisorto the Kemper Mutual Funds, today announced the completion of theacquisition of substantially all of the assets of Dreman ValueManagement, L.P. (DVM), including assignment of the Dreman mutual fundsadvisory contracts. Specific terms of the transaction were notdisclosed. Separately, the company announced that James R. Neel has been namedpresident and chief executive officer of Kemper Advisors, Inc., asubsidiary of KFS and the investment advisor to the Kemper-Dreman funds. The Dreman mutual funds will be renamed as follows: the Kemper-DremanHigh Return Fund, the Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, the Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and the Kemper-Dreman Fixed Income Fund. "The closing of this transaction is significant because it immediatelyallows us to provide retail and institutional clients with an enhancedproduct offering that includes the value style of equity investing,"said Stephen B. Timbers, chairman and chief executive officer of KFS."Furthermore, the acquisition affords Kemper tremendous flexibility inbringing new products to market." As previously reported, the investment functions of KFS and the acquiredoperation will remain separate. David Dreman will remain as chairman ofthe acquired operation. "We are extremely pleased that David willcontinue to play an integral role in the new company, including hisactive participation in managing key retail and institutionalportfolios," said Timbers. The acquired operation will continue to be based in New Jersey. "Bykeeping the investment functions separate, we believe that theoperations will retain the integrity of their investment process anddiscipline," said Timbers. Neel most recently was an executive vice president and equity portfoliomanager for Kemper Financial's institutional accounts. Prior to that hemanaged several of the Kemper retail mutual funds and served as chiefequity strategist. He has been with KFS for six years. Before joiningKFS, Neel was with Loomis Sayles & Co. where he managed a variety ofinvestment portfolios. "We are delighted to have a person of Jim's caliber in the role ofpresident and CEO," said Timbers. "He is a highly qualified andrecognized professional in the investment community. His experiencecoupled with his knowledge of Kemper will benefit him significantly inhis new position." KFS has approximately $43.7 billion in mutual fund assets undermanagement, including 30 open-end funds and seven closed-end funds, asof July 31, 1995. KFS' domestic institutional subsidiary, Kemper AssetManagement Company, has approximately $5.3 billion under management, notincluding assets managed for Kemper Corporation's affiliates and theKemper National Insurance Companies. The acquired operation currentlyhas approximately $1.5 billion of institutional assets under management. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. is one of the nation's largest assetmanagers with more than $63 billion under management. It is a subsidiaryof Kemper Corporation, a holding company with principal operations inasset management and life insurance. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010680 WT01-B13-198IA018-000197-B006-247http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/changeretdef.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174601 text/html 8239HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:41:58 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:27:43 GMTContent-length: 8055Content-type: text/html Changing Definition Of Retirement June 15, 1995 For more information contact: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 CHANGING DEFINITION OF RETIREMENT: MAJORITY OF AMERICANS EXPECT TO WORK DURING RETIREMENT, ACCORDING TOKEMPER-ROPER RETIREMENT MONITOR CHICAGO (June 15) - A majority of working Americans believe they will beforced to continue to work during retirement in order to make ends meetand maintain their desired standard of living, according to a pollreleased today by Kemper and Roper-Starch Worldwide. The "Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor" polled 2,086 randomly selectedAmericans about their attitudes and expectations regarding retirement.The survey included representation from demographic age groupsincluding: 20-Somethings (aged 20-29), Baby Boomers (aged 30-49),Pre-retirees (aged 50-64) and Retirees (aged 65 and older). The surveyhas a margin of error of plus/minus two percent. "For Americans under the age of 50, the word "retirement" has taken onnew meaning," said William E. Chapman II, executive vice president ofKemper. "When America's younger generations hit retirement age, it won'tnecessarily mean the end of their working years - especially if theywant to maintain a comfortable lifestyle. Their challenge is to plancarefully in an environment that is much more dynamic than their parentshad to contend with." Wages to replace Social Security, savings shortfalls "The old yardsticks by which current retirees measure their success infunding a comfortable retirement no longer apply to younger Americans,"noted Chapman. "These younger generations will try to fill the gap leftby what they expect to be limited Social Security benefits, diminishedhealth-care support and the lack of their own savings with wages earnedduring retirement," Chapman predicted, and pointed to a number offindings to support that claim: A vast majority of the two younger generations surveyed - 71% of BabyBoomers and 81% of 20-Somethings - believe that Social Security will notbe there for them. Some 65% of Baby Boomers and 74% of 20-Somethings acknowledged thatthey were not saving enough for retirement. Paying off a mortgage,reducing credit card debt, and the costs of raising children are citedas barriers to saving more. Despite their pessimistic expectations about government benefits theymight receive in retirement and their inadequate level of savings, 61%of 20-Somethings and 68% of Baby Boomers believe that they will haveenough to live comfortably during retirement. Nearly six out of 10 of working Americans surveyed believe that theywill need to work - at least part-time - during their retirement years.Fortunately, perhaps, the same amount of respondents said they want tocontinue working after retirement, regardless of their financial status. 20-Somethings, Boomers and Pre-retirees seek more advice "Clearly, most Americans understand the importance of carefully planningfor retirement, so attitude is not the problem," Chapman said. "Rather,changing political and economic conditions are causing uncertainty.Despite the dearth of information available on retirement planning,Americans are still clamoring for help." An overwhelming majority of 20-Somethings (69%), Baby Boomers (65%), andPre-Retirees (65%) said that their respective generations need more helpplanning for retirement. Roughly one in three of 20-Somethings and BabyBoomers and one in five Pre-Retirees feel "uncertain" or "at a totalloss" when it comes to planning for their own retirement. When asked who they did or will turn to for advice on most of theirretirement planning, Americans cite a number of sources: a broker orfinancial advisor (39%); spouse (37%); friends (24%); parents (23%);other family members (15%); personal finance magazines (12%); researchpublications (6%); and on-line financial services (3%). Six out of 10 Americans felt they need a broker or financial advisor tohelp them cut through the clutter and deal with all the information outthere about investments. Yet most weren't very confident in theirability to chose a broker or financial advisor. More than half of the20-Somethings and Baby Boomers feel either "uncertain" or "at a totalloss" when it comes to knowing how to select a broker or financialadvisor. Among the survey's other key findings: When asked what one piece of advice they would give younger generationsabout saving for retirement, retirees said "start saving early" (62%),and "take advantage of company sponsored savings plans (18%). Fewmentioned "save more money" (8%). Not surprisingly, 47% of retirees saidthey did not start saving early enough for retirement. Only one in four retirees said they were able to accurately predicttheir financial needs before they retired. Americans across all groups named company sponsored plans - including401(k) (52%) and 403(b) (4%) plans - as their top retirement savings vehicle,followed by savings accounts (44%), mutual funds (40%), life insurance(39%) and IRA or Keogh accounts (39%). Roughly two out of three Americans say that they share thedecision-making about investing for retirement with their spouse. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), is one of the nation's largestmoney managers with over 45 years of experience. Kemper Distributors,Inc. (KDI), is the principal underwriter and distributor of Kemperproducts. Together with its affiliates, KFS has approximately $60billion in assets under management. KFS and KDI are indirectsubsidiaries of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM). Roper-Starch Worldwide is a leading marketing, public opinion andadvertising research firm. It was the first company in the world to usescientific survey techniques to study consumer behavior, marketingstrategy, public opinion and corporate image. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010690 WT01-B13-199IA018-000197-B006-257http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/slackers.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174612 text/html 5441HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:42:12 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:28:14 GMTContent-length: 5257Content-type: text/html "20-Somethings" No Slackers When It Comes To Retirement Planning, According To Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor June 15, 1995 For more information contact: Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 "20-SOMETHINGS" NO SLACKERS WHEN IT COMES TO RETIREMENT PLANNING, ACCORDING TO KEMPER-ROPER RETIREMENT MONITOR CHICAGO (June 15) - When it comes to retirement, Americans in their 20sshatter the "slacker" myth of being lost and living for the now,according to a poll released today by Kemper and Roper-Starch Worldwide. The "Kemper-Roper Retirement Monitor" polled 2,086 randomly selectedAmericans about their attitudes and expectations regarding retirement.The survey included representation from demographic age groupsincluding: 20-Somethings (aged 20-29), Baby Boomers (aged 30-49),Pre-retirees (aged 50-64) and Retirees (aged 65 and older). The surveyhas a margin of error of plus/minus two percent. "The so-called '20-Something' generation shows surprising sophisticationabout issues pertaining to planning, saving, and investing forretirement," said William E. Chapman II, executive vice president ofKemper. "They are cognizant of their responsibility to plan, are willingto hold off on personal consumption in order to save for retirement, andhave thought seriously about their future and their retirement." Among the survey's key findings: Half (50%) of 20-Somethings said they had started putting money away forretirement within the last one to five years. In contrast, 40% of BabyBoomers aged 40 to 44, and 35% of Boomers aged 45 to 49, waited until atleast their 30s to start saving for retirement. 61% of Americans in their 20s said they or their spouse had put moneyaside for retirement in either savings or investments, while 71% of BabyBoomers said the same. 58% of 20-Somethings said they or their spouse had put money into a401(K), somewhat more than 52% of the Baby Boomers who indicated thatthey had done so. Roughly three out of four 20-Somethings said that retirement is apriority in their savings plan; 20-Somethings are as likely as BabyBoomers to say that retirement is something they think a great dealabout. 20-Somethings (55%) were as likely as Baby Boomers (53%) to say they areprepared to reduce personal spending now in order to save forretirement. About one in four 20-Somethings reported that they had increased theamount of money they put into retirement savings during the past year;39% of Baby Boomers reported doing the same. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), is one of the nation's leadingmoney managers with over 45 years of experience. Kemper Distributors,Inc. (KDI), is the principal underwriter and distributor of Kemperproducts. Together with its affiliates, KFS has approximately $60billion in assets under management. KFS and KDI are indirectsubsidiaries of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM). Roper-Starch Worldwide is a leading marketing, public opinion andadvertising research firm. It was the first company in the world to usescientific survey techniques to study consumer behavior, marketingstrategy, public opinion and corporate image. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010640 WT01-B13-200IA018-000197-B006-267http://www.kemper.com:80/about/kempernews/fivethings.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174620 text/html 4851HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:42:21 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 12-Sep-96 15:27:48 GMTContent-length: 4667Content-type: text/html Five Things Investors Should Know BeforeChoosing A Money Market Fund May 31, 1995 For more information contact: Eileen Davis, 312/499-1801 Steve Radis, 312/499-8393 FIVE THINGS INVESTORS SHOULD KNOW BEFORECHOOSING A MONEY MARKET FUND CHICAGO (May 31) - Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), the investmentadviser to Kemper Money Market Fund, today announced it is offering afree brochure to help savers and investors make wise decisions whenselecting a money market fund. Titled Shopping Around for a Money MarketFund? Five Things You Should Know Before You Invest, the brochure can be obtained by calling 1-800-694-1080, ext. 501. The brochure identifies five important considerations in choosing amoney market fund and offers guidelines for understanding eachconsideration. "Money market funds are an essential building block for any soundfinancial plan. They are designed to deliver money market yields and tomaintain stability of principal," said Michele Rudin, director of retailmoney fund marketing at KFS. "Yet, some money market funds have turnedto risky strategies to deliver higher yields. Helping to educateinvestors on how to make sound investment decisions is one of ourprimary goals." According to the money fund specialists at Kemper, whether a person is aconservative saver or a savvy investor, there are a few things he or sheshould know before choosing a money market fund, including: consider your tax bracket and the benefits of taxable versus tax-exempt income look for consistent performance over time, not just today's hottestyields check out the fund's expenses and how big a bite they will take out of your return think about the account services you will use and find out if they will cost you extra take a look at the fund's sponsor and track record Kemper Money Market Fund, one of the largest and oldest U.S. moneyfunds, has assets of more than $5 billion. An investment in Kemper MoneyMarket Fund is neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. Government.The Fund does seek to maintain a stable $1.00 share value, though therecan be no assurance that it will be maintained. Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS), is one of the nation's largestmoney managers with over 45 years of experience and, together with itsaffiliates, has approximately $60 billion in assets under management.KFS is a subsidiary of Kemper Corporation (NYSE: KEM), a holding companywith continuing operations in asset management and life insurance. This press release must be preceded or accompanied by a prospectus for Kemper Money Market Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1010650 WT01-B13-201IA018-000197-B006-277http://www.kemper.com:80/about/company.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174632 text/html 4642HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:42:34 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:22:10 GMTContent-length: 4460Content-type: text/html  The Company Kemper Financial Services, Inc. (KFS) was formed in 1948 when five Chicago entrepreneurs formed a mutual fund to capitalize on a technological breakthrough called television. They started Television Shares Management Corporation, and their Television Fund was the first to focus on the success and technological advances related to the television industry. Through successful innovation and diversification, KFS has enjoyed more than four decades of growth and prosperity. From its predecessor company managing a single mutual fund in 1948, KFS has grown to manage more than 28 different open-end mutual fund offerings as well as several closed-end funds. With more than $63 billion in assets under management, KFS is one of the nation's largest asset management firms and a recognized leader in the financial services industry. 1995 brought many changes to KFS. With the completion of the sale of Kemper Corporation, KFS is doing business as Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI) The name looks different, but our fundamental mission is the same: To manufacture and distribute high-quality investment management products and services to individuals and institutions and to help them achieve their long-term financial goals. ZKI employs a select group of talented professionals as well as entry level candidates. Qualified individuals would be considered for a variety of positions including: Shareholder Services Representatives Staff Accountants Investment Analysts Marketing Professionals Programmer/Analysts Wholesalers ZKI is committed to providing its employees with quality training and continuous professional as well as personal career development opportunities. Opportunities ZKI offers a competitive compensation as well as benefits package. Our comprehensive benefits package includes various medical plans, dental plans, vision insurance, life insurance, profit sharing/401(k), and tuition assistance. We are located in the heart of Chicago's financial market. It is an easy commute for city dwellers and suburban commuters. Easy access to all forms of public transportation. We are an Equal Opportunity Employer. ZURICH KEMPER INVESTMENTS, INC. 120 South LaSalle Street Chicago, IL 60603 Contact: Human Resources (312) 781-1121 (800) 621-1148 Fax (312) 499-8545 E-mail: job@kemper.com WT01-B13-202IA018-000197-B007-6http://www.kemper.com:80/about/joblist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174639 text/html 2618HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:42:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 22:34:37 GMTContent-length: 2436Content-type: text/html  Opportunities Lead Analyst Database Technician Inside Wholesaler Application For Employment (Kemper.com has been optimized to be viewed using Netscape Navigator 2.0.Accessing this application using a Netscape 1.x browser may cause your software to freeze. Click here to download a copy of Netscape Navigator 2.0.) WT01-B13-203IA018-000197-B007-18http://www.kemper.com:80/about/application.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174649 text/html 20373HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:42:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:22:01 GMTContent-length: 20190Content-type: text/html Kemper Online Application (An Equal Opportunity Employer) Please complete this entire application. Personal Information First Name M.I. Last Name Social Security Number Street Address City State Zip Code Home telephone Work telephone Have you ever worked or attended school under a different name? Yes No If yes, what name and at what school and/or employer? If hired can you provide proof that you are eligible to work in the UnitedStates? Yes No Are you at least 18 years of age? Yes No Position applying for (and if part time, hours available per week) Starting salary expected: General Information What prompted you to seek employment with us? Have you previously applied for a position with or been employed by a Zurichcompany? Yes No If yes, list dates and company: Are you a relative of an employee of a Zurich company? YesNo If Yes, which company and department? Please provide any additional information such as special skills, training,experience, equipment operation or qualifications you feel will be helpfulto us in considering your application. Educational Background Highest education level completed: ElementaryHigh SchoolCollegeGraduate12341 - 67 - 8 High School Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received College Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received College Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received College Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received Other Name City State Number of years attended Major Field of Study Degree, Diploma or Credit Received Year Degree Received Other Information Have you ever been refused a bond? Yes No If yes, please explain Have you ever been convicted, pleaded guilty or nolo contendere("no contest") to any felony? Yes No If yes, please explain Have you ever been convicted, pleaded guilty or nolo contendere("no contest") to a misdemeanor involving a fraudulent or dishonsetact? Yes No If yes, please explain Note: A conviction will not necessarily be a bar to employment. Factorssuch as age and time of the offense, seriousness and nature of the violation,and rehabilitation will be taken into account. Employment History LIST MOST RECENT JOB FIRST. All employers prior to your current employermay be contacted to verify the information provided. May we contact your current employer at this time? Yes No Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Company Address Telephone Position Full Time Part Time Employed From (mo./yr.): To (mo./yr.): Salary Start End Supervisor Duties Reasons for leaving Zurich companies comply with federal, state and local laws governingemployment and business practices, and provide equal employment opportunitiesto all applicants and employees in a manner that will not discriminate againstany person because of race, color, religion, age, sex. national origin,disability or other status protected by applicable law. Carefully read the following statements BEFORE agreeingbelow. I understand that accuracy and completeness of the information providedon this application are required. I understand that any misstatement oromission of fact on this application may result in the failure to be hiredor discharged. I understand that it is a requirement of employment that I be bonded (atthe expense of the employer) and that my employment is therefore subjectto my acceptance by the bonding company. I authorize Zurich to make a thorough investigation of my past employment,education and other activities and release from all liability all personsand entities supplying such information. I understand that it is the practiceof this company to obtain fingerprints of all employees and submit themto the Federal Bureau of Investigation. I agree, if employed, to permitZurich to obtain my fingerprints. I understand that some positions at Zurich have special continuing qualificationrequirements, such as the acquisition and maintenance of a license and/orthe passing of an examination after employment begins, or such other qualificationrequirements as may be established by the company, and acknowledge thatemployment in any position must terminate if a job qualification requirementis not met. I understand that as part of the normal procedure for processing my employmentapplication, a consumer report may be prepared. Such reports may includeinformation as to credit standing, character and general reputation. I alsounderstand that I have the right to make a written request within a reasonableperiod of time to receive additional detailed information about the natureand scope of this investigation. In the event that I am hired, and as a requirement of any employment withZurich, I agree to conform to the rules and standards of conduct of my employingcompany. I understand that my employment can be terminated for any or noreason and with or without notice, at any time, at the option of eitherthe company or myself. I understand that no employee or agent of Zurichis authorized to offer me an employment relationship other than one thatis terminable at will. I also understand and agree that the terms and conditions of my employment(other than my at-will status) as well as any employee benefits with Zurichmay be changed or discontinued at any time with or without notice. WT01-B13-204IA018-000197-B007-31http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/totalreturn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174658 text/html 8995HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:00 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:14:55 GMTContent-length: 8811Content-type: text/html How To Arrive At Total Return A recent Kemper Reports survey found that most shareholders responding to a recent Kemper Pulse survey evaluate the performance of their mutual fund on the basis of total return (for more survey results, see How Kemper Shareholders Evaluate Performance). That's good because total return represents the net effect of everything that happened with your fund over a certain time period (see below for a complete description of total return). To fully understand your fund's performance, it can be helpful to review the components of total return. A fund's total return in one year cannot be used to predict its performance in the next. By considering where your fund's return came from, however, you may have a better idea of what will influence your fund's ability to perform in the future. Let's review the components of total return for three basic fund types. A money market fund's total return will be generated by income earned on its net investments, which is paid to shareholders in the form of income dividends. Short-term capital gains and unrealized appreciation, while possible, are uncommon. Because a money market fund must continually reinvest as its existing short-term securities mature - requiring the proceeds to be reinvested at prevailing rates - the money market fund is especially sensitive to changes in rates. Its earning ability is directly dependent upon short-term interest rates, and its income distributions will fluctuate. At the same time, however, the fund manager strives to avoid NAV fluctuation. A money market fund seeks to maintain a stable net asset value $1.00 per share (although there can be no assurance that it will). There are many types of income funds, and each type has its own investment strategy. But every income fund shares one objective: the generation of current income. These are just a few of the considerations that can affect a fund's ability to earn income: The type of income-producing security that the fund invests in - e.g., because of the greater risk to principal, corporate bonds and mortgages (and mortgage-related securities) will generally yield more than comparable maturity U.S. Treasuries. The length of the fund's investment - funds that are willing to take the risk of investing in securities for a longer period of time will generally be compensated (with a higher rate of return) for assuming such risk. The quality of the investment - in order to appeal to investors, a poorer quality investment generally needs to offer a higher rate of return. Each of these considerations represents a risk - and that risk can be reflected in fluctuations in the price of a fund's shares. Lower-risk income funds - specifically funds whose objective is to maintain preservation of principal - will attempt to provide relative NAV stability. As with other income funds, these funds' ability to generate income depends upon interest rates and the maturities of their securities. However, the range of NAV change - up or down - may not be as great as other funds. High-risk income are willing to take maximum risk to maximize current income. Such a strategy, however, can erode principal. In that case, a positive total return may be the result of strong income dividends offsetting a shrinking net asset value. Capital growth funds, whose potential for total return is the highest among all mutual fund types over time, generally produce their total return from a combination of capital gain, income and price appreciation. Both the dividends and net asset value of your capital growth fund will fluctuate. The level of dividend income earned from stocks owned by the portfolio will fluctuate. Income dividends vary according to many factors, including the number of dividend-paying stocks in a portfolio and the level of dividends paid. No year is the same as the next when it comes to capital gain dividends. The strength of the stock market in 1995, for example, prompted several fund managers to take profits on many holdings, which generated significant capital gains. It is possible for a fund to produce a solid total return without paying significant dividends. In order to do this, the value of the portfolio must appreciate. Within the broad category of capital growth funds are funds that combine capital growth and income. Capital growth and income funds offer the added potential of earning income from fixed-income securities owned by the portfolio. By investing in bonds or other securities that produce income, this fund type helps reduce its reliance on capital growth - and its risk level. Of course, this strategy of attempting to reduce risk is not without a cost: The prospect of building total return through price appreciation is diminished for this type of fund. Total return A measure of the net investment income earned by the fund and any realized and unrealized appreciation or depreciation of the fund's investments for a period. Total return calculations assume that you reinvested your dividends. Income dividends Interest and dividend income earned by a fund's investments, less fund expenses, is net investment income. This is distributed to you in the form of income dividends. Income dividends of taxable funds are taxable. Capital gain dividends Distributions of any net profits realized by a fund when individual securities are sold are capital gain dividends. Such gains, if there are any, are distributed at least annually. Capital gain dividends are taxable. NAV change Any increase (appreciation) or decrease (depreciation) in the value of a fund's investments over time results in appreciation or depreciation of a fund share - its net asset value (NAV). Net asset values fluctuate. As long as you hold your shares, changes in their net asset value are not taxable. This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020600 WT01-B13-205IA018-000197-B007-44http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/investment_basics/diversification.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174705 text/html 8957HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:07 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 21:10:21 GMTContent-length: 8775Content-type: text/html The Power of Diversification Let's face it, if there were a place where we could all earn a solid return on our investments with little or no risk, you probably wouldn't be reading this. But, very often, you may have to accept more risk to seek higher potential returns than those offered by guaranteed or insured investments. Do nothing and continue complaining! Go to Las Vegas and place your entire life savings on one hand of black jack. Put your money under your mattress or bury it in the backyard. Put every penny you have into a high flying stock that you heard about on the train the other day. DIVERSIFY: Place a portion of your money in several carefully chosen investments, and keep a portion of your money in more conservative investments. Choice E offers one of the best potentials for gain without incurring undue risk. Scott Jordan is 50 years old. Through hard work and determination, Scott has managed to save $100,000 over the years. Scott wants to retire at age 60, but feels that he needs to earn more on his investments than he is presently earning in order to retire in comfort. His financial advisor has suggested that he put his money in several investments, each with varying degrees of risk, in order to make his retirement nest egg potentially grow faster. Scott asks just one question: "What if I lose money?" To help reassure Scott, his financial advisor illustrates this scenario: a hypothetical total loss of one investment. Let's see what happened to Scott's hypothetical investment in this example. Result: Scott's hypothetical portfolio MORE THAN DOUBLED its original value, from 1-1-86 through 12-31-95. Even with a 100% loss from one of Scott's investment choices, his historical hypothetical investment in the U.S. stock market (represented by the S&P stock index), the international stock market (represented by the EAFE international stock index), the bond market (represented by a bond index) and Treasury bills grew enough over 10 years to offset his loss from 1-1-86 through 12-31-95. By spreading your investment over several choices, you may be able to participate in the return potential of the stock market and reduce your risk. In our example, Scott's historical hypothetical investments included investments in stocks and bonds, represented by indices. Another popular way to diversify is to invest in a mutual fund, which spreads its portfolio holdings across a number of stocks and/or bonds. Not only does this further spread the risk of investing in the stock or bond markets, it allows your money to be managed by professional portfolio managers, trained to recognize both opportunities and risks. Professional management can add a great deal of value to the concept of diversification. Mutual fund shareholders benefit from the years of experience each portfolio management team brings to the table. Ask your financial representative to review your investments in light of your financial goals and your tolerance for risk. Then, ask your representative about the many investment opportunities available through Kemper, one of the largest asset managers, with more than $78 billion currently under management. If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now. Chart Source: Towers Data Systems. This hypothetical example is for illustrative purposes only and is not intended to represent performance of any specific portfolio of investments, but only of the indices shown. Investors cannot make investments directly into these indices. This information is historical and is not representative of future performance of these indices. There is no guarantee that any specific diversification strategy will result in a profit or protect an investor from loss. Performance of Kemper Funds is available from your financial representative or you can go to Kemper Funds Profiles. There are important differences among these investments that should be considered in reviewing this data. Rates of Treasury obligations are fixed at issuance and timely payment of principal and interest is backed by the U.S. Treasury. Market value will fluctuate inversely with interest rates prior to maturity and will equal par at maturity. Investment return and principal value of stocks will fluctuate with changes in the market. The returns and net asset value of mutual funds will fluctuate and shares upon redemption will be worth more or less than original cost. 1. The Standard & Poor's 500 Stock Index is an unmanaged index generally representative of the U.S. stock market. Source: Towers Data Systems. 2. The EAFE Index (Morgan Stanley Capital International Europe, Austral-Asia, Far East Index) is an unmanaged index that is a generally accepted benchmark for major overseas markets. Data is U.S. dollar adjusted. Source: Towers Data Systems. 3. The Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond Index is an unmanaged index generally representative of the performance of intermediate and long-term government and investment-grade corporate debt securities during various market conditions. Source: Towers Data Systems. 4. Towers Data Systems U.S. Treasury bill data is an unmanaged index based on the average monthly yield of 6-month U.S. Treasury bills. Source: Towers Data Systems. 5. A hypothetical investment of $20,000 losing all of its value during a 10-year time frame from 1-1-86 through 12-31-95. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020500 WT01-B13-206IA018-000197-B007-59http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/investment_basics/mistakes.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174714 text/html 16899HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:14 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 21:10:31 GMTContent-length: 16716Content-type: text/html The 13 Most Common Mistakes To Avoid When Investing In Mutual Funds How fast is the mutual fund industry growing? Today, 31% of all American households own shares of at least one mutual fund. Between 1990 and year-end 1995, assets in mutual funds skyrocketed from $567 billion to $2.1 trillion. And, as the chart at right indicates, the number of mutual funds available has also soared, from 1,500 in 1985 to more than 5,700 today. Clearly, American investors are aware of the advantages of mutual funds. Now, we'd like to take that awareness one step further. The following are 13 of the most common and costly mistakes to avoid when investing in mutual funds. After all, one of the surest routes to smart investing is educated investing. Common Mistake #1 Choosing a fund with short-term objectives to address long-term financial goals. If you are investing for your preschooler's college education or a dream retirement home, then a long-term investment perspective is probably more appropriate than a short-term one. Generally speaking, the more long-term your perspective, the greater your tolerance of price fluctuations should be. After all, if you are giving an investment 20 or 25 years to grow, you can probably withstand the price fluctuations that have historically accompanied greater rewards. In short, don't overlook the dual use of many mutual fund investments -- meeting monthly income needs while also taking advantage of long-term growth potential. Common Mistake #2 Always choosing the fund that is advertising the highest yield, rather than looking at total return. Yield is one way of evaluating a fund's performance. A high yield, however, may come at the expense of the fund's net asset value, or share price. Some funds may reduce the underlying value to pay out that high current income. As a result, the market value of your investment may be diminished. The most complete measure of mutual fund performance is total return. Total return takes into account the three components of performance: income dividends, capital gain dividends and changes in the value of your fund's shares. As a result, total return provides a more complete picture of performance than looking only at current income, or yield. Common Mistake #3 Choosing a fund based on incomplete magazine or newspaper information. Some magazine and newspaper rankings are based on yield (current income) rather than on the total value of the investment. Also, look carefully at the reporting period for a fund's performance. Some funds have had high returns for a quarter or two, or maybe one year. If you are making a long-term investment, it's critical that you look at the performance of a fund over a longer period of time -- three, five, or even ten years. Of course, a fund's past performance cannot guarantee its future performance, but it can give you a good idea of a fund's history and whether it has performed consistently over the years. Two of the best-known third-party ranking services are Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. and Morningstar, Inc. Both rank funds by total return over long periods of time. Common Mistake #4 Investing in mutual funds that deduct sales charges from your reinvested dividends. A sales charge compensates the individual who helps you select the right mutual fund. But, after you buy, why should you continue paying? Make sure the fund you select doesn't continue to deduct sales charges on your reinvested dividends. Over the life of your investment, free dividend reinvestment, with full compounding, can be a significant benefit. Kemper Funds offer free reinvestment of dividends at net asset value. That means you do not pay a sales charge for dividend reinvestment. Note: The assumed 8% return in the chart is not indicative of past or future performance of any particular mutual fund. The yield and net asset value of a mutual fund will fluctuate. In the example, total income earned from free reinvestment of dividends compounded monthly over a 10-year period is $22,196.40. Total income earned from reinvestment of dividends with a 4% sales charge over a 10-year period is $21,501.83. So, the additional income earned from free reinvestment of dividends over a 10-year period is $694.57. Common Mistake #5 Not investing in a municipal bond mutual fund when your objective is tax-free income. Given today's potentially higher marginal tax rates, more investors are turning to tax-free investments such as mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds. The income dividends from these funds are exempt from federal income taxes, though they may be subject to state or local taxes. And, if you invest in a state-specific fund, the income can be free from state and local taxes as well. For some investors, a portion of income may be subject to the alternative minimum tax.1 Common Mistake #6 Not having an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) if you are eligible to have one. Despite legislative changes over the years, the IRA continues to offer most investors tremendous opportunities to save and invest for retirement through the deferral of taxes. The powerful effect of tax-deferred compounding over time, and the affordability of the IRA, continue to make this an extremely important component of effective retirement planning. Investing in more than one mutual fund IRA allows you to further reduce risk by diversifying. You should, of course, review the description of the investment objective and policies in the prospectus of a fund before investing to more fully understand the market and credit risk associated with an investment in a particular fund.1 Common Mistake #7 Choosing a fund without understanding all of the fees and expenses. Some investors shop by comparing only sales charges. But, in addition to sales charges, mutual fund shareowners indirectly pay for management fees, general expenses, and, in some cases, distribution and administrative fees. Distribution and administrative fees are used by some funds toward payment of fund marketing and account-servicing. These fees are normally paid to third parties, like brokerage firms and banks, which market and service fund accounts. These charges are either in lieu of, or in addition to, sales charges paid by the investor. Management fees are paid by the fund to the fund's investment manager for expertise in the management of the fund's portfolio. These fees are usually a fixed percent per annum of the funds average net assets. General expenses include other operational expenses that are charged directly to the fund and include transfer agent, custodial and legal fees. Before you invest, study all the fees. It's better to know up-front than to find out later that performance of your fund is being pulled down by high distribution and management fees, or uncontrolled fund expenses. And, be sure to read a fund's prospectus before you invest. Common Mistake #8 Choosing a fund that doesn't have the shareholder privileges you might need or failing to activate those privileges when you open a fund account. To make the management of your account easier, most mutual funds offer investing privileges free of charge. Some funds, however, charge a fee for using them. To avoid headaches and delays later on, be sure to activate your investing privileges -- especially exchange and wire-redemption privileges -- when you open a new account. These privileges include: reinvestment of dividends, exchange privileges, wire redemptions, pre-authorized purchase plans and systematic withdrawal plans. Whatever you decide, make sure that you choose a fund that offers the privileges you need - at no extra charge. These privileges are subject to modification, suspension, or termination by a fund. Common Mistake #9 Failing to reinvest all dividends in order to take advantage of the power of compounding. Reinvesting your dividends can help add substantially to the growth of your investment. The chart to the right (for illustrative purposes only) portrays the beneficial impact of reinvestment income monthly at various interest rates, over a ten-year period. The chart assumes a $10,000 initial investment. The assumed rates are not representative of any yield or return that a particular fund may offer. Common Mistake #10 Failing to get professional advice in selecting the mutual funds that are right for your unique financial situation. Today's marketplace offers more than 5,700 mutual funds with many different investment objectives. In each investment category alone, there can be hundreds of funds from which to choose. How do you decide which fund is best for your personal financial situation and goals? The answer is simple: obtain the advice of a broker, banker or financial planner before you purchase. In today's ever-changing financial and tax environment, the need for professional guidance has never been greater. It's easy to consult a broker, banker or financial planner before you make a mutual fund choice. Common Mistake #11 Choosing a fund that makes redeeming shares like pulling teeth. Make sure the fund you select has simple and convenient redemption procedures. At most fund companies, the quickest and most convenient way is to have redemption proceeds wired to your local bank account. Kemper's wire-redemption privilege, if pre-authorized, makes it possible for you to redeem $1,000 or more with one toll-free phone call. Your money is normally sent via FedWire® to your designated bank account the next business day, free of charge by the fund. Even if you did not choose wire-redemption privileges, you may still redeem up to $50,000* without obtaining a signature guarantee. To redeem $50,000 or less, just call your financial representative. Or, you can send a letter requesting the amount you desire, signed by the owner(s) of the account. A check payable to you will be sent to your address of record within seven days. There is no need to make an extra trip to your bank or broker to get your signature guaranteed. *Redemption requests by individuals and certain designated institutional account holders for over $50,000, and all requests by institutions not so designated, do require a signature guarantee. See the prospectus for details and limitations. Common Mistake #12 Choosing a fund that is not a member of a family of mutual funds. Financial markets are constantly changing in response to economic and environmental factors. As a result, the mutual fund you select today may not be right tomorrow. You need the advantage of being able to conveniently exchange into another fund with different investment objectives. So you should select a fund that is part of a family of funds. Kemper Funds include a wide range of mutual funds to address a lifetime of changing investment objectives. Should your investment needs or market conditions change, you can move your investment within the Fund Family with one toll-free call.* Your Shareholder Services representative will be happy to tell you more about the other Kemper Funds. *The exchange privilege is subject to modification, suspension and termination and to certain limitations described in the prospectus. Common Mistake #13 Choosing a fund that is administered and managed by a firm that is here today, but may be gone tomorrow. When you invest your money in a mutual fund, you want to be sure it is being handled by an experienced, well capitalized firm with an established track record. Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. (ZKI), is one of the largest investment managers headquartered in North America, having more than $78 billion in assets under management. The company operates with three main business units: retail mutual funds, retirement plans and institutional asset management. ZKI is the investment advisor to the Kemper Funds and is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a global organization headquartered in Zurich, Switzerland, that provides services in life and non-life insurance, reinsurance and asset management in more than 45 countries worldwide. 1Consult your accountant or financial representative to discuss whether tax-free mutual funds or an IRA are right for you. For a Kemper Fund prospectus containing more complete information, including management fees and expenses, request one now or contact your financial advisor. If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now. Please read the prospectus before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020490 WT01-B13-207IA018-000197-B007-72http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/investment_basics/dollarcost.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174723 text/html 13032HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:23 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 23-Aug-96 21:10:23 GMTContent-length: 12849Content-type: text/html Dollar Cost Averaging "Buy low, sell high." So easy to say, but not so easy to do. In reality, many investors find it tough to resist the natural temptation to pull out of the market when prices are falling, or to put more money in after a significant rally. And many more investors, concerned that they have to get it right to hit it big, spend so long waiting for the "right time" to get into the market that they never do invest. They let their fears about market fluctuations deny them the outstanding performance opportunities provided by stocks. There is a way to help reduce the risk of investing at the wrong time and actually take advantage of the ups and downs of the stock market. It's a simple strategy that proves timing isn't everything. It's called dollar cost averaging. While dollar cost averaging can help protect you from buying only at the absolute worst time, it cannot guarantee a profit or protect against a loss in a declining market. But if you have the patience to ride out the tough times and stick to your regular investing schedule, there are definite advantages to dollar cost averaging. With dollar cost averaging, you make smaller investments at regular intervals over a period of time, instead of a large, one-time investment. The investment amount and frequency are up to you (for instance, $200 each week, $500 each month, or $1,000 every three months). Successful dollar cost averaging requires that you stick to your plan, regardless of what the market does. Make sure you select an amount that is consistent with your financial means, so that you can continue to purchase shares even through periods of low share prices. It's simpler than you might expect. Since you invest the same dollar amount each period, you automatically purchase more shares when prices are low and fewer shares when prices are high. This means that, over the entire purchase period, your average cost per share will be lower than the investment's average price per share. And you have used market fluctuations to your investment advantage. You've decided to invest $5,000 in a stock mutual fund, in $1,000 monthly investments over a five-month period. Let's see how three typical market trends-rising, declining, and fluctuating (up and down)-affect your total investment. Note: The hypothetical share prices used are for illustrative purposes only and are not intended to represent the actual prices of any Kemper Fund. In an up market, the best possible time to buy is obviously at the very beginning-the ground floor. But how can you tell exactly when the upswing will start? The truth is, no one can. The beauty of dollar cost averaging is that you don't need a crystal ball to guide your investment plan. When the share price drops, you should resist profit-taking -- selling your shares -- and continue your regular $1,000 investments. Regular Investment Share Price Shares Acquired $1,000 $ 5 200 $1,000 $ 6 167 $1,000 $ 7 143 $1,000 $ 6 167 $1,000 $ 9 111 $5,000 $33* 788 How did you do? With dollar cost averaging, you ended up with 788 shares worth $7,092. That's a 42% gain on your original $5,000 investment. Average Share Cost: $6.35 ($5,000/788 shares) Average Share Price: $6.60 ($33/5 purchases) And even with continually rising prices, your average cost per share is lower than the average price paid. * Cumulative total of share prices used to compute average price. Let's look at how dollar cost averaging can help protect you from buying at the worst time -- the highest price -- during a period of generally declining prices. While dollar cost averaging cannot protect against a loss in a declining market, you purchase more shares at lower prices with each investment. If you had committed your entire $5,000 the first month, you'd have received only 1,000 shares worth just $1,000 after 5 months. The price would have to rebound all the way to $5 just to break even... Regular Investment Share Price Shares Acquired $1,000 $ 5 200 $1,000 $ 3 333 $1,000 $ 3 333 $1,000 $ 2 500 $1,000 $ 1 1000 $5,000 $14* 2,366 ...But your five monthly $1,000 investments purchased a total of 2,366 shares that, at the final price, are worth $2,366. Average Share Cost: $2.11 ($5,000/2,366 shares) Average Share Price: $2.80 ($14/5 purchases) By dollar cost averaging you automatically bought more shares at attractive low prices. And any recovery beyond your average share cost -- $2.11 -- puts you back in the black and in great shape to benefit from future appreciation opportunities. * Cumulative total of share prices used to compute average price. During an up-and-down market, you purchase shares when prices are high, low, and in between. Can dollar cost averaging still work? With dollar cost averaging, you can use market fluctuations to your own investment advantage, even when share prices go up and down. By dollar cost averaging your investment, you always bought fewer shares when the price was high and more shares when the price was low. Regular Investment Share Price Shares Acquired $1,000 $ 5 200 $1,000 $ 7 143 $1,000 $ 5 200 $1,000 $ 3 333 $1,000 $ 5 200 $5,000 $25* 1,076 Thanks to dollar cost averaging, you stayed invested during an uncertain market, ending up with more than 1,000 shares. Average Share Cost: $4.65 ($5,000/1,076 shares) Average Share Price: $5.00 ($25/5 purchases) And even in a fluctuating market, dollar cost averaging results in an average share cost less than your average share price. * Cumulative total of share prices used to compute average price. You want to ease into the stock market. You are retiring or changing jobs and want to roll over or transfer your benefit distribution. You recently sold a home or other large asset and want to consolidate your proceeds. You received a sizable gift, bonus, inheritance, or other large payment. If you have a significant sum to invest, consider starting a dollar cost averaging program with an investment in a money market or other conservative fixed income fund.* Then periodically -- and consistently -- exchange (transfer) a set amount into an equity or other higher potential fund. Ask your financial advisor about starting a Kemper Systematic Exchange Plan, a feature that can handle these regular transfers for you automatically.** If you know your representative's e-mail address, click here to send him or her an e-mail now. If you don't have a lot of money to invest, you may sign up for one of Kemper's other automatic investing options: Payroll and Government Direct Deposit or Bank Direct Deposit, a feature that lets you invest automatically from your checking or savings account at an Automated Clearing House member bank, savings and loan, or credit union. * An investment in a money market mutual fund is neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government. There can be no assurance that the fund will be able to maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00 per share. ** The exchange privilege is subject to modification, suspension, or termination and to limitations described in the prospectus. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1020480 WT01-B13-208IA018-000197-B007-86http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/taxable.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174732 text/html 5358HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:33 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:10 GMTContent-length: 5176Content-type: text/html Taxable Or Tax-Exempt? Depending on your tax bracket, you may be better off - and enjoy a yieldadvantage - in an investment that is exempt from federal income taxes. The primary intention of tax-exempt investments is to generate incomethat is not subject to federal income taxes. (Income may be subject tostate and local taxes, and a portion of income may be subject to thealternative minimum tax for certain investors.) When you consider the federal taxes you would owe on the income you receivefrom a taxable investment, you may find that you will retain more incomewith a tax-exempt investment. In general, the higher your tax bracket,the more advantageous a tax-exempt investment can be - as you will note inthe tables below. (Both tables are based on 1996 federal rates.) *This table assumes a decrease of $3.75 of itemized deductions for each $100of adjusted gross income over $117,950. For a married couple with adjustedgross income between $176,950 and $299,450 (single between $117,950 and$240,450), add 0.7% to the above marginal federal tax rate for each personal and dependencyexemption. The taxable equivalent yield is the tax-exempt yield dividedby 100% minus the adjusted tax rate. For example: if the table tax rate is37.1% and you are married with no dependents, the adjusted tax rate is38.5% (37.1% + 0.7%+0.7%). For a tax-exempt yield of 6%, the taxableequivalent yield is about 9.76% (6% ÷ (100%-38.5%). As shown in the tables, you would have to earn significantly higher yieldson ataxable investment to offset the effect of the federal tax you would oweonyour income. You would not be liable to pay federal income tax on the interest dividend incomeyou receive from the tax-exempt investment. However, for all tax exempt mutual funds, distribution of capital gains are considered taxable income to the shareholder. Please remember thata portion of the interest dividend may be considered a tax preference item for purposes of the alternative minimum tax. (Of course, the yields inthetables are for purposes of illustration only and do not reflect theyield ofa specific investment.) Even though most investors prefer to avoid taxes, the tax advantage andlower tax-exempt yields available from tax-exempt investments are notthebest choice for all investors. For your own circumstances, be sure toworkthrough the calculations shown above or consult your financialrepresentative. Investors are required to disclose on their federal income tax returnstheamount of tax-exempt interest earned during the year. In addition,individuals whose modified income, which includes adjusted gross income,tax-exempt interest and 50 percent of their Social Security benefits,exceeds a base amount will be subject to federal income tax on as muchas 85percent of their Social Security benefits. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009830 WT01-B13-209IA018-000197-B007-97http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/evaluate_perform.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174740 text/html 5218HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:42 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:18 GMTContent-length: 5036Content-type: text/html How Kemper Shareholders EvaluatePerformance The ultimate measure of your mutual fund iswhether it enables you toachieve your investment goal - the purchase of ahome, the financing ofyour child's education or the attainment of acomfortable retirement.But how do you evaluate your mutual fund'speriodic progress? Whatencourages you about your fund's performance andwhat discourages you?Which of the many performance measures aremeaningful and which do youdismiss as investment world static? These are the questions that we sought to answerwhen we recently askedseveral hundred thousand Kemper mutual fundshareholders in four equityand three income funds to complete a Kemper Pulsesurvey mailed alongwith their issues of Kemper Reports. Response tothe survey was high,and the results are believed to be statisticallysignificant anddemographically sound. Highlights of the surveyfindings follow. "On their own, survey results can't and shouldn'tdictate investmentphilosophy," says Stephen B. Timbers, presidentof Kemper Funds."But they can improve our understanding ofshareholders' expectations oftheir funds, and they can help frame ourcommunications to investors." The performance of a mutual fund can be measuredavariety of ways. What's most important to youabout your fund? Total return is widely considered to be the bestyardstick of mutualfund performance because it takes into accountthe three components ofperformance: income dividends, capital gaindividends and changes inthe value of the fund's shares. Question #2 on the survey varied, depending onwhether it was mailedto an income or equity fund shareholder. Equity Funds- Individual investors have varying expectations oftheir mutual funds. For example, how many yearsare you prepared to give your equity fund toappreciate in value? Income Funds- Individual investors have varying expectations oftheir mutual funds. For example, to what extentdo you rely on your fund's dividends for yourmonthly income? Investors in equities are wise to give theirinvestment more thanfive years to appreciate. The fortunes of everycompany depend tosome extent upon the health of the U.S. economy.Giving an equityinvestment just one or two years to perform maybe insufficient time toexpose it to the most productive points in aneconomic cycle. An income fund's ability to provide currentincome is one of its primaryappeals. However, a mutual fund's earnings areinfluenced by interestrates and other variables that can fluctuatesignificantly. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009840 WT01-B13-210IA018-000197-B007-112http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/funds_vs_dividends.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174755 text/html 3833HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:43:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:33 GMTContent-length: 3651Content-type: text/html The Difference Between Mutual Fund And Stock Dividends Many mutual fund shareholders mistakenly believe that a mutual funddividend is similar to a dividend declared by a corporation.Corporations that pay dividends are returning a share of their profitsto their shareholders, an interim means of rewarding shareholders fortheir investment. Investors have reason to be encouraged when a companydeclares consecutive dividends or dividend increases. Conversely, a cutin dividends often suggests that something is amiss. A change in the dividend paid by a mutual fund is normally much lessmeaningful. The dividend level represents the income that the fund hasearned on its investments - interest on the bonds held in an income fundportfolio or dividends on stocks in an equity fund portfolio. Becauseinterest rates and the financial markets tend to move in cycles, you canalways expect some fluctuation in the income earned by your fund.Regardless of these fluctuations, mutual funds distribute substantiallyall of their income annually in order to avoid paying income tax ontheir earnings. When interest rates rise and a fund can earn more on its underlyinginvestments, the dividends it pays may be expected to rise. By the sametoken, a drop in interest rates over an extended period of time willresult in a reduction in the interest income earned by a fund. Thisdecline in income earned may result in the fund being forced to cut thedividends paid to shareholders. Dividend income is only one way that your investment in a mutual fundcan grow. You also have the opportunity to receive capital gainsdistributions, which are distributions of any profits that your fundearns when it sells securities. Another possibility is the capital gain(or loss) you experience when you sell your shares at a higher (orlower) share price than your cost per share. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009850 WT01-B13-211IA018-000197-B007-121http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/whats_yield.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174805 text/html 6585HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:45 GMTContent-length: 6403Content-type: text/html What's In A Yield? How much income will your investment yield? That is a difficult questionto answer - although some investments promise a fixed return over aspecific period of time, mutual funds do not, and you cannot considerpast yield of a mutual fund a reliable predictor of future results. But if only for the purpose of comparing one investment choice withanother, it makes sense to pay attention to the stated yield of aninvestment. Mutual fund companies and depository institutions followboth regulation and convention in describing an investment's yield.Below we take a closer look at the various yields that you may seementioned in sales literature or advertisements. Annual percentage yield (APY): Income earned on a bank deposit (acertificate of deposit or money market deposit account, for example) isdescribed as an annual percentage yield. The yield reflects the totalamount of interest paid on a deposit account, based on the interest rateand the frequency of compounding for a 365-day period. Current yield: You will see a current - or seven-day - yield mentioned inmoney market fund advertising. This yield represents one week's incomeannualized as of a specific date. It does not include realized orunrealized gains and losses. Effective yield: Effective yield, in the context of fixed-priceinvestments such as money market funds or certificates of deposit,includes the effect of compounding net investment income. That's why aneffective yield will be higher than a quoted yield. To understand thedifference between the yield quoted on an investment and its effectiveyield, find out how frequently the income is assumed to be compounded.You'll note a greater difference when income is compounded weekly thanquarterly or semiannually. And, remember that effective yieldpresupposes that you reinvest all your income and that interest ratesremain constant. Current distribution rate: Current distribution rate is simply a measureof the level of dividends distributed by a mutual fund for a specifiedperiod. It may sometimes be greater than the fund's yield because, forinstance, it may include gains from the sale of short-term investmentsand possibly long-term gains (which may be non-recurring). SEC yield: The Securities and Exchange Commission requires all incomemutual funds to calculate a yield using the same standardized formula.According to the formula (which is included in Kemper funds' "Statement of Additional Information" or Part B), the SEC yield is netinvestment income per share earned over a specific month, expressed asan annualized percentage of the fund's maximum offering price (thefund's per share net asset value plus the maximum applicable salescharge) on the last day of that month. Taxable-equivalent yield: You'll find a taxable-equivalent yield cited inmaterial that accompanies investments in municipal bonds and mutualfunds that seek to earn income exempt from federal taxes. The stated orcoupon yield of these investments will likely be lower than the yield ofinvestments that are taxable. However, it's possible to calculate atax-equivalent yield that represents the yield that you would have toearn on a fully taxable investment before taxes to match the yield on atax-free investment. The marketing materials will tell you the federal(and state, if applicable) tax rates used as a basis for calculating thetaxable-equivalent yield. This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. Although yield will give you an idea of the income being generated byyour investment, total return is considered one of the best measures of the overallperformance of most mutual fund investments. (Because money market fundsseek to maintain a constant $1.00 share price, yield is the usualmeasure of their performance.) Total return is a measure of the income earned by the fund'sinvestments, plus the effect of any realized and unrealized appreciationor depreciation of the investments, during a stated period of time,assuming the reinvestment of all dividends. While yield measures onlythe income component of your fund shares, total return considers threecomponents: income dividends, capital gain dividends and changes in thevalue of your shares. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009860 WT01-B13-212IA018-000197-B007-128http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/miss_prospectus.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174814 text/html 3091HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:18 GMTContent-length: 2909Content-type: text/html What You Might Miss If You Don't Read The Prospectus Every mutual fund shareholder has been provided with a prospectus at onetime or another. Ah, but have you read the prospectus? Mutual fund prospectuses may look drearily alike but each fund companyuses the prospectus to describe its own investment policies andpractices. Most practices are reasonable and easy to understand - evenso, you'll be better off knowing them sooner rather than later. Here's a short list of what you might miss if you don't read theprospectus: Some fund companies assess a fee every time you reinvest yourdividends. Some fund companies assess a fee if you redeem your shares before aprescribed time period. Some fund companies impose a 30-day or longer waiting period beforethey'll exchange your shares from one fund into another. Some funds insist on the right to pay your redemption proceeds in"marketable securities" instead of cash in the case of largeredemptions. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1994 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009880 WT01-B13-213IA018-000197-B007-138http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/autoinvesting.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174821 text/html 7501HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:27:42 GMTContent-length: 7319Content-type: text/html The Benefits Of Automatic Investing Some of the best things you can do for yourself - eating vegetables,flossing your teeth and investing regularly - are the most difficulthabits to develop. None provides immediate gratification, and some aredownright disagreeable. There's no sugar surge from vegetables. Flossingcan be irritating. And when you invest a portion of your income, thatmoney is not available for you to spend. What, then, is the incentive toadopt these good habits? The payback for a lifetime of eating peas (and Brussels sprouts andasparagus and broccoli) is good health. Wedging that floss in and out ofyour teeth can spare you the expense and discomfort of repeatedvisits to the dentist. And people who invest regularly find theirmotivation by in the potential for positive long-term results.Although you can be given no guarantees, the decision to adopt a regularinvestment plan can be the beginning of yet another habit that can begood for you. Where do your investment dollars come from? Really, there are only twopossibilities. You might have a sizable amount of money (which we'll call a lump sum)that you want to put to work toward a short-term goal, such as thepurchase of a home, or a long-term goal, such as your retirement. Lumpsums can drop into your lap for any number of reasons - possibly youhave earned a bonus, received an inheritance or settled an insuranceclaim. No matter how it gets there, a lump sum distribution is anoccasion that requires an investment decision. But lump sum payments are infrequent occurrences. If you're like mostpeople, any money that you have to invest must come from your currentincome. You may use your income for other obligations and expenses, butif you're going to invest for your future, you're going to have do soout of today's income. Here's where you need discipline to develop the goodhabit to invest regularly. It's the enviable person who can sit down, pay his bills, buy what hewants and still have money left. It's the admirable person who followsthrough by taking the money that's left and investing it. It's the rareperson, indeed, who follows this regime every pay period. The rest of us need the discipline of an automatic investment program.Simply, an automatic investment program requires you to make thedecision to invest once. Once you've decided that you want to startinvesting now - as opposed to waiting for that day some point in thefuture when you get your lump sum - the automatic investment program cantake care of the rest. Where does your income come from? Whether it's from a paycheck, agovernment payment or a bank account, you can establish a regularprogram that will directly and automatically transfer a certain amountinto a mutual fund account. All you need to do is provide instructionsabout how much should be moved and into which fund account on what date. A program of automatic investing is easy to initiate, and this goodhabit can start with a relatively small sacrifice on your part. (AtKemper, the minimum monthly investment is $50.) In addition, a regular plan helps you develop a certain nonchalance.Once you've arranged to invest a fixed amount every paycheck or everymonth, you don't need to worry whether it's a "good" or "bad" time to bemaking an investment. When prices are high, your fixed investment willbuy fewer shares of your fund than when prices are low. Of course, whenthe price of your fund shares is low, you'll be able to accumulate moreshares. Market fluctuations shouldn't concern a regular investor with along-term investment horizon. You should realize, however, that an automatic investment program cannotassure a profit or protect against loss in a declining market. Sincethis type of program involves continuous investment regardless offluctuating share values, you'll need to consider your financial abilityto continue the program through periods of low price levels. As a Kemper shareholder, you have your choice of three automatic investment programs.* All are free of charge. You can arrange to have all or a portion of your paycheck investeddirectly into a Kemper fund. You can automatically invest directly from your checking account.Justselect the day each month that your money should be transferred to yourmutual fund account from your checking or savings account at any bank,savings institution or credit union.** If you receive Social Security checks or other regular paymentsfromthe U.S. government or any of its agencies, you can automatically investall or a portion of your government check directly into a Kemper fund. *Investments may be subject to a sales charge. Please consult yourprospectus for additional information. **In order for you to establish a Bank Direct Deposit plan, yourfinancial institution must be a member of the Automated Clearing HouseAssociation. Note that mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteedas bank products are, and mutual funds present a greater risk tocapital. For more information, talk to your financial representative or callKemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009900 WT01-B13-214IA018-000197-B007-149http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/track_investment.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174828 text/html 4969HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:17 GMTContent-length: 4787Content-type: text/html Tracking Your Kemper Fund Investment To keep an eye on the progress of your investment, you can turn to many sourcesof information. Here's a quick review of what Kemper provides: Your quarterly statement. You'll find your fund's year-to-datetotal return through the end of the previous month and its averageannualtotal returns as of the closing date of the previous quarter shown inthe fund summary of your quarterly statement. Total return and average annual total return are a measure of netinvestment income and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments,assuming that dividends are reinvested. While total returns are notadjusted, average annual total returns are adjusted for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at theend of the period. Average annual total return reflects annualizedchange while total return reflects aggregate change. Our goal is to mail your statement as close to the end of the quarter aspossible, which restricts our ability to print your fund's returns as ofthe date of the close of that quarter. KemperACCESS. For up-to-date Kemper fund and account information 24hours a day, seven days a week, call our automated telephone responsesystem. By calling 1-800-972-3060 on a touch-tone telephone, you canreceive the following information: Account balance Most recent transactions Dividend earnings Current yields and returns Current net asset values Selected account transactions also are available. Are you a first-time caller? Don't be stumped when asked to enter yourPersonal Identification Number (PIN) - your PIN is the last four digitsof your Social Security number. (You can change your PIN by followingKemperACCESS instructions.) Instant Profiles. This quarterly publication presents performancedata about each fund in the Kemper family of funds. Asset size,portfoliocomposition and applicable duration and maturity information also arereported. Annual and semiannual shareholder reports. A comprehensive reportof your fund's six-month performance is mailed to you twice a year. Inityou will find an economic overview from Kemper's chief investmentofficer, a question-and-answer with the fund's portfolio manager anddetailed performance and financial data. Reminder: Please remember that the performance of your individualinvestment may differ from the total return reported by your fund. Thetotal return on your investment will depend on when you purchased yourshares, at what price and how you handle dividends and otherdistributions. Your financial representative is the best source you canturn to for help in reviewing your Kemper investment. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009920 WT01-B13-215IA018-000197-B007-158http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/sig_guarantee.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174835 text/html 3499HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:59 GMTContent-length: 3317Content-type: text/html What's A Signature Guarantee? As a precaution against those who have no right to your investeddollars, there are many circumstances when Kemper will require you toprovide a signature guarantee. A signature guarantee is a certification that attests to the genuinenessof your signature. The financial institution that you obtain theguarantee from - which could be a commercial bank, trust company,federal savings bank, savings institution, member of a nationalsecurities exchange or other type of eligible financial institution -warrants that you as the signer are an "appropriate" person and that youhave "legal capacity" to sign. This certification goes beyond what a notary public provides. A notaryattests only to the fact that he or she witnessed an individual sign adocument. Because a notary public does not guarantee that the individualwho signed the document truly is who he or she says he is, Kemper doesnot accept a notarized document where a signature guarantee is required. These are a few examples of when you'll be asked to provide a signatureguarantee: When you request any change in the registration of your mutual fundaccount. When you add certain privileges to an existing account. When you redeem more than $50,000 from your account or when you redeemany amount and request that the check be mailed to a different addressthan is shown on the account's registration. When you redeem an account and request that the check be mailed to anaddress that has been changed within the previous 30 days. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009930 WT01-B13-216IA018-000197-B007-177http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/waiveexp.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174847 text/html 5018HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:46 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:44 GMTContent-length: 4836Content-type: text/html Why Mutual Funds Waive Expenses Mutual funds pursuing the same investment objective can be compared on the basis of any number of characteristics. A significant difference between their returns, however, may be a sign that a fund is either having its operating expenses absorbed or management fees waived by its investment advisor. Although they're often offered on equity funds, you're most likely to notice the effect of an absorption or waiver in the yields of a bond or money market mutual fund. Their presence can explain how a fund is able to provide a relatively higher return to shareholders. A look at the fund's Summary of Expenses, which is included near the front of every mutual fund prospectus, usually will reveal whether expenses are being absorbed or fees are being waived. A footnote to the summary should disclose the existence and effects of an absorption or a waiver. The Financial Highlights of a fund, included in both the prospectus and fund financial statements, also show what the expense ratio and net investment income ratio would be with and without the waivers. This information will give you some idea of how the waivers affect performance. Investment advisors are most likely to absorb out-of-pocket expenses or to waive management fees when they have just introduced a fund. Although every fund is capitalized with seed money from the investment advisor, one of its goals is to grow as soon as possible. Every fund needs to attain a certain size in order to initiate investments, diversify and properly pursue its investment strategy. One of the best ways of attracting new assets is by lowering shareholder expenses and fees. The decision of how much to absorb and/or waive -- and for how long -- is more art than science. The difference must be enough to serve as an incentive. A new income fund whose fees and/or expenses are being waived may offer a 40 to 80 basis point (0.40 percent to .80 percent) yield advantage, for example. This tends to be sufficient to attract new shareholders. Waivers typically remain in place for a limited time, after which the investment advisor will gradually reinstate the waived costs and fees to the fund. It is hoped that the fund will be large enough to better absorb the waived fees by the time they are added back. Such waivers are common with fund introductions. Some investment advisors also make a practice of waiving the expenses and fees of a more mature fund. When this is done and the fund is thereby able to produce a higher yield, the investment advisor is making a marketing decision to incur the fund's expenses and forgo fee income in favor of asset growth for the fund. The reason for this strategy is that a larger fund will provide certain economies of scale that should lead to reduced ongoing costs. You should know, though, that an investment advisor typically reserves the right to stop the practice and reinstate the fund's true expenses and fees at any time. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014270 WT01-B13-217IA019-000202-B027-108http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/rainy_day.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174900 text/html 6428HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:44:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:47 GMTContent-length: 6246Content-type: text/html Do You Need A Rainy Day Fund? By definition, an emergency - an automobile accident, a sudden illness,the loss of a job - is something that's not planned. You can plan howyou're going to finance your child's education and you can prepare foryour eventual retirement, but how do you know how much money you mightneed in the case of an emergency? It's impossible to know. Yet the inability to predict exactly how much you may need should nothave the effect of discouraging your planning - sooner or later a littlerain is going to fall in everyone's life. When you experience the suddenoccurrence of an event that requires significant financial resources,you're going to want a rainy day fund. What's a rainy day fund? It's a sum of money that you set aside to beavailable when you need it. The rain may fall at any point, and yourfund should help bail you out. Once you decide to establish a rainy dayfund, the next two questions are: How much do you need to set aside andwhere will you keep it? As a general rule, some experts recommend that you keep the equivalentof your net income for three to six months in a readily availablesource. If you lose your job, for example, the rainy day fund shouldshield you from the elements until you can find a new one. (You may needto increase the amount of your reserve if you think that it will takelonger than six months to get a new job.) Projecting the amount of income you'd expect to have to replace willgive you one measure of how much you should have set aside. Analternative is to estimate the total expenses you'd need to meet whileyou were out of work or in the midst of any other financial crisis. Where will you keep your rainy day money? These are a few points toconsider when evaluating the suitability of a money market fund and anaccount at a financial institution: Stability. Remember that the purpose of this rainy day moneyis togive you peace of mind at a time when you're likely to be experiencingstress. An emergency is no time to find out that the dollars you'recounting on using have dwindled. Given their potential for price fluctuation, certain types of mutualfundsmay not be appropriate investments for an emergency fund. Money marketfunds, however, can be an alternative to financial institution accounts. Money market funds are neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S.government and there can be no assurance that a stable net asset valueof $1 per share will be maintained. Money market shares represent agreater risk to capital than certificates of deposit or savingsaccounts.While principal and interest in a savings account with a financialinstitution is guaranteed, and the account is generally insured by theFederal Deposit InsuranceCorporation. Access. The checkwriting privilege available with moneymarket fundsassures you immediate access to your rainy day fund no matter what timethe rain falls. Access to savings accounts will vary from financialinstitution to financial institution. If you keep invest your money in acertificate of deposit, however, remember that you may be subject to apenalty for early withdrawal. Yield. Unlike other investments you have, the earningability of yourrainy day fund may be of less concern to you. However, there areimportant differences between mutual fund and financial institutionaccounts. Money market funds, such as those offered by Kemper, seek to maximizecurrent income while maintaining the stability of the principal. Moneymarket fund yields generally fluctuate daily, responding to changes inprevailing interest rates. Mutual funds are required to distributesubstantially all of their income. Bank products offer fixed or variableyields that are set by the financial institution and changed at itsdiscretion. To obtain a Kemper Money Fundsprospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009780 WT01-B13-218IA019-000202-B027-124http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/dontdaydream.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174909 text/html 5715HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:45:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:08 GMTContent-length: 5533Content-type: text/html Do's And Don'ts For Daydreamers It's Saturday morning and you're indulging in a little daydreaming.While your financial advisors would prefer to think that you're dreamingabout financing your retirement, your dream this morning is about how toget that new car...or how to swing a week or two in the islands...or howto achieve just about any number of short-term investment goals. At one point or another, we all have to make some decisions about how toinvest for the short term. In the case of a bonus or inheritance or lumpsum distribution, you may have a plan for how you're going to use moneythat suddenly becomes available - yet you don't want it sitting idle inthe interim. On the other hand, you may want to set aside funds toward acertain goal you expect to reach in the not-so-distant future, such as anew car or vacation, and you want them to be earning until you need toaccess it. What do you do? Whatever you do (and you'll want to consult yourfinancial representative for specific advice), be sure to recognize thatyour approach to investing for the short-term will vary somewhat fromwhat you'd do as a long-term investor. These are just a few points that you'll want to keep in mind: In all likelihood, you are counting on a specific dollar amount toachieve your goal. The stability of your principal, then, will have tobe more important to you than its return. Remember that the pursuit ofhigher returns implies a higher level of risk. Because of your imminentneed for your money, you may not be able to withstand the degree ofvolatility that would be acceptable to someone who has committed his orher funds for the long term. You'll need an investment whose objectiveis preservation of capital. Access may be more important to you as a short-term investor. You'llwant to avoid investments that restrict (and these restrictions could bein the form of penalties on withdrawals or limited service hours) yourability to withdraw funds at any time. Pay attention to the fees that accompany investments. The feestructure of some investments assumes that you have an extendedinvestment horizon and expect to remain invested for years. That's true, for example, of mutual fund shares purchased in Class A andClass B of Kemper mutual funds. Class C shares of Kemper funds may bemost appropriate for investors who anticipate a relatively shortinvestment period. Investors in Class A shares pay an upfront sales charge, and investorsin Class B shares purchase their shares with the understanding thatredemptions during the first six years may be subject to a contingentdeferred sales charge. Class B shares also pay an annual distributionservices fee of 0.75 percent for six years. Class C provides analternative for those who want to be able to redeem their shares at anytime without charge. In lieu of a sales charge, an annual distributionservices charge of 0.75 percent is assessed on Class C shares. (Thesesomewhat higher expenses will result in lower income and capital gaindistributions on a per share basis than are earned on Class A shares,and the distribution fee for Class C shares remains in place regardlessof how long a shareholder owns the shares.) To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1995 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009790 WT01-B13-219IA019-000202-B027-130http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/downpayment.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174925 text/html 2929HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:45:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:11 GMTContent-length: 2747Content-type: text/html The Down Payment Just Gets You In The Door If you're saving to buy a home, the down payment on your purchase willmost likely be your first and largest hurdle. But, if you're like mosthome buyers, the spending doesn't stop once you've crossed the thresholdto your new home. Then you'll need funds for furnishings (furniture, householddecorations, kitchen housewares and floor and window coverings) andimprovements such as landscaping and the building of patios, fences anddriveways. According to calculations by the National Association of Home Builders,in the first three months after their purchase, new homeowners spend 25 to35 percent more of their income each month than non-moving homeownersdo. This burst of spending, which continues but at a slower pace for thenext several months, totals an estimated $6,475 in the first full yearafter the purchase. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1994 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009800 WT01-B13-220IA019-000202-B027-147http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/purchasing_car.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174933 text/html 3575HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:45:34 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:45 GMTContent-length: 3393Content-type: text/html Purchasing A New Car? The American dream of taking the wheel of a brand new automobile andheading down the highway has become a dream less available to the middleclass. According to Zurich Kemper Investments Economist David Hale, auto prices haverisen so sharply during recent years that today's new auto buyer has anaverage income that's about 40 percent above the national medianhousehold income. Ten years ago, new auto buyers had a household incomethat was about 20 percent above the national median, according to Hale. For the would-be car buyer, these higher auto prices may require a moreplanned, longer term investment strategy. To the economy and to automanufacturers, Hale says, "This compression in the share of populationnow able to qualify for new auto purchases has greatly increased thesensitivity of auto sales to factors that influence the income orconfidence of people in the top income quintile of the population." The1995 income tax hike, for example, hurt upper-income Americans andresulted in an auto slump, Hale says. The graph below tracks the U.S. average new car transaction price as apercentage of disposable income per household. As you can see, today'snew car buyer commits about as much of his or her disposable income asthe new car buyer in 1960. Over the last 35 years, 1973 was the lowpoint, when a new car purchase consumed the smallest amount of the buyer'sdisposable income. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009810 WT01-B13-221IA019-000202-B027-162http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/mmfbalan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174950 text/html 5642HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:45:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:20 GMTContent-length: 5460Content-type: text/html Money Market Funds Balance Income, Stability Many people know that a money market mutual fund strives to maintain a $1.00 net asset value per share. But how is this accomplished? Understanding how a money market mutual fund "works" requires some consideration of its investments. A money market fund typically has two objectives: to generate income and to preserve principal, which is represented by net asset value (NAV). The desire to preserve principal guides the fund manager's selection of income-producing investments -- a money fund invests in high quality, short-term securities. The high quality is intended to help guard the fund against credit risk while short maturities are intended to help reduce exposure to interest rate risk. These are a few of the possible investments that a money market fund might include in its portfolio: Obligations of or guaranteed by the U.S. government, its agencies or instrumentalities. Short-term government obligations are considered to be the safest short-term investments. (Of course, any U.S. government guarantee of the securities owned by the portfolio does not guarantee the net asset value of its shares.) Commercial paper obligations with very high ratings. This is a form of unsecured debt issued by corporations -- their good name and financial strength is the investor's security. Commercial paper can range in maturity from 1 to 270 days, with the interest rate generally rising with the time to maturity. Bank certificates of deposit (CDs). A money market mutual fund will often purchase large denomination ($100,000-plus) bank CDs. The rate of return on a CD is commensurate with its size and length of term to maturity. Repurchase agreements. In a repurchase agreement (also called a repo), the money fund will buy primarily U.S. government or agency obligations from a dealer on the condition that the dealer will repurchase the security back at a mutually agreed upon time and price. Such an agreement enables the manager to "lock in" a maturity and yield. The short-term nature of the investments in the portfolio requires continual monitoring of events. Fiscal policy (such as federal taxation and spending plans), monetary policy (particularly the Federal Reserve Board's action on interest rates) and legislative policy also can influence how a money fund manager will invest. If a manager expects interest rates to rise, the fund might have a much shorter average maturity -- so when assets are sold, the proceeds can be invested at the higher rates. On the other hand, if the forecast calls for a decline in interest rates, the manager might want to invest in longer maturity investments to benefit from higher interest rates as long as possible. Again, all investment decisions are based within the framework of preserving principal. To obtain a Kemper Money Funds prospectus in addition to those you already have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now. The prospectus contains more complete information including management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or send money. An investment in a money market fund is neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government, and there can be no assurance that the fund will be able to maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00 per share. This article was excerpted from the Winter/Spring 1996 issue of Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014280 WT01-B13-222IA019-000202-B027-173http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/encourageinv.html 198.152.185.42 19970106174957 text/html 3738HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:45:59 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:17 GMTContent-length: 3556Content-type: text/html Encourage The Habit of Investing What's one of the best gifts you can give your child? Parents who teachtheir children "that money you put away is not gone forever" havesignificantly influenced their children's retirement savings habits,according to B. Douglas Bernheim, an academic economist at StanfordUniversity. Bernheim says his research has demonstrated a strong link betweenchildhood experiences and adult behavior. Specifically, individuals whowere encouraged to maintain a bank account as a child saved 108 percentmore for their retirement when they became adults than those who did nothave a childhood bank account. Children who received allowances saved 36percent more as adults, according to Bernheim. If you'd like to use a mutual fund to reinforce the importance ofinvesting for tomorrow, it is possible to establish an account in thechild's name. The account will be set up according to the rules of theUniform Gift to Minors Act (UGMA) or Uniform Transfer to Minors Act(UTMA). The custodian you select when establishing the gift account willhave exclusive control of the investment until the child comes of age(age 18 or 21 depending upon your state of residence). However,duplicate copies of the quarterly statement can be mailed to the child.And, of course, the child can participate by monitoring the progress ofhis or her investment every day in the newspaper, on financialtelevision programs or via on-line computer services. To obtain a Kemper Mutual Fund prospectus in addition to those youalready have, please call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or request one now.The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you invest or sendmoney. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009710 WT01-B13-223IA019-000202-B027-185http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/collegeplan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175005 text/html 3573HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:46:06 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:27:50 GMTContent-length: 3391Content-type: text/html College Planning Junior year. Years ago it was considered the best year in high school -those gawky years were all but forgotten but it was still too soon tofret about college. Unfortunately, that's not the case today - at leastnot for the parents of a high school junior. In fact, some financialplanning should take place when the student is a sophomore. The year before a student heads for college is the pivotal year used bymany financial aid officers to determine financial aid eligibility. Yourincome and assets will be reviewed each year but the so-called firstbase income year is the one that sets the precedent. The base yearstarts on January 1 of the student's junior year to December 31 of thatyear (when, if all has gone well, the student is halfway through senioryear). The following are a few tips from the Detroit News-Free Press on how toimprove your chances for qualifying for aid: Cash in U.S. savings bonds earmarked for college before the baseincome year begins. Once the cash is in the bank, it's considered anasset, not income. Financial aid offices expect parents to devote asmuch as 47 percent of their income to college but only 5.65 percent oftheir assets. If you usually get large income tax refunds, reduce your withholdingthe year before the base income year. Refunds show up as income thefollowing year for taxpayers who itemize. Try to have bonuses paid in a year other than the base income year.Avoid all pension or IRA distributions. This article was excerpted from the Summer/Fall 1994 issue of KemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009720 WT01-B13-224IA019-000202-B027-203http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/how_kempergift.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175023 text/html 3441HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:46:24 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 20:31:29 GMTContent-length: 3257Content-type: text/html How To Give The Gift Of A Kemper Mutual Fund There are many gifts you can give a special youngster, but very few havethe potential to appreciate over time. A Kemper fund investmentprovides the opportunity to grow with a child - without getting lost,broken or forgotten as the child matures. Whether your gift will help finance college or other future needs, amutual fund can be one of the most significant gifts a child can receivebecause the more time it has to grow, the greater value a mutual fundcan potentially provide. Kemper offers several mutual funds that could be well suited for achild's portfolio because of their long-term investment objectives. And,according to the Uniform Gift to Minors Act (UGMA) or Uniform Transferto Minors Act (UTMA), a mutual fund gift to a child can provide certaintax benefits, based on current law in most states. For more information about giving the gift of a Kemper fund, please call your financial representative or Kemper Shareholder Services 1-800-621-1048. We'll be happy to send you a gift kit, including prospectuses containing more complete details about custodial accounts and an attractive gift card and envelope. The Kemper Funds teddy bear is a perfect companion to the gift of a Kemper Funds account to a child. Click here to order it - or other gift items - from our Kemper Funds Logo Wear catalog. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010100-B WT01-B13-225IA019-000202-B027-219http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/how_comparefund.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175036 text/html 8241HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:46:38 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:35:50 GMTContent-length: 8056Content-type: text/html How The Gift Of A Mutual Fund Compares With The Gift Of A U.S. Savings Bond Many parents, grandparents, aunts and uncles have traditionally givenU.S. savings bonds to children. U.S. savings bonds can be given directlyor transferred according to the rules of the Uniform Gift to Minors Act(UGMA) or Uniform Transfer to Minors Act (UTMA). The only way to give aKemper fund gift to a child is to establish an UGMA/UTMA account.Here's how the gift of a U.S. savings bond compares to the gift of aKemper fund account. (Series EE with May 1, 1995, or later issue dates) Establishing an UGMA/UTMA requires $1,000 or $50 a month according tothe terms of an automatic monthly investment program. Savings bonds are available in denominations ranging from $50 to$10,000. Kemper offers a range of funds with varying objectives. At one end of the risk/return spectrum are funds whose primary objective is the growth of capital (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, Kemper Technology Fund and Kemper Asian Growth Fund). At the other end of the risk/return spectrum are Kemper money market funds whose objective is maximum current income consistent with the stability of principal. Mutual funds are neither insured nor guaranteed by the U.S. government and present greater risk to capital than U.S. savings bonds. Returns and net asset value will fluctuate. Money market funds seek to maintain a stable $1 share value, although there can be no assurance that they will. Investment by Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund and Kemper Technology Fund in smaller companies presents greater risk than an investment in larger, more established companies. Also, investment in international securities presents special risk considerations including exchange rates, government regulations and differences in liquidity. A savings bond is purchased at half its face value or denomination andit is guaranteed to accrue interest until it equals its face value. Previously, a guaranteed minimum interest rate enabled investors toproject how long they'd need to hold the bond before it reached itsvalue. Starting May 1, 1995, the U.S. Treasury abandoned its practice ofoffering a guaranteed minimum rate in favor of "market-based rates" thatwill be set on May 1 and November 1 of every year. On savings bonds less than five years old, the U.S. Treasury pays 85 percentof the average of six-month Treasury security yields or 4.56 percentas of November 1, 1996. Rates paid on savings bonds that are five years or older are85% of the average of five-year Treasury security yields or 5.53 percentas of November 1, 1996. If a savings bond earning market rates has not reached face value after17 years, the government will make a one-time adjustment to make theredemption value at least equal to the face amount. Unless distributed, the earnings of a mutual fund are reflected in thefund's net asset value, which is updated each day the New York StockExchange is open for trading. The redemption price on any given day isbased on the current net asset value. Distributions of any income or capital gains may be taken in cash orreinvested in additional shares at net asset value. Previously, interest on the U.S. savings bond was credited monthly.Starting with savings bonds sold on May 1, 1995, interest is creditedsix months after its issue date and every six months thereafter. Theinvestor who redeems a savings bond between scheduled interest accrualdates will not receive interest for the partial period. The Series EE U.S. savings bond stops earning interest after 30 years. The custodian you select when establishing the gift account will haveexclusive control of the investment until the child comes of age (age 18or 21 depending upon your state of residence). If the savings bond you give is not established as an UGMA/UTMA, a financial institution will generally allow a minor to cash ina savings bond if the child is old enough to understand the transactionand can sign his or her name. If a custodial account is established, thecustodian you select will have exclusive control of the investment untilthe child comes of age (age 18 or 21 depending upon your state ofresidence). U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. The Standard & Poor's 500 U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. Kemper Funds © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010110-B WT01-B13-226IA019-000202-B027-229http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/tax_consgift.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175050 text/html 4577HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:46:45 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:37:08 GMTContent-length: 4392Content-type: text/html What Are The Tax Consequences For Gift-Givers? Both the gift of a mutual fund and the gift of a U.S. savings bondqualify for the $10,000 annual gift tax exclusion. If your spouseconsents and you file IRS Form 709 (this form can be retrieved from the IRS web site), you and your spouse may give up to$20,000 per year tax-free to each child. In addition, the establishment of an UGMA/UTMA for a mutual fund gift(which is the only way an investment in a Kemper fund can begiven to a child) or for a U.S. savings bond provides certain taxbenefits. If you establish an UGMA/UTMA and as long as the child'sincome tax return is filed separately from yours, the first $650 inearnings from your gift is tax-free until the year in which the childturns 14. The second $650 in earnings from the gift is taxed at thechild's income tax rate which, presumably, is the lowest federal taxrate of 15 percent. Any earnings above $1,300 are taxed at the parent'sincome tax rate (subject to annual adjustment for inflation). After the child reaches 14, all income beyond the first $650 in earningsfrom the gift is taxed at his or her income tax rate. These rules applyregardless of who makes the gift. You should note that there are additional tax benefits available to aU.S. savings bondholder, whether the bond is received directly orthrough the UGMA/UTMA. For example, earnings on U.S. savings bonds arefree of state and local taxes. Also, the bondholder can choose todeclare earned interest each year or defer declaring the interest untilthe bond is redeemed or the date interest stops accruing, which is after30 years. There are some mutual funds that invest in municipal bonds (click here to learn about Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds) and offerincome free of federal and, in some cases, state and local taxes. Aportion of the income may be subject to the alternative minimum tax forcertain investors. The appropriateness of investing in such mutual fundsmay depend on the child's income tax rate. For more information about giving the gift of a Kemper fund, send us an e-mail now or call your financial representative or Kemper Shareholder Servicesat (800) 621-1048. We'll be happy to send you a gift kit, including prospectuses containing more complete details about the funds, includingcharges and expenses, additional information about custodial accountsand a convenient gift card and envelope. Please be sure to read theprospectus carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1016180-B WT01-B13-227IA019-000202-B027-246http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/twentyyears.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175103 text/html 4453HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:47:05 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:38:02 GMTContent-length: 4268Content-type: text/html U.S. Savings Bonds vs. The Standard & Poor's 500 Hypothetical Illustration Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Public Debt, Hypo® (Hypo® is a registered service mark of Towers Data Systems, Bethesda, Maryland) If you had invested $1,000 in U.S. savings bonds 20 years ago, you wouldhave been guaranteed a steady increase in your investment. No suchassurance was available from the stock market, as you can see from theup and down performance of the Standard & Poor's 500 index. However,the return on $1,000 invested in the stock market, as represented by theS&P 500, would have been more than three times the return on the U.S.savings bonds. The data for both the U.S. savings bonds and the S&P500 track the performance of $1,000 invested from October 1, 1976, throughSeptember 30, 1996. This information is historical and does not represent future performanceof the S&P 500 index or U.S. savings bonds. The S&P 500 is anunmanagedindex of common stocks that's generally considered representative of theU.S. stock market. The performance of the index is not intended to berepresentative of the past or future performance of any Kemper capital growthfund. There are important differences between the S&P 500 stocks andU.S. savings bonds. For example,stocks have fluctuating investment return and principal while a U.S.savings bond has a fixed principal and is guaranteed by the U.S.government to accrue interest until the principal and accrued interestequal the face value of the savings bond. How much is your U.S. savings bond worth today? A calculator available through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York web site will enable you to compute the redemption value of a savings bond. U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. Kemper Funds © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including management fees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from your financial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (800) 621-1048 or request one now. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. 1010140-B WT01-B13-228IA019-000202-B027-250http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/bondsvsfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175110 text/html 4661HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:47:12 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:26:22 GMTContent-length: 4476Content-type: text/html  U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. Kemper Funds If you had invested $1,000 in U.S. savings bonds 20 years ago, you would have been guaranteed a steady increase in your investment. No such assurance was available from investments, which go up and down. (See U.S. Savings Bonds Vs. The Standard & Poor's 500.) Kemper Funds Outperformed U.S. Savings Bonds Each of the six Kemper Funds with a 20-year history also outperformed the 20-year return of the U.S. savings bond. To view a comparison of the 10/1/76 to 9/30/96 performance of $1,000 invested in a U.S. savings bond and one of the six Kemper Funds in existence on 10/1/76, select a Kemper Fund and click on the compare button. Kemper Growth FundKemper Income and Capital Preservation FundKemper Municipal Bond FundKemper Small Capitalization Equity FundKemper Technology FundKemper Total Return Fund Sources: U.S. Bureau of the Public Debt, Hypo® (Hypo® is a registered service mark of Towers Data Systems, Bethesda, Maryland) This information is historical and does not represent future performance of Kemper Funds, the S&P 500 index or U.S. savings bonds. The S&P 500 is an unmanaged index of common stocks that's generally considered representative of the U.S. stock market. There are important differences between these investments. For example, stocks have fluctuating investment return and principal while bonds have both fixed principal and return if held to maturity and their value will vary prior to maturity. A U.S. savings bond has a fixed principal and is guaranteed by the U.S. government to accrue interest until the principal and accrued interest equal the face value of the savings bond. Please note that investments by Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund and Kemper Technology Fund in small companies presents greater risk than investments in larger, more established companies. An investor may not make a direct investment in the S&P 500. How much is your U.S. savings bond worth today? A calculator available through the Federal Reserve Bank of New York web site will enable you to compute the redemption value of a savings bond. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024590 WT01-B13-229IA019-000202-B027-270http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/factscustodial.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175121 text/html 7973HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:47:20 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 16:41:01 GMTContent-length: 7788Content-type: text/html About Custodial Accounts It's easy to open a gift account at Kemper. And, if the gift isestablished to meet the requirements of your state's Uniform Gift toMinors Act (UGMA) or Uniform Transfer to Minors Act (UTMA), it can enjoyunique tax benefits. According to current Uniform Gift rules, you canopen a mutual fund account in a child's name and designate yourself, aspouse or a friend to administer it until the youngster reaches adultage. It is not necessary that the custodian be a parent. Q: How do I establish a gift account with Kemper? A: Simply obtain the child's Social Security number and appoint acustodian to manage the account. Complete a new account application,making certain to check the box in Section 1, "Gift to a Minor," andenter the names of the custodian and minor where indicated. The minimum investment amount for a custodial account is $1,000 unlessyou establish an automatic investment plan, in which case you can set upan account for as little as $50. If you choose to establish an automaticinvestment plan, be sure to complete Section 12 on the application. Q: What are the responsibilities of the custodian? A: The custodian for the account controls the money - how it isinvestedand spent - until the child legally comes of age. In most cases, thelegal age is 18 or 21 for the purposes of the Uniform Acts. However,some states allow custodianship to extend beyond the age of majority. Here's a tip to bear in mind: As a parent, if you name yourself ascustodian and you die before your child becomes an adult (an adult isoften defined by the statutes as either age 18 or 21), the value of the gift account may beincluded as part of your estate for federal tax purposes. In this case, youmay wish to consult your tax advisor about alternatives such as namingsome person other than yourself as custodian. Or, if you and your spouse make the giftjointly, consider a third-party custodian. Q: What happens when the child reaches the age of majority? A: When the child reaches the adult age designated by the stateforending the custodianship, the assets are his or hers to spend or toinvest in any way. The money you invest on behalf of a child isconsidered an irrevocable gift. The account you've established in onechild's name, for example, cannot be transferred to the name of anotherminor. Q: What Kemper funds may I establish a gift account in? A: Kemper offers a range of funds that could be well suited for achild's portfolio. (Click here to view the Kemper Funds Risk/Return Spectrum.) Your financial representative can help answer yourspecific investing questions. Q: What are the tax benefits of establishing a gift account for achild? A: For children under the age of 14, the Internal Revenue Servicetreatsa child's first $650 of unearned income ("unearned" means notrepresenting compensation for services) as tax-free. The second $650 ofunearned income is taxed at the child's marginal tax rate of 15 percent.Any unearned income over $1,300 is taxed at the parent's top marginaltax rate. (The parent's rate applies even if the gift comes from someoneelse). This means that for an investment earning a hypothetical 8percent* annually, you could have up to $16,250 in the child's name andstill qualify for favorable tax treatment on the $1,300 of income. Forchildren 14 years and older (at the end of the tax year), all earningsafter the first $650 are taxed at the child's tax rate. You can further enhance the potential tax benefits of the gift bychoosing an investment strategy that emphasizes capital appreciationover income. While income dividends are taxed up to the highest marginaltax rate of 39.6 percent, the current maximum tax on capital gains is 28percent. Growth stocks often pay low or no dividends because earningsare needed to finance further growth. That being the case, capital growthfunds may be better from a current tax perspective (especially forchildren under age 14). Keep in mind, however, that capital growth mutualfunds often make an annual distribution of any realized capital gains which would be taxable when distributed. The procedures for calculating the tax for children under age 14 can bevery complex, with the amount of tax dependent upon both the type ofincome (earned versus unearned) and the amount of deductions offsettingthat income. Additional information may be found in the U.S. Savings Bond Investor Information Guide, which is available from the Savings Bond page of the U.S. Treasury web site. You may wish to consult with a tax, legal or other advisorfor more information, particularly if these gifts are to be part of alarger financial plan. Please call Kemper's Shareholder Servicesrepresentatives at (800) 621-1048 for answers to administrativequestions. *This assumed rate is for purposes of the illustration only and is notintended to represent the return of a specific investment, which willfluctuate. Q: Does a Kemper Fund gift account qualify for the gift taxexclusion? A: Yes, an UGMA gift qualifies for the $10,000 annual gift taxexclusion. If your spouse consents and you file IRS Form 709 (this form can be retrieved from the IRS web site), you andyour spouse may give up to $20,000 per year tax-free to each child. This material must be preceded or accompanied by a Kemper Funds prospectus. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus please call Shareholder Services at (800) 621-1048, or request one now. The prospectus contains more complete informationincluding management fees and expenses. Please read it carefully beforeyou invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010130-B WT01-B13-230IA019-000202-B027-295http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/special_planning.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175141 text/html 4316HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:47:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:30:06 GMTContent-length: 4134Content-type: text/html Pre-Retirees Have Special Planning Pressures Anyone can leap tall buildings in a single bound.Dodging speeding bullets is overrated.But who can plan a retirementwhen theyhave their own job to do,are worried about getting their kids started out right in lifeand are helping their parents age comfortably? If anyone can fill the tights of a superhero, it has to be today's 50- to 64-year-olds. If you're in that age group, you know what the pressures are: Eight out of 10 pre-retirees (those in the 50-plus generation) have adult children, almost one-third of whom live with their parents. Many parents who married "later in life" are paying all or some of their children's college expenses.* In part because their parents married and had their children "early" in their lives, half of all pre-retirees have at least one living parent; 22 percent have two living parents. Considering their in-laws, as well, 70 percent of pre-retirees have a parent for whom they have some financial responsibilities.* Between 16 and 30 percent of the 50-plus generation are estimated to have set aside nothing toward their retirement due, for the most part, to financial difficulties.** Women in this generation often quit full-time employment to spend 18 hours a day or more serving as a home nurse without pay.*** Well, superhero, we'd like you to walk back into that telephone booth and transform yourself into plain old average Clark or Clarkina Kent - who will be retiring in the next 10 to 15 years. We'd like you to contemplate your retirement and how you might prepare for it. (And if it helps at all, you might want to think of your retirement years as one powerful locomotive barreling toward you.) *Source: Concerns of Adults in Their Pre-Retirement Years, conducted for the American Association of Retired Persons by Princeton Survey Research Associates, January 1994. **Source: Retirement Savings in America, The Fifth Annual Merrill Lynch Retirement Planning survey, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc. 1993. ***Source: New Passages: Mapping Your Life Across Time, Gail Sheehy, Random House, New York, 1995. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018650 WT01-B13-231IA019-000202-B027-311http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/get_ready.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175156 text/html 5780HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:47:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:37 GMTContent-length: 5598Content-type: text/html Get Ready To Retire! You're looking good, you're active, maybe you're a top performer at work. The fact remains that it's time to start thinking about a new, imminent responsibility - as a retiree. Are you ready? With a life expectancy longer than any generation before you, you had better be. (Haven't you heard - superheroes live forever!) Of course, you may expect to always be there for your parents, for your children and for your dear friends. But who are you turning to for help? There's no need to make your retirement planning decisions on your own. For a comprehensive overview of the range of investments available and their suitability for your circumstances, call on a financial representative. For your retirement years, you may need about 70 to 80 percent of the salary you made in yourhighest earning years. How much can you count on from Uncle Sam? You can go toSocial Security Online or call 1-800-772-1213 to requestan Earnings and Benefit Statement (SSA-7004) from the Social Security Administration. The statementestimates your future benefits. Are you counting on your employer to provide more than just a gold watch at retirement? Depending on your age and years of service, you may qualify for a full, partial or no pension at all from your employer. You'll want to ask your company pension plan administrator for details about your company's vesting, distribution (lump sum or rollover) and payment options. Of course you would be, when you consider the total sum that you may need to finance a 30-year retirement. One suggestion: Focus on the amount of money that you'll need on a monthly basis, and your financial representative may be able to develop an investment plan capable of meeting your monthly needs. As important as all your other responsibilities may be to you, now is the time for you to make tracks in planning for the retirement that you deserve. The Social Security Administration and your employer can tell you about how much they'll be contributing - the question is: What more can you do? Leaping into action on your personal saving and investing now can help make a big difference 10 years from now. Get ready to retire! This article was excerpted from Winter/Spring 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018640 WT01-B13-232IA019-000202-B027-325http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/early_ira.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175205 text/html 9045HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:06 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:13 GMTContent-length: 8863Content-type: text/html How Early IRA Contributions Can Add Up Have you ever stopped to consider what you're missing out on bywaiting until the last possible minute to make your Individual Retirements Account (IRA) contribution? Making a contribution just in the nick of time has become standardpractice for many taxpayers. It's understandable, perhaps, for taxpayerswho qualify for a tax-deductible contribution - they can use alast-minute IRA contribution to reduce the amount of income they'll paytax on. But, because their annual incomes exceed the current IRS limits,many taxpayers cannot qualify for a tax-deductible IRA. The benefit ofan IRA to all taxpayers is the ability to build a retirementaccount whose earnings can grow free from taxes until the account isdistributed, at which time they may be taxed as ordinary income. (Distributions prior to 59 1/2may be subject to a 10 percent penalty.) The opportunity to build an IRA - through an annual contribution of amaximum of $2,000 - becomes available every year, starting on January 1of the tax year. This "window of opportunity" remains open until, inmost years, April 15 of the next year. Are you sneaking through that window on the last possible date? If youare, you're foregoing a maximum of 15 months of potential earnings thatcan compound free from current taxes! We'll show you why it can be toyour advantage to be ready with your IRA contribution when the windowopens rather than when it's closing. Many savvy IRA investors havealready made and/or are making their 1996 tax year contributions now. We can think of at least four other dates when contributing to your IRAmakes more sense. The true benefit of the IRA is its ability to compound earnings that arenot taxed until a distribution is made. The sooner you make yourcontribution, the sooner your investment can start working on a tax-deferred basis for you. Toillustrate, we've selected four dates to show how the earnings of ahypothetical fixed-income investment could grow, in the tax year aloneand over a period of 30 years ending on April 15. And to give you anidea of the value of tax-deferred investing, we also show how much thesame hypothetical investment dollars would earn over the same timeperiod - if their earnings were taxed every year. We assume a 36% incometax rate in this example. To illustrate the powerful effect of tax-deferred income growth, we'vehad to assume a specific fixed growth rate - we've used 8 percent,compounded monthly. This assumed rate is for illustrative purposes onlyand is not intended to represent performance of any specific investment,which will fluctuate. A program of regular investing cannot assume aprofit nor protect against a loss in a declining market. Since this typeof program involves continuous investment regardless of fluctuating sharevalues, you'll need to consider your financial ability to continuethe program through periods of low price levels. More importantthan the absolute numbers, then, is the growth of an investmentinitiated early in the tax year versus the growth of an investmentinitiated on the last possible date each year. Hypothetical Illustration If you made a $2,000 contribution to an IRA on the last possible date(April 15) every year for 30 years How much you'd have accumulated in an IRA in a 30-year period ending onApril 15 How much you'd have accumulated if the earnings on your investment had been subject to current taxes The value of the tax-deferral over 30 years $259,289 $145,791 $113,498 Hypothetical Illustration Now let's take a look at what you would have accumulated if youinvested earlier for each tax year Investment Date By the tax filing date of April 15, your investment would have already grown to Investing on the same early date every year for 30 years would haveincreased your IRA to How much you'd have accumulated if the earnings on your investment hadbeen subject to current taxes The value of the tax-deferral over 30 years On New Year's Day Start the year out right by taking full advantage of an IRA. $2,210 $290,713 $159,563 $131,150 On April 15 As long as you're in the habit of making a contribution on this date -the difference is that you'll be gaining a full year's worth ofcompounding. $2,166 $282,976 $155,538 $127,438 On June 21 Summer solstice is the longest day of the year - surely you'll be ableto find some time to set aside funds for your future. $2,138 $279,240 $154,219 $125,021 On Labor Day* Do you want to work for the rest of your life? An investment on this daywill help your retirement plans. $2,095 $273,729 $152,262 $121,467 *Our calculations used September 4 of each year. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009910 WT01-B13-233IA019-000202-B027-337http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/dontretdist.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175213 text/html 6599HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:15 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:28:10 GMTContent-length: 6417Content-type: text/html Don't Touch Your Retirement Plan Distribution! So, congratulations are in order. You've just gotten a new job and wellwishes abound. You're feeling on top of the world when you hear from arepresentative of your (soon-to-be-former) company's retirement plan:What are your plans for the sum that's been accumulating in your name? Of course, you're going to be tempted. (It's how much?) But this is morethan a left side of the brain/right side of the brain problemconfronting you. From a tax perspective, deciding whether to take yourdistribution in cash or whether to roll it over is a struggle betweenright and wrong. What should you do with your retirement plan distribution? This is oneof very few topics on which investment advisors are in completeagreement. Conventional Wisdom The "right" answer to the question, "What should I do with myretirement plan distribution?" is based on a few assumptions: Because your contribution to your retirement plan is deducted fromyour pay even before you see it (matched in some cases by employercontributions), retirement plans are among the easiest ways to plan fora comfortable future. Time has a value of its own. You can never recover the time you'vealready spent building a tax-deferred retirement plan. Investments that compound on a tax-deferred basis (without theircurrent balances being reduced by the need to pay taxes every year) havehigher earning potential. By virtue of their tax-deferred status, retirement plans areendorsedby the federal government - conversely, the government penalizes mostpremature (before the age of 59 1/2) distributions fromretirementplans. Most investors go out of their way to minimize the amount they payinfederal income tax. Your decision You are 30 years old and your plan payout totals $20,000. You have three choices: 1. You can take your distribution in cash. Do that and, assuming you're in the 28 percent tax bracket, you will owethe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 28 percent of $20,000 or $5,600 incurrent income taxes. Plus, as a general rule, you'll have to pay a 10percent penalty, or $2,000 more, for taking the distribution beforereaching age 59 1/2. You'll have $12,400 left from your plan. 2. You can take your distribution in cash and move it into anIndividualRetirement Account (IRA) or you may be able to move the cash into aqualified retirement plan of your new company within 60 days ofreceiving the check. Your employer is required by the IRS to withhold 20 percent of yourdistribution ($4,000) as a prepayment of your potential tax liability.You won't owe current income taxes on the remaining amount - $16,000 -as long as you roll it over within 60 days. Even if you roll over the $16,000 cash distribution within 60 days,you'll owe current income taxes (28 percent of $4,000 or $1,120) andapplicable early withdrawal penalties (10 percent of $4,000 or $400) onthe $4,000 your employer paid to the IRS. The difference between the$4,000 prepayment and the $1,520 in income taxes due represents a taxcredit, which the IRS will refund to you (less any additional incometaxes you may owe) after you file your tax return. 3. You could request your employer to transfer your distributiondirectly into an IRA or possibly into a qualified retirement plan ofyour new company. Where should your distribution be invested? Yourfinancial representative can review the possibilities with you. Selecting this option would keep all $20,000 of your plan assets workingfor you and you'd continue todefer taxes until you withdraw money from your account. The hypothetical examples in the above graph assume a 28 percent incometax bracket and an 8 percent return, compounded monthly. This assumedrate of return is for illustrative purposes only and is not intended torepresent performance of any specific investment, which may fluctuate.IRA and qualified retirement plan assets will be subject to currentincome taxes at the time of withdrawal, under current tax law.Calculations assume a 28 percent annual income tax liability on theamount invested in a taxable investment. Please consult your financial representative or tax advisorconcerningthe full effect of taxes and distributions. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1995 issue ofKemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009730 WT01-B13-234IA019-000202-B028-1http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/ret_online.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175221 text/html 2638HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:54 GMTContent-length: 2456Content-type: text/html Retirement Planner Online The Kemper Retirement Dream Planner is a slide-rule calculator thatguides you through a few simple calculations designed to help youestimate how much money you'll need to realize your retirement dreams.When you adjust the calculator according to your age, annual salary andcurrent investment and savings balances, the calculator can help youplan how much more you'll need to invest each month - assuming threehypothetical rates of return - to generate your desired level ofretirement income. Ask your financial representative for a Kemper Retirement DreamPlanner or call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009740 WT01-B13-235IA019-000202-B028-15http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/nat_council.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175231 text/html 3289HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:31 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 19:53:01 GMTContent-length: 3105Content-type: text/html National Council On The Aging In advertisements and newspaper articles and from your financialrepresentative directly, you'll be hearing a lot about retirementplanning from Kemper Funds in 1996. Retirement planning is a processthat can never be started too soon and should continue throughout one'sretirement years. As a means of demonstrating our commitment to retirees and enhancing ourunderstanding of older adults, Kemper has become a corporate member ofthe National Council on the Aging (NCOA). The NCOA is a 35-year-oldprivate nonprofit organization whose educational programs andpublications are designed to "make life better for older Americans andtheir families." We at Kemper are proud of the NCOA's approval of several of ourretirement planning brochures, and we look forward to its counsel as weundertake additional projects designed to address the needs of an agingAmerica. Don't miss In the Prime, a 26-part weekly half-hour television series that explores being in the prime of life (between the ages of 45 and 60) today. The program, sponsored by Kemper Funds management, can be seen on public television stations nationwide. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009750-A WT01-B13-236IA019-000202-B028-25http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/price_retdream.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175239 text/html 7045HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:43 GMTContent-length: 6863Content-type: text/html The Price Of Your Retirement Dream It's easy for us to put a price tag on what your retirement dream coststoday. Much more difficult is your job - you need to project what itwill take to realize that dream tomorrow, six months or 30 years fromnow. What do you want to do in your retirement and what financial resourcesdo you need to accomplish those dreams? These are the two questions that both retirees and those not yet retiredmust ask and answer as they plan for an unknown future. Whether we like it or not, money is a means to an end, and that'sparticularly true when it comes to retirement. Indeed, your financialstate can dictate your retirement age. Today, according to research by Georgetown University, 63 is the medianretirement age for both men and women. Many of those who continue towork beyond age 63 are those who feel their financial resources areinsufficient. Americans' retirement income comes from four basic sources - SocialSecurity, asset income, pensions and earnings. The percentagecontributed by each has been shifting over the years, with the declinein Social Security income being the most notable change. How much total income is needed to finance the retirement you've dreamedabout? You must consider the income and growth potential of your assetsagainst your retirement objectives. Be forewarned: This will be ananalysis chocked with imponderables - prevailing inflation rates, yourage at retirement, how long you live after you retire, the size of yourSocial Security and employee benefits, your post-retirement obligationsand your plans. Establishing and following through on an investment plan that can takeyou to retirement and beyond can be a daunting task. To keep yourselfmotivated, we suggest that you visualize your dream and work toward it.Every individual has his or her own vision of retirement, of course.Generally, though, as a retiree you ought to be able to... After years of meeting a work schedule, you're free to go whenever andwherever you please. Your dream may be to travel to see new sights and or stroll downdifferent streets. For a permanent change of scenery or climate, you maywant to relocate. Then again, you may not want to go anywhere. In a 1992 AmericanAssociation of Retired Persons survey, more than eight out of 10 peopleaged 55 and older said they'd like to stay in their current homes. Ifthat's your decision, your retirement income should provide for you tocover your maintenance expenses. Let someone else mow the lawn or shovelthe snow. You may want to invest in some modifications that enable youto stay in your home as long as you want. Kemper estimates that the typical retiree needs at least 75 percent ofhis or her pre-retirement income to live comfortably. Some expenses -such as those related to transportation or clothes for work - decline atretirement. But health care and certain other expenses tend to rise. It's been said that in retirement, time no longer equals money. That canbe good and bad. The "spending" of time can be directed on what may nothave been possible to do before - line dancing at a country westernclub, whiling away hours in a fine art gallery or serving a church. Yet many retirees become nervous at the thought that instead of devotingthe majority of their time to an income-generating occupation, they aredoing nothing but consuming. Retirees are acutely aware that everythinghas a price, and that their spending depletes the assets they workedyears to build. To enjoy the freedom that you have at retirement, your financial assetsmust continue to work for you after you've stopped working. The biggest threat to your doing what you want to do and going where youwant to go - and the source of many retirees' financial problems - isthe effect of inflation on the financial resources you accumulate byretirement age. Inflation raises the specter that what you accumulatemay not be sufficient over the long term. At least one retiree expense is especially inflationary. At a time whenthe annual inflation rate has been averaging 3.5 percent, prescriptionsand medical care in general has increased by 15 percent to 20 percentper year, according to the Older Americans Almanac. Both retirees and people not yet retired need to take proactive steps toaccount for inflation. Your success in planning a worry-free retirement,in fact, can turn on an investment program that anticipates inflation'seffect on your future purchasing power and standard of living. Beatinginflation is your best bet for realizing your retirement dream. This article was excerpted from the Fall/Winter 1994 issue ofKemperReports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1009760 WT01-B13-237IA019-000202-B028-38http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/rely_savings.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175247 text/html 5088HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:29:48 GMTContent-length: 4906Content-type: text/html Can You Rely On A Savings Account? By Dr. John Silvia Chief Economist Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. As an economist, I am alarmed by the results of the recent Kemper-RoperRetirement Monitor, a survey conducted to report on American attitudesand expectations regarding retirement. Specifically, the finding that aregular savings account was the most popular individual investment(after the company-sponsored 401(k)) for retirement - across all agegroups - is very sad. When you consider the language that Americans use when talking aboutretirement, this should not be surprising. When we talk about planning,for example, we talk about "saving" for retirement. We don't often hearabout investing for retirement. It's a "nest egg" that we try to build,not an income-generating machine. Why is this sad? I wonder how many people who are "saving" forretirement today are considering the risk they're taking that theirsavings account will tragically fail to provide for the length andquality of the retirement they can expect - not to mention expensivehealth care. While the principal and interest of a savings account isgenerally insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, therisk is that the retiree will outlive his or her income from it. These survey results demonstrate that Americans clearly want safety fortheir retirement funds. We are not about to overlook the potential fordefault, which was a lesson learned well from the 1930s Depression era.Yet there is another lesson that history can teach us - and it is thatinflation has the potential to erode the real value of our retirementfunds. In the 1970s, returns on savings accounts failed to keep up withinflation. In the 1980s, savings accounts failed to keep up witheconomic growth. It is precisely because rates paid on savings accountsare not pegged to economic growth or inflation that they fail to keep upwith either. By contrast, other investments have historically provided returns abovethe rate of inflation. For appropriate investment guidelines today, we need to look forward notbackward. In the past, Social Security benefits made up the shortfallbetween desired income needs and the returns provided by regular savingsaccounts. That won't continue, as reduced real benefit levels and highertaxes are the future for Social Security. Perceptions of risk and required return drive retirement planning. Thepopularity of savings accounts as a retirement vehicle suggests thatAmericans have a high aversion to risk for their retirement funds but avery low estimated need for a return. In a world of 3 percent or moreinflation and federal budget cutbacks on Social Security and Medicare,Americans should recognize that reliance on regular savings accounts isnot a strategy without a risk of its own. Dr. John Silvia Biography © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1009770 WT01-B13-238IA018-000197-B003-43http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/business/smallbus.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172910 text/html 4001HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:25:06 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 16:34:32 GMTContent-length: 3817Content-type: text/html Small Businesses To Benefit From Pension Law Changes With the new pension law changes, small businesses are expectedto be among the biggest winners. In fact, according to estimatesby the U.S. Department of Labor and the Profit Sharing/401(k)Council of America, at least 10 million workers could benefitfrom the changes in the pension laws. One of the most critical pieces of the legislation includes anew savings plan option called SIMPLE (Savings Incentive MatchPlan for Employees). With SIMPLE, employers of 100 or fewer employeeswould be able to set up a plan using a one-page form. In addition,the cumbersome task of conducting nondiscrimination testing willno longer be required, making it even easier to set up a plan. SIMPLE contributions will be immediately vested and fully portable,making it easier for employers to accept plan rollovers. Employersmust contribute 3 percent of pay for participating employees or2 percent of pay for all employees earning at least $5,000, whetheror not they participate. Under a special rule, the match couldbe reduced (but not below 1 percent) in not more than two outof any five years. As incentive to keep participants in the plan,the distribution penalty tax is increased to 25 percent underSIMPLE and applies to distributions made within the first twoyears the employee first participates in the plan. The new laws now allow tax-exempt organizations, other than stateand local governments, to offer 401(k) plans to their workers. Further changes include the repeal of the family aggregationlaw, which will now enable relatives who work in a family businessto earn their own retirement benefits without undue restrictions. Consult your tax or legal advisor for a better understanding ofthe new legislation and how it may impact your business. If youknow his or her e-mail address, send an e-mail now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1025550 WT01-B13-239IA018-000197-B003-53http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/business/helpprotect.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172919 text/html 3892HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:25:20 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 16:34:29 GMTContent-length: 3708Content-type: text/html Help Protect Your Company's Retirement Plan From Claims A decision by the Supreme Court this past March (Varity Corp.v. Howe) ruled that plan beneficiaries may sue on their ownbehalf for breaches of fiduciary duty under ERISA. This was allowedeven though ERISA had historically prohibited participants frombringing suit on their own behalf. The decision concluded thatERISA Sec. 502(a)(3) was intended to be a general "catch-all"that would protect plan participants and beneficiaries, by allowingparticipants to bring claims on their own behalf, as well as onthe behalf of the plan itself, in the case of an employer's allegedmisrepresentation and breach of fiduciary duty. Now some employers fear that they could be more vulnerable tolitigation. Although more suits may indeed be filed as a resultof the Supreme Court ruling, you may help protect your intereststhrough proper plan communication and documentation. Comprehensive written documents All of your company's benefits plans should be in writing. Thecompany's right to make changes to the plan should be clearlyspelled out in plan documentation. Oral communication Any communication about the plan, written or oral, could be usedin litigation. Therefore, consider limiting the number of approvedplan spokespersons and refrain from oral statements about theplan as much as possible. A centralized benefits plan departmentcan help control the flow of information and make it less likelythat inappropriate information is communicated. With proper plan disclosure you may be able to limit your company'srisk. Consult your financial or tax advisor to ensure that yourplan's documentation is appropriate. If you know his or her e-mailaddress, send an e-mail now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1025540 WT01-B13-240IA018-000197-B003-66http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/business/dolpushes.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172927 text/html 5339HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:25:27 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 16:34:23 GMTContent-length: 5155Content-type: text/html The DOL Pushes For Better Investment Education Workers are increasingly finding themselves responsible for theinvestment management of their retirement savings. The reason? The growing popularity of participant-directed individual accountretirement plans, such as 401(k) plans. An advantage of theseplans is that they remove the burden of investment allocationfrom employers. In return, workers hold ultimate control overtheir accounts and are oftentimes given more flexibility in theirinvestment options. Although such plans are generally viewed as positive, the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) has become concerned. The DOL fearsthat participants may not understand investment principles wellenough to make informed decisions that will ensure an adequateretirement income. In addition, the responsibility of choosinginvestments may frighten workers who do not understand investmentprinciples, thus deterring them from plan participation. To combat these drawbacks, many employers and plan sponsors haveprovided workers with basic investment education programs. Manyothers, however, have held back. They fear that their investmenteducation may be construed as offering "investment advice"under section 3 (21) (A) (ii) of ERISA, which could give riseto fiduciary status and potential liabilities. In an effort to promote better investment education by employers,the DOL recently published Interpretive Bulletin 96-1. The bulletin clarifies the differences between investment educationand investment advice. It also identifies four categories of investmenteducation, which are summarized below. 1) Plan Information Any materials that explain the operation of the plan, its investmentalternatives, the benefits of enrolling, the advantages of increasingcontributions and how preretirement withdrawals may lessen retirementincome. 2) General Financial and Investment Information Information that explains such topics as risk and return, diversification,dollar cost averaging, compounded return, tax deferred investment,effects of inflation, determining time horizons, and other similarfinancial and investment concepts. 3) Asset Allocation Models Materials that illustrate different portfolio asset allocationsbased on various time horizons and risk profiles and are basedon generally accepted investment theories and principles. 4) Interactive Investment Materials Worksheets, software and similar materials, which provide a participantthe means to estimate future retirement income needs and assessthe impact of different asset allocations on retirement income. Ongoing investment education can play a crucial role in helpingyour workers understand what it takes to invest successfully. A better understanding by employees may also expand your plan'sparticipation and contribution rates. As always, contact yourfinancial or legal advisor if you have questions about your company'sinvestment education programs. If you know his or her e-mailaddress, send an e-mail now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1025530 WT01-B13-241IA018-000197-B003-73http://www.kemper.com:80/curious/business/linkstosmall.html 198.152.185.42 19970106172936 text/html 2678HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:25:37 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 05-Dec-96 18:14:07 GMTContent-length: 2494Content-type: text/html Links To Small Business Sites The World Wide Web offers a wealth of information for the smallbusiness investor. Dun & Bradstreet PSI-Research smallbizNet The Small Business Resource Center Smart Business Supersite U.S. Chamber Of Commerce U.S. Small Business Administration Your Small Office © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1026430 WT01-B13-242IA019-000202-B028-59http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/comp_total_returns_a.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175302 text/html 56104HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:48:57 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:43:47 GMTContent-length: 55921Content-type: text/html Class A Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 9/30/96 (Unadjusted for sales charge) YTD 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 10-yr. Cum. International and Global Funds Kemper Europe Fund + 5.26% - - - - - - - - - - - Kemper Global Income Fund + 2.01 - - - - +22.66% +11.13% -1.90% +10.23% -1.47% +19.88% - Kemper International Fund +10.28 +44.17% +6.46% +17.25% +18.57% -7.50 +9.13 -4.79 +35.65 -4.00 +12.96 +143.18% Capital Growth Funds Kemper Growth Fund +14.96 +13.41 +5.73 +10.82 +30.75 +3.86 +66.85 -1.56 +1.63 -5.91 +31.87 +298.50 Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund +22.08 - - - - - - - +2.54 +0.15 +43.29 - Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund + 8.10* - - - - - - - - - - - Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund +16.83 +14.75 +0.24 +7.76 +26.13 -5.22 +69.01 +0.12 +16.79 -3.31 +31.17 +302.64 Kemper Technology Fund +15.44 +14.42 +6.86 +3.10 +24.81 +0.44 +44.35 -1.19 +11.69 +11.35 +42.77 +329.48 Kemper Value+Growth Fund +16.22 - - - - - - - - - - - Capital Growth and Income Funds Kemper Blue Chip Fund +20.09 - - -6.64 +27.26 +2.41 +44.43 -1.20 +3.82 -5.16 +31.72 - Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund + 5.95 - - - +18.29 -6.08 +26.53 +11.32 +9.07 -0.03 +44.57 - Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund +17.61 - - - +18.45 -8.63 +47.57 +19.80 +9.22 -0.99 +46.86 - Asset Allocation Funds Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio + 9.68 - - - - - - - - - - - Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio + 7.42 - - - - - - - - - - - Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio + 5.90 - - - - - - - - - - - Kemper Total Return Fund +10.45 +17.62 -2.37 +8.76 +19.83 +4.11 +40.16 +2.49 +11.59 -9.18 +25.80 +177.40 Target Equity Funds Kemper Retirement Fund - Series I (Closed to investors)# +10.21 - - - - +12.57* +43.36 +1.91 +11.37 -6.26 +23.75 - Kemper Retirement Fund - Series II (Closed to investors)# + 7.06 - - - - +6.89* +41.86 +3.06 +12.50 -6.79 +23.55 - Kemper Retirement Fund - Series III (Closed to investors)# + 7.14 - - - - - - +11.68* +13.61 -7.26 +26.17 - Kemper Retirement Fund - Series IV (Closed to investors)# + 5.21 - - - - - - - +10.35* -8.18 +27.52 - Kemper Retirement Fund - Series V (Closed to investors)# + 5.26 - - - - - - - -0.22* -7.46 +29.00 - Kemper Retirement Fund - Series VI# + 3.03 - - - - - - - - - - - Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund (Closed to investors)# + 1.43 - - - - - - - - +0.67* +21.68 - Tax-Free Income Funds Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund + 0.98 - - - - - - - - +1.33* +14.08 - Kemper Municipal Bond Fund + 0.58 +19.08 +3.09 +8.65 +11.30 +6.66 +12.78 +8.71 +13.20 -5.51 +18.33 +115.76 Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.46 +18.38 +4.19 +7.52 +11.48 +6.70 +11.42 +8.25 +12.59 -5.47 +19.48 +114.21 Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.23 - - - - - +10.03* +9.11 +13.50 -3.91 +18.40 - Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.02 - - - - - - - - - +12.42* - Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.44 - - - - - - - - - +12.07* - Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.26 +12.60 -1.05 +7.74 +12.01 +5.93 +13.39 +9.43 +12.97 -4.95 +17.98 +108.09 Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.44 - - - - - - - +10.06* -3.67 +18.37 - Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.13 - - - - - - - - - +13.14* - Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund + 1.32 - - - - - - +9.88 +14.13 -2.61 +18.46 - Income Funds Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund + 3.08 - - +4.82 +11.64 +7.19 +13.46 +6.06 +4.91 -0.44 +8.51 - Kemper Diversified Income Fund + 5.09 +2.76 -8.05 +19.61 +7.96 -12.60 +51.69 +17.80 +20.88 -3.83 +19.67 +175.08 Kemper High Yield Fund + 9.62 +18.26 +9.02 +14.41 -1.14 -12.98 +46.84 +17.08 +20.29 -1.72 +17.46 +194.61 Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund - 1.22 +14.57 +3.10 +10.43 +8.55 +6.48 +17.91 +7.85 +11.71 -3.38 +21.35 +121.69 Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund + 1.34 - - - - - - +6.32* +5.50 -0.96 +11.26 - Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund + 0.13 +16.24 +2.68 +6.35 +14.00 +9.68 +17.25 +4.61 +6.31 -3.06 +18.37 +111.77 Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund + 0.04 - - - - - - +5.83* +5.64 -3.44 +18.07 - Compare your fund's performance against the broad market indices. Consumer Price Index +2.70% +1.13% +4.41% +4.42% +4.65% +6.11% +3.06% +2.90% +2.80% +2.70% +2.50% +42.90% Dow Jones Industrial Average +16.95 +27.25 +5.55 +16.21 +32.24 -0.54 +24.25 +7.40 +17.00 +5.02 +36.94 +358.43 FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe +11.23 +45.27 +7.80 +13.99 +28.52 -1.81 +14.27 -4.12 +28.79 +2.62 +22.64 +234.56 Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond +0.61 +15.26 +2.76 +7.89 +14.53 +8.96 +16.00 +7.40 +9.75 -2.92 +18.47 +126.02 Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond -0.15 +15.32 +2.20 +7.03 +14.23 +8.72 +15.32 +7.23 +11.00 -3.51 +19.24 +123.59 Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond +1.83 +19.31 +1.51 +10.16 +10.79 +7.29 +12.14 +8.82 +12.28 -5.17 +17.46 +113.71 Morgan Stanley Capital International EAFE +4.62 +69.94 +24.93 +28.59 +10.80 -23.20 +12.50 -11.85 +32.94 +8.06 +11.55 +136.39 Russell 1000 Growth +16.11 +15.36 +5.31 +11.27 +35.92 -0.26 +41.16 +5.00 +2.90 +2.66 +37.19 +316.32 Russell 2000 Growth +10.97 +3.58 -10.48 +20.37 +20.17 -17.41 +51.19 +7.77 +13.36 -2.43 +31.04 +183.35 Standard & Poor's 500 +13.49 +18.67 +5.25 +16.56 +31.63 -3.11 +30.40 +7.61 +10.10 +1.31 +37.53 +303.43 Salomon Brothers World Government Bond +1.21 +23.04 +18.41 +4.37 +4.33 +11.98 +15.81 +5.53 +13.27 +2.35 +19.04 +153.32 Wilshire Large Company Growth +19.27 +15.50 +4.70 +15.20 +35.20 +0.30 +46.60 +5.90 +0.54 +2.96 +37.88 +357.30 *Total return figures since fund's inception: Kemper Florida Tax-FreeIncome; Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond; Kemper Michigan Tax-FreeIncome; Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income; Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income;Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income; Kemper Retirement Series I; SeriesII; Series III; Series IV; Series V; Series VI; KemperShort-Intermediate Government; Kemper U.S. Mortgage; Kemper Worldwide2004. The maximum initial sales charge is 5.75% for Kemper Blue ChipFund, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund, Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund, Kemper International Fund, KemperGrowth Fund, Kemper Technology Fund, Kemper Small Capitalization EquityFund and Kemper Total Return Fund and Kemper Value+Growth Fund. Themaximum initial sales charge is 4.50% for Kemper Income Funds (3.5% forKemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund and KemperShort-Intermediate Government Fund) and 5.0% for Kemper Target EquityFunds. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditionsas described in the funds' prospectuses. #Multiple classes notavailable; fund performance shown. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014870 -B WT01-B13-243IA019-000202-B028-78http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/comp_total_returns_b.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175315 text/html 20269HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:49:13 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:43:53 GMTContent-length: 20086Content-type: text/html Class B Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 9/30/96 (Not adjusted for contingent deferred sales charge) Except for Kemper Cash Reserves, Kemper-Dreman Contrarian, Kemper-Dreman High Return, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value, Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond, Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income, Kemper New JerseyTax-Free Income, Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income, Kemper Quantitative Equity, Kemper Short-Intermediate Government and Kemper U.S. Mortgage and Kemper Value+Growth, shares of this class were first available on 5/31/94. Total return figures are since the class's inception. YTD 1995 International And Global Funds KemperEurope Fund + 4.84%*** - KemperGlobal Income Fund + 1.43 +19.20% KemperInternational Fund + 9.49 +11.96 Capital Growth Funds KemperGrowth Fund +14.11 +30.50 Kemper-DremanSmall Cap Value Fund +21.28 - KemperQuantitative Equity Fund + 7.37** - KemperSmall Capitalization Equity Fund +15.82 +29.90 KemperTechnology Fund +14.55 +41.22 KemperValue + Growth Fund +15.45 - Capital Growth And Income Funds KemperBlue Chip Fund +19.30 +30.78 Kemper-DremanContrarian Fund + 5.31 - Kemper-DremanHigh Return Fund +16.78 - KemperHorizon 20+ Portfolio + 8.84 - KemperHorizon 10+ Portfolio + 6.85 - KemperHorizon 5 Portfolio + 5.38 - KemperTotal Return Fund + 9.80 +25.54 Tax-Free Income Funds KemperIntermediate Municipal Bond Fund + 0.47 +12.98 KemperMunicipal Bond Fund - 0.18 +17.45 KemperCalifornia Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.18 +18.61 KemperFlorida Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.42 +17.42 KemperMichigan Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.53 +11.72* KemperNew Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund - 1.00 +11.56* KemperNew York Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.38 +16.93 KemperOhio Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.19 +17.49 KemperPennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.48 +12.34* KemperTexas Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.76 +17.24 Income Funds KemperAdjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund + 2.39 +7.89% KemperDiversified Income Fund + 4.44 +18.57 KemperHigh Yield Fund + 8.85 +16.35 KemperIncome and Capital Preservation Fund - 1.82 +19.97 KemperShort-Intermediate Government Fund + 0.67 +10.37 KemperU.S. Government Securities Fund - 0.51 +17.42 Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund - 0.46 +16.94 The contingent deferred sales charge scheduled for Class B shares purchased on or after 3/1/93 for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Sales charges are eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. *Since fund's inception 3/15/95. **Since fund's inception 2/15/96. ***Since fund's inception 5/1/96. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014890 -B WT01-B13-244IA019-000202-B028-90http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/comp_total_returns_c.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175325 text/html 19887HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:49:25 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:43:56 GMTContent-length: 19704Content-type: text/html Class C Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 9/30/96 (Not adjusted for contingent deferred sales charge) Except for Kemper-Dreman Contrarian, Kemper-Dreman HighReturn, Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value, Kemper Horizon, KemperIntermediate Municipal Bond, Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income, Kemper NewJersey Tax-Free Income, Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income, Kemper Quantitative Equity and Kemper Value+Growth, shares of this class were first available on 5/31/94.Total return figures are since the class's inception. YTD 1995 International And Global Funds KemperEurope Fund + 4.84% - KemperGlobal Income Fund + 1.54 +19.26% KemperInternational Fund + 9.49 +11.96 Capital Growth Funds KemperGrowth Fund +14.22 +30.7 Kemper-DremanSmall Cap Value Fund +21.56 - KemperQuantitative Equity Fund + 7.47## - KemperSmall Capitalization Equity Fund +15.84 +29.95 KemperTechnology Fund +14.63 +41.81 KemperValue+Growth Fund +15.35 - Capital Growth And Income Funds KemperBlue Chip Fund +19.29 +31.02 Kemper-DremanContrarian Fund + 5.22 - Kemper-DremanHigh Return Fund +16.77 - KemperHorizon 20+ Portfolio + 8.95 - KemperHorizon 10+ Portfolio + 6.88 - KemperHorizon 5 Portfolio + 5.29 - KemperTotal Return Fund + 9.77 +24.94 Tax-Free Income Funds KemperIntermediate Municipal Bond Fund + 0.38 +13.12 KemperMunicipal Bond Fund - 0.17 +17.47 KemperCalifornia Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.33 +18.47 KemperFlorida Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.43 +17.56 KemperMichigan Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.54 +11.74# KemperNew Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.77 +11.61# KemperNew York Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.37 +16.88 KemperOhio Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.20 +17.49 KemperPennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund - 0.55 +12.45# KemperTexas Tax-Free Income Fund + 0.68 +17.37 Income Funds KemperAdjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund + 2.54 +7.79 KemperDiversified Income Fund + 4.48 +18.68 KemperHigh Yield Fund + 8.87 +16.39 KemperIncome and Capital Preservation Fund - 1.79 +20.29 KemperShort-Intermediate Government Fund + 0.72 +10.46 KemperU.S. Government Securities Fund - 0.59 +17.43 KemperU.S. Mortgage Fund - 0.57 +17.03 #Since fund's inception 3/15/95. ##Since fund's inception 2/15/96. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014880 -B WT01-B13-245IA019-000202-B028-105http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/performyield.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175334 text/html 6849HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:49:34 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 22:32:32 GMTContent-length: 6667Content-type: text/html Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Shares are not insured or guaranteed andare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Money fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments. Total returncalculations assume that you reinvested your dividends. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund,Kemper Diversified Income Fund and Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of the followingunmanaged indices: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P Actuaries World Index, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. Returns for Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper IntermediateMunicipal Bond Fund, Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper NewJersey Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund, KemperPennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund and Kemper-Dreman Funds include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses byKemper Financial Services, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund are no longer in effectand expenses are generally being reinstated for Kemper Ohio Tax-FreeIncome Fund and Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Performance of fund classes will differ.Please see prospectus for details. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014900 WT01-B13-246IA019-000202-B028-120http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/smallcapequity.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175344 text/html 13904HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:49:45 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 13721Content-type: text/html Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund Seeks maximum capital appreciation byinvesting primarily in common stocks of smaller companies (marketcapitalization of $1 billion or less) considered undervalued, emerging orrecovering. LCI International, Omnicare, Dura Pharmaceuticals, Idexx Labs, CRA Managed Care, MGM Grand, Tellabs, Mohawk Industries, Risk Capital Re Inc., Alternative Resources $935,000,000 KSCAX KSCBX KSCCX 2/20/69 5/31/94 5/31/94 16.83% 15.82% 15.84% 10.05% 11.82% 14.84% 9.58% 12.23% 15.16% 14.52% - - 14.27% - - 12.70% 18.80% 19.75% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015310-B WT01-B13-247IA019-000202-B028-130http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/technology.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175409 text/html 13707HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:50:09 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 13524Content-type: text/html Kemper Technology Fund Seeks growth of capital by investingprimarily in common stocks of companies that use, develop or benefit fromtechnology. Cisco Systems, Intel, Sun Microsystems, Microsoft, 3Com, Parametric Technology, Computer Associates INTL, Ascend Communications, U.S. Robotics, Dell Computer $1,089,000,000 KTCAX KTCBX KTCCX 9/7/48 5/31/94 5/31/94 15.44% 14.55% 14.63% 8.81% 10.55% 13.63% 5.18% 7.67% 10.69% 18.16% - - 15.01% - - 13.15% 28.37% 29.60% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Technology Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015340-B WT01-B13-248IA019-000202-B028-142http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/asian_growth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175419 text/html 12904HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:50:19 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:52 GMTContent-length: 12721Content-type: text/html Kemper Asian Growth Fund Long-term capital growth. Equity securities of primarily Asian companies. KANAX KANBX KANCX 10/21/96 10/21/96 10/21/96 - - - - - - - - - - - - # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Asian Growth Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1024580 WT01-B13-249IA019-000202-B028-157http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/europe.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175432 text/html 13119HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:50:31 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:52 GMTContent-length: 12936Content-type: text/html Kemper Europe Fund Long-term capital growth. Bayer AG, Glaxo Wellcome, British Petroleum, Koninklijke Ahold, Independent Newspaper Geographic Distribution of Common Stocks: United Kingdom 25%, Netherlands 24%, Germany 10%, France 10%, Switzerland 7%, Spain 7%, Ireland 6%, Italy 4%, Sweden 2%, Norway 2% $2,200,000 KEFAX KEFBX KEFCX 5/1/96 5/1/96 5/1/96 5.26% 4.84% 4.84% -0.79% 0.84% 3.84% - - - -0.79% 0.84% 3.84% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Europe Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1019840-B WT01-B13-250IA019-000202-B028-166http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/quantitative.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175441 text/html 12409HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:50:41 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 12226Content-type: text/html Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund Seeks growth of capital and reduction of risk by investing primarily in common stocks. Compaq, Philip Morris, UST, Viacom, General Electric, U.S. Robotics, Union Texas Petro Hldgs., 3Com, Consolidated Stores, Walt Disney $4,000,000 KQEAX KQEBX KQECX 2/15/96 2/15/96 2/15/96 8.10% 7.37% 7.47% 1.88% 3.37% 6.47% * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. For Class C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015300-B WT01-B13-251IA019-000202-B028-172http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/valuegrowth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175448 text/html 12397HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:50:49 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 12214Content-type: text/html Kemper Value+Growth Fund Seeks growth of capital through professional management of aportfolio of growth and value stocks. Phillip Morris, General Electric, UST Inc., Compaq, FNMA, FHLMC, Merrill Lynch & Co., Walt Disney, 3Com, Carnival $30,000,000 KVGAX KVGBX KVGCX 10/16/95 10/16/95 10/16/95 16.22%* 15.45%* 15.35%* 9.51%* 11.45%* 14.35%* * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Value+Growth Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. For Class C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015320-B WT01-B13-252IA019-000202-B028-186http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/horiz20.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175455 text/html 12549HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:50:57 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 12366Content-type: text/html Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio Through professional management and diversification across domestic and foreign markets, asset classes and management styles, seeks relative consistency of returns by controllingrisk for its given time horizon. Development Bank of Singapore, Compaq, British Petroleum, General Electric, Steris Corp., Honda Motor, FNMA, Circle K Japan, FHLMC, Matsushita $25,000,000 KHOAX KHOBX KHOCX 12/29/95 12/29/95 12/29/95 9.68%* 8.84%* 8.95%* 3.37%* 4.84%* 7.95%* * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015240-B WT01-B13-253IA019-000202-B028-197http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/totalreturn.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175503 text/html 13783HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:51:05 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:50 GMTContent-length: 13600Content-type: text/html Kemper Total Return Fund Seeks the highest total return, asmeasured by income and capital gain, consistent with reasonable risk byinvesting in common stocks, preferred stocks, convertible and nonconvertiblebonds and money market instruments. Preferred and common stocks 63%, Governments 14%, Nonconvertible bonds 19%, Cash and equivalents 4% $3,005,000,000 KTRAX KTRBX KTRCX 3/2/64 5/31/94 5/31/94 10.45% 9.80% 9.77% 4.14% 5.80% 8.77% 8.00% 10.63% 13.66% 8.73% - - 10.09% - - 11.59% 11.45% 12.70% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.75% for Kemper Total Return Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015270-B WT01-B13-254IA019-000202-B028-209http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/retire_series.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175511 text/html 2267HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:51:13 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:10:52 GMTContent-length: 2083Content-type: text/html Target Equity Funds Prospectuses And Important Information Kemper Retirement Fund Series I Kemper Retirement Fund Series II Kemper Retirement Fund Series III Kemper Retirement Fund Series IV Kemper Retirement Fund Series V Kemper Retirement Fund Series VI © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1012050 WT01-B13-255IA019-000202-B028-221http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/worldwide.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175520 text/html 13124HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:51:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:52 GMTContent-length: 12941Content-type: text/html KemperWorldwide 2004 Fund Seeks to provide long-term capitalgrowth with guaranteed return ofinvestment on the maturity date to investors who reinvest all dividendsand hold their shares to the maturity date. The fund invests a portionof its assets in U.S. government guaranteed zero coupon bonds and thebalance of its assets in international securities, primarilystocks. Ciba-Geigy, Aegon, British Biotech, Roche Hldg., Tsubakimoto Chain Co. Geographic Distribution of Common Stocks: Japan 24%, United Kingdom 13%, Netherlands 12%, Switzerland 7%, Ireland 6%, France 6%, Spain 5%, Hong Kong 5%, Sweden 4%, Italy 4% $37,000,000 KWIVX 5/3/94 1.43% -3.61% 0.86% 7.14% Maturity Date: 11/15/04 # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 5.0% for Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015190-B WT01-B13-256IA019-000202-B028-233http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/horiz10.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175531 text/html 12567HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:51:29 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 12384Content-type: text/html Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio Through professional management and diversification across domestic and foreign markets, asset classes and management styles, seeks relative consistency of returns by controllingrisk for its given time horizon. Development Bank of Singapore, Compaq, Steris Corp., FNMA, Kyocera, General Electric, British Petroleum, ING, FHLMC, Circle K Japan $25,000,000 KHRAX KHRBX KHRCX 12/29/95 12/29/95 12/29/95 7.42%* 6.85%* 6.88%* 1.24%* 2.85%* 5.88%* * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015250-B WT01-B13-257IA019-000202-B028-245http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/high_yield.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175542 text/html 14483HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:51:42 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:46 GMTContent-length: 14300Content-type: text/html Kemper High Yield Fund Seeks the highest level of currentincome by investing primarily in high-yield fixed-income securities.Capital gain is a secondary objective. Bonds 91%, Cash and equivalents: Cash equivalents 6%, Treasuries 1-3 1%, Preferred and common stocks 2% $4,095,000,000 7.7 years 5.4 years KHYAX KHYBX KHYCX 1/26/78 5/31/94 5/31/94 8.90% 8.43% 8.47% 9.62% 8.85% 8.87% 4.65% 4.85% 7.87% 7.88% 9.02% 12.06% 11.98% - - 10.90% - - 11.73% 9.51% 10.80% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper High Yield Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015000-B WT01-B13-258IA019-000202-B028-258http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/diversified.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175550 text/html 14617HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:51:51 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 14434Content-type: text/html Kemper Diversified Income Fund Seeks high current return byinvesting in primarily high yield, foreign and U.S. governmentfixed-income securities. High yield corporates 40%, Emerging markets 6%, Foreign currency bonds 23%, Mortgages 14%, Treasury notes & bonds 6%, Cash & equivalents: Treasuries 1-3 10%, Other 1% $778,000,000 8.2 years 4.7 years KDIAX KDIBX KDICX 6/23/77 1/23/89 new obj. 5/31/94 5/31/94 6.88% 6.26% 6.35% 5.09% 4.44% 4.48% 0.40% 0.47% 3.49% 4.79% 5.69% 8.78% 11.50% - - 10.14% - - 10.49% 7.43% 8.75% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Diversified Income Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014990-B WT01-B13-259IA019-000202-B028-277http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/horiz5.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175620 text/html 12526HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:52:20 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 12343Content-type: text/html Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio Through professional management and diversification across domestic and foreign markets, asset classes and management styles, seeks relative consistency of returns by controllingrisk for its given time horizon. Development Bank of Singapore, ING, Honda Motor, Compaq, Canon, Steris Corp., General Electric, ASTRA, Banco Bilbao, Mitsui & Co. $18,000,000 KHZAX KHZBX KHZCX 12/29/95 12/29/95 12/29/95 5.90%* 5.38%* 5.29%* -0.20%* 1.38%* 4.29%* * Since fund's inception. # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 5.75% for Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. For C shares, performance is adjusted for the 1% CDSC for shares redeemed within one year. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015260-B WT01-B13-260IA019-000202-B028-282http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/global_income.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175629 text/html 14394HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:52:29 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:45 GMTContent-length: 14211Content-type: text/html Kemper Global Income Fund Seeks high current income consistentwith prudent total return asset management by investing primarily ininvestment grade foreign and domestic fixed-income securities. United States 20%, Netherlands 20%, United Kingdom 20%, Australia 15%, France 12%, Japan 5%, Norway 5%, Italy 3%. $136,000,000 6.8 years 4.8 years KGIAX KGIBX KGICX 10/1/89 5/31/94 5/31/94 4.82% 4.34% 4.36% 2.01% 1.43% 1.54% -2.61% -2.45% 0.57% -0.45% 0.75% 3.65% 5.46% - - 8.57% 8.17% 9.39% Note: Portfolio percentages may not equal 100% due to unrealizedgains and losses on forward foreign exchange hedges. # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 4.50% for Kemper Global Income Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015360-B WT01-B13-261IA019-000202-B028-287http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/taxfree.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175640 text/html 3142HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:52:38 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:54:33 GMTContent-length: 2960Content-type: text/html Kemper Tax-Free Income Funds Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund Kemper Municipal Bond Fund America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! Kemper California Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Florida Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Michigan Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper New Jersey Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper New York Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Ohio Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Pennsylvania Tax-Free Income Fund Kemper Texas Tax-Free Income Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012130-A WT01-B13-262IA019-000202-B029-5http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/preservation.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175651 text/html 14658HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:52:49 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 14475Content-type: text/html Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund Seeks as high a level of currentincome as is consistent with preservation of capital by investing inprimarily investment grade corporate bonds, government securities,commercial paper and money market instruments. Treasury bonds and notes 14%, Foreign bonds 13%, Corporate bonds 66%, Cash and equivalents: Cash equivalents 1%, Treasuries 1-3 6% $570,000,000 13.7 years 5.1 years KICAX KICBX KICCX 4/15/74 5/31/94 5/31/94 6.38% 5.71% 5.72% -1.22% -1.82% -1.79% -5.70% -5.56% -2.73% -0.58% 0.30% 3.26% 7.01% - - 7.79% - - 9.24% 6.11% 7.43% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015010-B WT01-B13-263IA019-000202-B029-20http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/usmortgage.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175711 text/html 14444HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:53:00 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 14261Content-type: text/html Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund Seeks maximum current return by investing in U.S. government securities(primarily mortgage-backed) and repurchase agreements. Mortgage-backed: GNMA 83%, Other 11%, Governments: Short-term 6% $2,962,000,000 8.9 years 4.1 years KUMAX KUMBX KUMCX 1/10/92 10/26/84 5/31/94 6.01% 5.46% 5.55% 0.04% -0.46% -0.57% -4.41% -4.25% -1.51% -0.46% 0.63% 3.47% 0.00% 5.30% - 0.00% 6.46% - 4.24% 7.02% 6.28% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015040-B WT01-B13-264IA019-000202-B029-28http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/usgovtsec.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175721 text/html 14599HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:53:21 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:51 GMTContent-length: 14416Content-type: text/html Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund Seeks high current income, liquidity and security of principal by investing in securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies, including GNMA certificates, andother government securities and repurchase agreements. Mortgage-backed: GNMA 82%, Other 10%, Governments: Short-term 8% $4,157,000,000 8.9 years 4.1 years KUSAX KUSBX KUSCX 10/1/79 5/31/94 5/31/94 6.33% 5.66% 5.68% 0.13% -0.51% -0.59% -4.42% -4.32% -1.55% -0.24% 0.71% 3.55% 5.35% - - 7.30% - - 8.94% 5.25% 6.52% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 4.50% for Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015030-B WT01-B13-265IA019-000202-B029-35http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/int_muni_bond.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175730 text/html 14381HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:53:30 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:47 GMTContent-length: 14198Content-type: text/html Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund As high a level of current incomeexempt from federal income taxes as is consistent with preservation ofcapital. Average maturity normally ranges from three to ten years. Cash and Equivalents 2%, US Government Secured 8%, General Obligations 23%, Revenue Bonds 67% $22,000,000 9.1 years 5.8 years KIMAX KIMBX KIMCX 11/1/94 11/1/94 11/1/94 3.98% 3.29% 3.33% 6.33%* 5.23%* 5.29%* 0.98% 0.47% 0.38% -1.79% -3.44% -0.60% 1.26% 0.37% 3.26% 6.82% 6.00% 7.58% *Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% federal income tax rate. # Portfolios are subject tochange. ## These figures are adjusted for maximumsales charge (Class A) or the contingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) ineffect at the end of the specified period (Class B). The maximum initialsales charge (Class A) is 2.75% for Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund. The CDSC schedulefor Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%.Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level.Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reducedor eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds'prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015060-B WT01-B13-266IA019-000202-B029-41http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/shortintgovt.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175738 text/html 14250HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:53:39 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:49 GMTContent-length: 14067Content-type: text/html Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund Seeks high current income andpreservation of capital, with equal emphasis, by investing in primarilyshort- and intermediate-term U.S. government securities and a limitedinvestment in other fixed-income securities. Governments: Short-term 73%, Intermediate-term 25%, Cash equivalents 2% $204,000,000 2.3 years 2.0 years KSIAX KSIBX KSICX 1/10/92 2/1/89 5/31/94 5.08% 4.45% 4.57% 1.34% 0.67% 0.72% -2.15% -3.20% -0.25% 0.64% 0.35% 3.36% 0.00% 4.40% - 4.09% 5.78% 4.66% # Portfolios are subjectto change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 3.5% for Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares foryears 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annualperiod is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns areadjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated undercertain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1015020-B WT01-B13-267IA019-000202-B029-50http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/adjust_us.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175746 text/html 14328HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:53:47 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 01-Nov-96 22:23:44 GMTContent-length: 14145Content-type: text/html Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund Seeks high current income consistentwith low volatility of principal by investing primarily in adjustablerate securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or itsagencies or instrumentalities. Government agency ARMS 79%, Fixed-rate agency securities 1%, Government bonds: Short-term 20% $94,000,000 3.8 years 3.0 years KADAX KADBX KADCX 9/1/87 1/1/92 new obj. 5/31/94 5/31/94 5.28% 4.68% 4.68% 3.08% 2.39% 2.54% -0.51% -1.57% 1.55% 1.36% 1.28% 4.29% 4.36% - - 6.23% 2.95% 4.25% # Portfolios are subject to change. ## These figures are adjusted for maximum sales charge (Class A) or thecontingent deferred sales charge (CDSC) in effect at the end of thespecified period (Class B). The maximum initial sales charge (Class A)is 3.5% for Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund. The CDSC schedule for Class B shares for years 1 to 6 is 4%, 3%, 3%, 2%, 2% and 1%. Adjustment for a full annual period is at CDSC for the next annual level. Thus, 1-year returns are adjusted for 3% CDSC. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditions as described in the funds' prospectuses. Compare Your Fund Against A Broad Market Index View Your Fund's Class A Share Long-Term Comparative Total Returns For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014980-B WT01-B13-268IA019-000202-B029-54http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/mmfunds.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175757 text/html 2512HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:53:59 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 19:02:43 GMTContent-length: 2330Content-type: text/html Kemper Money Funds Kemper Money Funds Kemper Money Market Fund Kemper Government Money Fund Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund Kemper Cash Reserves Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012030 WT01-B13-269IA019-000202-B029-63http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/tax_exempt.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175809 text/html 11821HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:54:07 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 02-Jan-97 18:26:13 GMTContent-length: 11636Content-type: text/html Kemper Tax-Free Money Fund* Seeks to provide maximum current income to the extent consistent with stability of principal by investing in short-term, high quality, tax-exempt municipal obligations. Tax-exempt commercial paper 49%, Variable rate demand notes 44%, Tender option securities 2%, General market obligations 5% $734,000,000 9/10/87 Week Ending 12/31/96 3.56% Week Ending 12/31/96 5.66% ## Week Ending 12/31/96 3.63% Week Ending 12/31/96 5.77% ## * A series of Kemper Money Funds. # Portfolios are subject to change. ## Based upon the fund's yield and the 37.1% federal income tax For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014950-B WT01-B13-270IA019-000202-B029-70http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/govt_sec_port.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175820 text/html 10912HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:54:20 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 02-Jan-97 18:26:13 GMTContent-length: 10727Content-type: text/html Kemper Government Money Fund* Seeks to provide maximum current income to the extent consistentwith stability of principal by investing in exclusively short-termobligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government, its agencies orinstrumentalities and repurchase agreements of such obligations. Repurchase agreements 61%, Federal agencies 36%, U.S. Treasuries 3% $681,000,000 11/30/81 Week Ending 12/31/96 5.14% Week Ending 12/31/96 5.27% *A series of Kemper Money Funds. #Portfolios are subject to change. For more complete information on any Kemper Fund, including managementfees and expenses, please request a free prospectus from yourfinancial representative, Kemper Shareholder Services (1-800-621-1048), e-mail us your request for a prospectus through the mail or download a prospectus. Read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Rememberthat there is no assurance that the objective of any mutual fund willbe achieved and mutual fund returns and net asset value fluctuate.Shares are redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more orless than their original cost. Money market funds seek to maintain anet asset value of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance thatthey will. Mutual fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Performance And Yield Notes Returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returnsand net asset values fluctuate. Sharesare redeemable at current net asset value, which may be more or lessthan the original cost. Kemper Money Funds seek to maintain a net assetvalue of $1.00 per share, but there can be no assurance that they will.Fund shares are not insured or guaranteed by the U.S. government. Average annual total return and total return measure net investmentincome and capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assuming reinvestmentof dividends and, for average annual total return only, adjustments for the maximumsales charge or the contingent deferred sales charge in effect at the end of the periods,as applicable. Average annualtotal return reflects annualized change while total return reflectsaggregate change. During the periods noted, securities pricesfluctuated. For each money market fund, the current annualized yield isthe seven day annualized net investment income per share as of theindicated date. Gains or losses are not included. Effective yieldreflects compounding of income. Special Risks Investment by certain portfolios in lower rated and non-rated securitiespresents a greater risk of loss to principal and interest than higherrated securities (principally Kemper Diversified Income Fund and KemperHigh Yield Fund). For portfolios that invest internationally(principally Kemper International Fund, Kemper Global Income Fund, KemperEurope Fund, Kemper Diversified Income Fund, Kemper Asian Growth Fundand Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund), thereare special risk considerations, including foreign exchange rates,foreign government regulations and differing degrees of liquidity thatmay adversely affect portfolio securities, all of which are more fullydiscussed in the funds' prospectuses. Investment in smaller companies (Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fundand Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund) presents greater risk of lossthan investment in large companies. Concentration in certain marketsectors (Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund) presents special riskconsiderations. Performance of funds may be compared to the performance of variousunmanaged indices including, but not limited to: the Standard & Poor's 500 stock index and the DowJones Industrial Average, which are generally representative of the U.S.stock market; the Wilshire Large Company Growth Index, which isgenerally representative of the market for stocks of larger growthcompanies (selected on the basis of sales growth, return on equity anddividend payout); the Lehman Brothers Government/Corporate Bond index,which is generally representative of intermediate and long-termgovernment and investment grade corporate debt securities; the MorganStanley Capital International EAFE, which is generally representative ofinternational markets; the FT/S&P - Actuaries World Index - Europe, which is generally representative of the equity securities of European companies; the Consumer Price Index, generallyrepresentative of the level of inflation; the Salomon Brothers WorldGovernment Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index on a U.S. dollar total return basis with all dividends reinvested and is comprised of government bonds from 14 countries; the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond Index, which is an unmanaged index generally representative of intermediate-term government bonds, investment grade corporate debt securities and mortgage-backedsecurities; the Lehman Brothers Municipal Bond Index, which includesapproximately 15,000 bonds; the Russell 1000 Growth Index, which is an unmanaged index comprised of common stocks of larger U.S. companies with greater than average growth orientation and represents the universe ofstocks from which "earnings/growth" money managers typically select; and theRussell 2000 index, which is an unmanaged capitalization weighted price only index which is comprised of 2000 of the smallest stocks in the Russell3000 index. The performance of funds may also be compared to the combined performance of several indices. Returns for Kemper Asian Growth Fund, Kemper Value+Growth Fund, Kemper-Dreman Funds and Kemper Europe Fund include the effect of a temporary waiver ofmanagement fees and/or an absorption of certain operating expenses by Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc., as investment advisor, for periodsspecified in the prospectus, which improved results. The absorption andwaiver for certain Kemper State Tax-Free Income Funds has been reinstated. Income fromtax-exempt funds may be subject to state and local taxes except asotherwise provided in the prospectus, and a portion of income may besubject to the alternative minimum tax for certain investors. Please see prospectus more for details on how performance of fund classes will differ. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1014940-B WT01-B13-271IA019-000202-B029-76http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/intlglobal.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175827 text/html 2394HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:54:29 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 19:07:20 GMTContent-length: 2212Content-type: text/html Kemper International and Global Funds Kemper Asian Growth Fund Kemper Europe Fund Kemper Global Income Fund Kemper International Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015350 WT01-B13-272IA019-000202-B029-85http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/capgrowth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175836 text/html 2836HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:54:36 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:39:46 GMTContent-length: 2654Content-type: text/html Kemper Capital Growth Funds Kemper Growth Fund Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund Kemper Small Capitalization Equity Fund Kemper Technology Fund Kemper Value+Growth Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1015280 WT01-B13-273IA019-000202-B029-90http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/capgrowthinc.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175844 text/html 2402HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:54:45 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:43:40 GMTContent-length: 2220Content-type: text/html Kemper Capital Growth and Income Funds Kemper Blue Chip Fund Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012060 WT01-B13-274IA019-000202-B029-98http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/assetallocation.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175851 text/html 2434HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:54:53 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:47:19 GMTContent-length: 2252Content-type: text/html Kemper Asset Allocation Funds Kemper Horizon 20+ Portfolio Kemper Horizon 10+ Portfolio Kemper Horizon 5 Portfolio Kemper Total Return Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1018490 WT01-B13-275IA019-000202-B029-110http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/targetequ.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175904 text/html 2727HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:55:06 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:50:57 GMTContent-length: 2545Content-type: text/html Target Equity Funds Kemper Retirement Fund-Series I Kemper Retirement Fund-Series II Kemper Retirement Fund-Series III Kemper Retirement Fund-Series IV Kemper Retirement Fund-Series V Kemper Retirement Fund-Series VI Kemper Worldwide 2004 Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012050 WT01-B13-276IA019-000202-B029-119http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/income.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175911 text/html 2729HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:55:13 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 15-Nov-96 18:59:17 GMTContent-length: 2547Content-type: text/html Kemper Income Funds Kemper Adjustable Rate U.S. Government Fund Kemper Diversified Income Fund Kemper High Yield Fund Kemper Income and Capital Preservation Fund Kemper Short-Intermediate Government Fund Kemper U.S. Government Securities Fund Kemper U.S. Mortgage Fund © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1012040 WT01-B13-277IA019-000202-B029-133http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/comp_total_returns_cls.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175927 text/html 8080HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:55:25 GMTLast-modified: Friday, 22-Nov-96 16:11:37 GMTContent-length: 7898Content-type: text/html Closed-End Funds Comparative Total Returns Comparative Total Returns 10/31/96 (Based on net asset value, not market price) YTD 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 The Growth Fund of Spain, Inc. +13.76% - -4.61% +15.84% -23.48% +28.79% +2.30% +22.12% Kemper High Income Trust +12.47 -9.90 -15.54 +53.85 +18.80 +21.50 -3.26 +16.88 Kemper Intermediate Government Trust +1.70 +9.71 + 7.14 +15.16 + 5.42 + 6.05 -3.29 +16.65 Kemper Multi-Market Income Trust +6.69 +2.55 -11.94 +52.21 +17.29 +14.44 -3.05 +20.11 Kemper Municipal Income Trust +3.95 +9.05 + 6.79 +16.12 +11.08 +14.65 -6.64 +17.87 Kemper Strategic Income Fund +19.55 - - - - - -0.84* +30.80 Kemper Strategic Municipal Income Trust +4.70 +9.46 + 6.64 +12.58 + 9.30 +12.34 -0.16 +12.38 Kemper closed-end funds' returns are historical and do not represent future performance. Returns, market price and net asset value fluctuate. *Comparative total return is as of fund's inception on 4/29/94. © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016510-F WT01-B13-278IA019-000202-B029-142http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/closedend_news.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175935 text/html 2586HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:55:36 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 24-Sep-96 20:13:52 GMTContent-length: 2403Content-type: text/html Kemper Closed-End Funds News The Growth Fund of Spain, Inc. Kemper High Income Trust Kemper Intermediate Government Trust Kemper Multi-Market Income Trust Kemper Municipal Income Trust Kemper Strategic Municipal Income Trust Kemper Strategic Income Fund © Copyright Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1016510 WT01-B13-279IA019-000202-B029-158http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/whoswho.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175945 text/html 5306HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:55:44 GMTLast-modified: Tuesday, 09-Jul-96 14:11:46 GMTContent-length: 5123Content-type: text/html A Who's Who of Financial Representatives Prospectuses And Important Information As you know, Kemper Funds believes that working with a financial representative is the best way to evaluate today�s investment alternatives. "Financial representative" is a catch-all term for the licensed professionals who represent others' financial interests. Investors today have their choice of where they meet their representative (at a brokerage office, at a financial institution or in their home, for example), the level of service (from full to limited) they want to receive, and how services will be compensated for. And, as markets become increasingly complex and global, an increasing number of financial representatives have continued with their education. Do you need help in deciphering your financial representative's business card? Despite the many possible affiliations and designations, almost every financial representative comes from one of four basic disciplines. Here's a quick portrait of each "type." The accountant You expect a certified public accountant (CPA) to be able to advise you on audit, accounting and tax issues. To offer more encompassing help, including personal income tax planning, investment planning and estate planning, many CPAs also have sought accreditation from the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, as a Personal Financial Specialist (PFS). A PFS must have several hours of planning experience over a three-year period, pass a comprehensive exam and submit references. Reaccreditation is required every three years. The insurance agent To be serving as a financial representative, an insurance agent can be expected to have a license to sell securities as well as insurance. Insurance agents' interest in the spectrum of personal financial management has led to the creation of a Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC) designation. Accreditation requires coursework (in investments, income taxation and estate and financial planning), a minimum of three years of experience and adherence to a code of ethics. Chartered life underwriters (CLUs) qualify for a fast track to the ChFC, but the designation is not exclusive to the insurance industry. The American College, Bryn Mawr, Pa., awards the ChFC. The financial planner Financial planners represent a broad view, offering advice in investment planning (including mutual funds and individual securities), insurance, taxes, retirement, estate and investment planning. A certified financial planner (CFP) has completed extensive education, examination, experience and ethics requirements set by the Certified Financial Planner Board of Standards, Denver. While almost half of all CFPs work for financial planning firms, they're also employed at securities, accounting and insurance firms and banks. The broker Brokers are sales representatives who work for a brokerage firm, also known as a broker/dealer. They are registered with the National Association of Securities Dealers and have passed a qualifying examination. Because they�re trained in securities laws, their expertise is in the selection and monitoring of stocks, bonds, mutual funds and other financial products. But while the generic "broker" gives you an idea of the representative's training, it does not satisfactorily describe the scope of his or her service. That's why many of those with a foundation in brokerage prefer to call themselves financial consultants or advisors. Many brokers also have additional designations, such as the CFP. This article was excerpted from Spring/Summer 1996 Kemper Reports, Kemper's quarterly shareholder magazine. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014360 WT01-B13-280IA019-000202-B029-168http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/customplan.html 198.152.185.42 19970106175953 text/html 4666HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:55:54 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:10:51 GMTContent-length: 4482Content-type: text/html A Custom-tailored Plan To Help Achieve Your Goals Prospectuses And Important Information A financial representative can become your trusted partner for thelong-run. He or she will get to know you and work with you, to help youreach a lifetime of financial goals. Here's what you should expect from the start... A detailed analysis of your financial situation. Your representative canexamine your current investments, income and tax situation, to analyzeyour current level of "fiscal fitness." A clear definition of your goals. Together, you and your financialrepresentative can formalize your goals - for the near-term (buy a newhouse in a few years?), and for the long-run (college for children?retirement?). An individualized strategy to help reach your goals. Most likely, yourinvestment plan will include a combination of investments that addressyour time and safety requirements. Your portfolio will be uniquely yours- geared toward helping to meet your financial needs now, and later. Regular portfolio reviews.You and your financial representative should periodically review yourinvestments to be sure you're on track to reaching your goals.Similarly, you should talk with your representative throughout variouslife stages. Marriage, new babies, retirement, aging parents, new jobs -all of these might warrant a change in your investment strategy. Do you really need a professional financial representative? Yes, if you agree with these statements.... I do not have time to continually monitor the financial markets andmy investments, and would rather leave the detailed analysis up to aninvestment professional. Agree ____ Disagree ____ Some of these statements apply to me. (These common life situationsmay indicate a need for specialized investment strategies.) Agree ____ Disagree ____ I have a new job. I have my own business. My household income has recently changed. There has been a change in my family (i.e., a new baby). I will have to finance a college education. I have retired, or soon will retire, or need to start planning for retirement. I have parents who need (or may eventually need) financial support. I'm not completely confident that my assets are strategicallyallocated so that I'm on target to reach my financial goals. Agree ____ Disagree ____ I need to establish a disciplined savings and investment plan. Agree ____ Disagree ____ My investments are serious business, deserving the attention andskill of a dedicated, experienced financial professional. Agree ____ Disagree ____ If you agree with some (or all) of the questions above, a professionalfinancial representative is probably right for you. So keep reading... © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B13-281IA019-000202-B029-182http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/boost.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180010 text/html 3614HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:56:07 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:10:50 GMTContent-length: 3430Content-type: text/html Boost Your Confidence And Peace Of Mind Prospectuses And Important Information Your financial representative is a licensed professional, trained tohave an in-depth understanding of the financial markets. What's more, heor she is expected to maintain the highest level of integrity andrespect in dealing with clients. Entrusting your investments to an investment professional can actuallylift a weight off your shoulders. Why? Because your financial representative can... Evaluate and help choose the best investments alternatives for you. Yourrepresentative can pre-screen investment choices, and present you withthe ones that make the most sense for your situation. Help you manage risk. Investing to build capital always involves some degree of risk. Afinancial representative can help you find the most comfortablecombination of risk and reward for you, based on your goals andtime-frame. Likewise, he or she can help you employ a variety ofrisk-reduction strategies to help protect your investments. Monitor the markets - and everything that impacts them. You won't haveto worry and watch the markets, because that's your representative'sfull-time job. He or she will help keep your focus on long-term results- and put short-term ups and downs in perspective. This can help reducelosses due to "panic selling" - losses that result from sellinginvestments at the wrong time, for the wrong reasons. Relieve you of administrative details. Your investment transactions cango much more smoothly when handled by a professional financialrepresentative. In fact, he or she can take most of the time-consuming,but necessary, paperwork off your hands. And, if you make all of yourinvestments through one representative, matters like address, telephonenumber, and name changes can be handled with one phone call.Furthermore, your representative can even help you organize and reportyour investments' performance at tax-time. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B13-282IA019-000202-B029-194http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/improve.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180018 text/html 4799HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:56:20 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:10:51 GMTContent-length: 4615Content-type: text/html Improve Your Investment Potential Prospectuses And Important Information Mutual fund investors who worked with a professional financialrepresentative have reaped greater rewards! A well-chosen group of mutual funds can make an excellent cornerstonefor a results-oriented investment portfolio. And, studies have shownthat investors who use professional financial representatives - takingadvantage of their experience and guidance - have achieved betterresults than investors who chose to go it alone. See for yourself... A study of 1,000 equity and fixed income mutual funds showed thatinvestors who bought funds through a professional financialrepresentative had better investment results than those who purchasedfunds themselves - 15% better in equity funds and 9% better in fixedincome funds.* *Source: Dalbar, Inc. study "Quantitative Analysis of Investor Behavior"(6/30/94). This information is historical and does not represent futureresults. Also, there can be no guarantee that a particular investor'sresults will be improved through professional advice. The study comparedcumulative investment returns over the period 12/31/92 to 12/30/94 for awide variety of equity and fixed income funds sold directly to investorsand sold through financial representatives. Performance information doesnot consider the effect of sales charges paid by investors who workedwith financial representatives. Source of investment information was theInvestment Company Institute. Here's how your financial representative's experience and guidance canhelp provide this exceptional benefit... Encouragement to stay the course. A long-term perspective is one of thebest predictors of financial success. And, because studies have shownthat investors who worked with a professional financial representativeheld their mutual fund investments longer than those who did not (3.2vs. 2 years respectively for equity funds, and 2.9 vs. 1.7 years forfixed income funds)** - they may have greater potential for success inthe long-run. Information about emerging opportunities. As an investment professional,it's your financial representative's job to stay abreast of (and let youknow about) new investment opportunities. On the other hand, an investorworking alone would have to do lots of homework, including reading avariety of financial publications and investment newsletters, to gaintimely awareness of such opportunities. Advice when it's time to move. Should you move quickly to take advantageof a new opportunity? Or should you stick with your current investments?With a professional financial representative at your side, you can beconfident that you're making educated choices based on time-testedexperience. And that's the best feeling of all. **Source: Dalbar, Inc. study "Quantitative Analysis of InvestorBehavior" (6/30/94). Comparison of redemption rates in long-term(excluding money market funds) fixed income and equity mutual funds -funds sold through financial representatives vs. direct-marketed funds. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. WT01-B13-283IA019-000202-B029-202http://www.kemper.com:80/funds/establish.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180026 text/html 3610HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:56:27 GMTLast-modified: Saturday, 04-May-96 18:10:51 GMTContent-length: 3426Content-type: text/html Establish A Relationship Based On Mutual Respect And Trust Prospectuses And Important Information 15 Important Benefits That Your Financial Representative Can Provide An analysis of your current financial situation. Clear definition of your financial needs and goals. An individualized strategy to help reach your goals. Regular portfolio reviews. Potential for greater returns. A long-term perspective. Advice when it's time for a strategy change. Evaluation of the best investment alternatives for you. Knowledge of emerging opportunities. Risk management strategies. Continual market analysis. Reduce loss due to "panic selling". Tax preparation and/or reporting assistance. Help with paperwork and administrative details. An introduction to Kemper Funds ...the only mutual fund family you may ever need. Ask a financial representative about Kemper Funds. Kemper - one of America's largest asset managers - offers a family ofmutual funds designed to help meet a lifetime of financial goals. And,since Kemper believes that the professional guidance of a full-servicefinancial representative is an invaluable asset to investors, its fundsare available primarily through investment professionals. Kemper Distributors, Inc. 120 South LaSalle Street Chicago, Illinois 60603 This brochure may be distributed to the public only when preceded oraccompanied by a Kemper Funds prospectus. If you would likeprospectuses for other Kemper Funds containing more completeinformation, including management fees and expenses, ask your financialadvisor, call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048 or request one now. Please read theprospectus(es) carefully before you invest or send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1010220 WT01-B13-284IA019-000202-B029-242http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/asiangrowth.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180106 text/html 5049HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:57:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 21-Oct-96 15:52:25 GMTContent-length: 4867Content-type: text/html Kemper Asian Growth Fund Why Kemper Asian Growth Fund makes sense Ability to invest in developing or emerging countries Experienced management Potential to increase returns Fund Objective: Long-term capital growth, by investing in a diversified portfolio consisting primarily of equity securities of Asian companies. Ability to invest in developing or emerging countries The fund invests primarily in Asian equity securities believed to have potential for capital growth. The fund invests primarily in developing or "emerging" economies. For example: China Indonesia Korea Malaysia Philippines Thailand Taiwan As a policy, the fund will invest in Japan only when economic conditions warrant and then only on a limited basis. However, the fund may invest without limit in developed countries such as Hong Kong and Singapore. Portfolio Manager: Andrew Mason, director of Asian Equities. Prior to joining Zurich Kemper Investments, Mr. Mason was portfolio manager of the Asian and Japanese portfolios for a United Kingdom pension fund and has 14 years of international investment experience.. Kemper has been managing international equities since 1981 -- longer than 94% of the companies managing international equities.* *Source: Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. Fund Facts Inception Date : October 21, 1996 Approximate Assets: $2 million NASDAQ Symbols A Shares KANAX B Shares KANBX C Shares KANCX Why should you consider investing in Asia? As you can see, the U.S. market has underperformed some of the major Asian markets since 1990. Returns are historical and do not reflect future performance. The returns represented are for individual markets and do not represent performance of the fund. Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc. Average annual total returns for the 5-year period ending 9/30/96. Please note that there are special risk considerations associated with an investment in the fund, including fluctuating exchange rates, government regulations and differences in liquidity. As with any mutual fund, returns and net asset value will fluctuate. For a prospectus containing more complete information, including management fees and expenses, download now, contact your financial representative or call Kemper Funds at 800-621-1048. Please read the prospectus carefully before you invest or send money. Fund shares are not FDIC insured and are not deposits or other obligations of, or guaranteed by, any bank. Fund shares involve investment risk, including the possible loss of principal. Investment Manager: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. Principal Underwriter: Kemper Distributors, Inc. 222 South Riverside Plaza Chicago IL 60606 © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1024090 WT01-B13-285IA019-000202-B029-253http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/nl_confirm.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180116 text/html 4231HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:57:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:20:29 GMTContent-length: 4049Content-type: text/html News About Your Transaction Confirmation Statements If you've recently made an account transaction or changed anyof the services or features on your account, you probably noticeda few changes in your confirmation statement. In late August,we introduced the second phase of our project to consolidate yourtransaction confirmation statements. Now, when several changesor transactions occur on your Kemper Funds accounts during thesame day, you'll receive one consolidated statement, instead ofseparate statements for each individual transaction. For example, an exchange of shares from one fund to another wouldpreviously prompt two statements: one confirming a redemptionand one confirming a purchase. Now, one statement confirms bothtransactions. Another difference you'll notice is that your transaction confirmationstatement no longer shows any prior account transactions. Previously,your statement included your transactions year-to-date or thelast 18 transactions on your account, whichever was the smallestnumber of transactions. Now, you'll see only the transactionthat prompted the statement. This change should help to eliminateconfusion by differentiating transaction confirmation statementsfrom quarterly account statements. "We're very pleased to introduce this new phase in our consolidatedstatement project," says Ann Laughlin, first vice presidentof Kemper Shareholder Marketing and Broker Communications. "Bysimplifying the way in which we report transactions and consolidatingdaily account activity onto one statement, we hope to eliminateconfusion and help to reduce fund expenses." Transaction confirmation statements now have the same look andformat as your quarterly statement. No matter what type of statementyou receive from us, information such as the date of your statement,your fund and account numbers and the tax identification numberon your account can always be found in the same place. Transactionconfirmation statements will be consolidated in the same manneras your quarterly statements: All accounts with the same registration,address and tax identification number will appear on one statement,unless you have requested otherwise. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022480 WT01-B13-286IA019-000202-B029-260http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/nl_hold.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180128 text/html 2573HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:57:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:18:29 GMTContent-length: 2391Content-type: text/html Hold Period Reduced Kemper Funds has reduced the 15 calendar day "hold"policy on purchases made by check or ACH transfer. The primarypurpose of such a hold period - a common restriction among mutualfunds and banks - is to protect you and the fund from fraud andtheft. However, we found that the waiting period could be reducedto 10 calendar days without compromising security. Of course,for most Kemper Funds, which are generally used as long-term investments,a hold period is seldom a problem. But short-term investors,particularly those in Kemper Money Funds, may appreciate thegreater flexibility and liquidity of a shorter hold period. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022490 WT01-B13-287IA019-000202-B029-268http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/nl_five.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180137 text/html 5396HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:57:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:17:26 GMTContent-length: 5214Content-type: text/html Five Stars For Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund Kemper-Dreman Small Cap Value Fund was recently awarded Morningstar's5-star "highest" rating for its overall performanceand performance over the three years ended July 31, 1996 in thesmall company category. For the one-year period, the fund's ratingis 4-stars, or "above average."* "We're thrilledto see this fund recognized for its outstanding performance,"says Jim Neel, president of Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. "It'sa proven winner that continues to offer an attractive opportunityfor long-term investors." Kemper-Dreman Small Cap ValueFund seeks long-term capital appreciation by investing in smallcapitalization stocks ($100 million to $1 billion) diversifiedacross at least 15 industries. Earlier this year, the fund gained a new portfolio manager. StevenStokes, a chartered financial analyst, joined Dreman Value Advisors,Inc. as managing director. In addition to his work on the SmallCap Value Fund, he is portfolio manager for approximately $200million in institutional assets. Stokes stresses that Kemper-DremanSmall Cap Value Fund's investment strategy and style remain unchanged. "The philosophy takes precedence over personality,"he says. "We'll continue to pursue attractively priced stockswith strong fundamentals - the strategy that has contributed tothe fund's strong performance since its inception in 1992." Returns are historical and do not reflect future performance. Returns and net asset values fluctuate. Shares are redeemableat net asset value, which may be more or less than original cost. * Morningstar ratings range from five stars (highest) toone star (lowest) and represent its assessment of the historicalrisk level and total return of a fund relative to its class asa weighted average for the three-, five- and 10-year periods. Ratings are not absolute or predictive of future performance. Average annual total return measures net investment incomeand capital gain or loss from portfolio investments, assumingreinvestment of dividends and adjustment for the maximum applicablesales charge of 5.75%. Average annual total return reflects annualizedchange. Returns and rankings are historical and do not reflectfuture performance. Performance shown is for Class A shares. Sales charges are reduced or eliminated under certain conditionsas described in the fund's prospectus. Performance of other classeswill vary from that shown because of differences in sales chargesand fees paid by shareholders investing in different classes. Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. rankings are based uponchanges in net asset value with dividends reinvested and do notinclude the effect of sales charges. If they did, results mayhave been less favorable. Investment in small companies presentsgreater risk than investment in larger, more established companies. To obtain a Kemper Funds prospectus in addition to thoseyou already have, please contact your financial representative,call Kemper Shareholder Services at 1-800-621-1048, or downloadone now. The prospectus contains more complete information including managementfees and expenses. Please read it carefully before you investor send money. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022500 WT01-B13-288IA019-000202-B029-276http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/nl_yrend.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180144 text/html 4108HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:57:46 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 19:19:25 GMTContent-length: 3926Content-type: text/html We're Improving Your Year-end Statement We're planning a number of enhancements for your 1996 year-endaccount statement to provide a more comprehensive overview ofthe performance of your Kemper Funds investments. If you have multiple accounts, the first part of your statement,the portfolio summary, reports on your entire Kemper Funds portfolio. The summary will now include your initial investment amount*,any subsequent purchases you've made, any amounts withdrawn andthe change in your account value as of December 31. We'll alsoinclude your investments' market value as of the beginning ofthe statement period, allowing you to compare it to the currentmarket value. Similar to the portfolio summary, for each of your accounts,we will show your initial investment amount*, subsequent purchasesyou've made, any amounts withdrawn and the change in your accountvalue as of December 31. If you've held your account for two years or more, you'llalso receive a "Personal Performance" summary showingthe one-year total return on each of your accounts, as well astheir average annual total return since inception* and a graphicillustration for each of your Kemper fund accounts. The taxable income portion of your dividend summary will beexpanded to show ordinary income (which includes both your incomedividends and short-term capital gains) and long-term capitalgains. * For accounts established prior to December 31, 1989, the market value as of December 31, 1989, will be used in place of your initial investment amount and as a starting point for calculating your average annual total return. For Kemper-Dreman accounts established after September 11, 1995, the market value as of September 11, 1995, will be used in place of your initial investment amount and as a starting point for calculating your average annual total return. A detailed explanation of the enhanced year-end statement willbe in the next issue of Kemper Fundamentals. You'll receiveit, along with your statement, in early January, 1997. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1022510 WT01-B13-289IA019-000202-B029-285http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/proc_req.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180153 text/html 4637HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:57:54 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 17:15:21 GMTContent-length: 4453Content-type: text/html Announcing Improved Flexibility for Processing Requests The choice is yours! Do you use your Kemper fund account as a way to systematicallypay your mortgage or other regular bill? Do you systematically exchange from one Kemper fund to another? Kemper Funds has improved capability to accommodate your needs.Thanks to recent technological advancements, we can be more flexibleabout processing your requests on the date you desire. Now! Our systematic withdrawal plan, a transaction previouslyprocessed on the 25th of every month, is available on any dateyou choose*. You choose the frequency -- monthly, quarterly, semiannually,annually or any months you'd like -- with which you want regularcash withdrawals from your account. You choose the amount-- which could be a fixed dollar amount, a fixed percentage ofyour account or an equal amount sufficient to deplete your accountwithin the number of years or months you stipulate**. Systematicwithdrawals can be mailed to you or, if you choose, depositedinto your financial institution account. *Systematic withdrawal plans are not available for KemperTarget Equity Funds. **For Class B shares and C shares purchased after April 1,1996, no more than 10 percent of your current account value maybe redeemed on an annual basis. Now! Systematic exchanges, transactions previously processed onlyon the 10th of every month, are now available on any date youchoose. You choose the frequency -- monthly, quarterly, semiannually,annually -- with which you want a sum from one Kemper fund transferredinto another Kemper Fund***. You choose the amount -- whichcould be a fixed dollar amount, a fixed percentage of your accountor an equal amount sufficient to deplete your account within thenumber of years or months you stipulate. Sums can be systematicallyexchanged from one Kemper fund into one or more Kemper funds. ***Please note that a minimum balance of $1,000 is requiredin both the "to" and "from" accounts. Theexchange amount must be at least $100. Now! You choose the start and stop dates for when you'dlike to systematically purchase (through a direct deposit froma financial institution account, for example) shares of your Kemperfund, when you'd like to systematically redeem shares and whenyou'd like to stop one transaction and initiate another. To establish either the systematic withdrawal or systematic exchangefeature on your Kemper account, you'll need to complete a form,which you can download now. Or, call Shareholder Servicesat 1-800-621-1048. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019700 WT01-B13-290IA019-000202-B029-293http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/p_adams.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180200 text/html 3870HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:58:02 GMTLast-modified: Thursday, 29-Aug-96 20:48:03 GMTContent-length: 3686Content-type: text/html Meet The Newest Member Of Our Equity Investment Team Patrick S. Adams, 35, in June was named portfolio manager of the $2.6 billion Kemper Growth Fund, our flagship growth equitymutual fund. Adams, who brings an impressive record as a growthinvestment style manager, is the latest in a series of enhancementsto Kemper's equity investment team in the last year. As part of an August 1995 acquisition, Kemper through its newwholly owned subsidiary Dreman Value Advisors, Inc. (DVA) assumedmanagement responsibility for Kemper-Dreman High Return Fund,Kemper-Dreman Contrarian Fund and Kemper-Dreman Small Cap ValueFund. With the acquisition of DVA came the value investing style ofDavid Dreman, who is generally considered the pioneer of a contrarianinvestment strategy. Dreman is the chairman of DVA and managesKemper-Dreman High Return Fund. Christian Bertelsen in March joined DVA as chiefinvestment officer and portfolio manager of Kemper-Dreman ContrarianFund. Bertelsen has an outstanding track record as an investmentmanager and practitioner of the contrarian investment strategy. Shortly after the DVA acquisition, Kemper hired veteran portfoliomanager Steven Reynolds to oversee and direct the company's equityinvestment department. Reynolds served as interim manager forKemper Growth Fund until Adams joined Kemper in June. In addition to assuming responsibility for the Kemper-Dreman Funds,the company in the last year introduced four new equity funds:Kemper Europe Fund, Kemper Horizon Fund, Kemper Value+GrowthFund and Kemper Quantitative Equity Fund. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1019670 WT01-B13-291IA019-000202-B029-302http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/new_name.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180216 text/html 3094HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:58:11 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 21-Aug-96 18:19:56 GMTContent-length: 2909Content-type: text/html A New Name: Zurich Kemper Investments, Inc. In January, Kemper Financial Services, Inc. became an indirect subsidiary of Zurich Insurance Group. "The name is different," says Stephen B. Timbers, president, chief executive and chief investment officer, "but our fundamental mission is the same: To manufacture and distribute high quality investment management products and services to individuals and institutions and to help them achieve their long-term financial goals. Our goal is to fulfill this mission better than anyone else in the investment management business." With nearly $70 billion in total assets at year-end 1994, the Zurich Insurance Group ranks among the largest international insurance organizations in the world. Zurich is a company with four core businesses, three of them insurance-related: property-casualty, life and reinsurance. The purchase of Kemper reflects its commitment to the fourth business - asset management - and to its goal to become a world leader in the global financial services market. Zurich is a public company, traded under the symbols ZURN (Telekurs) and ZURZn (Reuters) on the Swiss Stock Exchange. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014370 WT01-B13-292IA019-000202-B030-1http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/watch_for_ads.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180227 text/html 2303HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:58:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 19-Aug-96 22:33:48 GMTContent-length: 2121Content-type: text/html Watch For Our Ads! Kemper Funds' current advertising campaign focuses on the theme of building wealth versus looking for a fast buck. In the coming weeks, look for print ads in Business Week, Forbes, Smart Money, Worth, Smithsonian, Time and Newsweek. Our television ads will run on the CNN, CNBC, Discovery and A&E cable networks. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014410 WT01-B13-293IA019-000202-B030-9http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/20yr_munibond.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180234 text/html 3125HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:58:36 GMTLast-modified: Wednesday, 27-Nov-96 21:46:00 GMTContent-length: 2940Content-type: text/html America's First Municipal Bond Fund Celebrates 20 Years! Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, America's first retail municipal bond fund, celebrated its 20th birthday on April 20. Since Kemper introduced its fund, 1,847 tax-free mutual funds have been launched, representing approximately $252 billion in municipal bond fund assets as of September 30, 1996. Kemper Municipal Bond Fund Class A shares have outperformed the Lipper Analytical Services, Inc. general municipal debt mutual fund category averages for the one, five and 10-year periods ended September 30, 1996. Kemper tax-free funds, including Kemper Municipal Bond Fund, Kemper Intermediate Municipal Bond Fund and eight state tax-free income funds, totaled $4.9 billion in assets as of September 30, 1996. Click here for more information about Kemper Municipal Bond Fund or request a prospectus now. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - All rights reserved. 1014400-A WT01-B13-294IA019-000202-B030-17http://www.kemper.com:80/shareholders/nl_deposit.html 198.152.185.42 19970106180241 text/html 5360HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.1Date: Monday, 06-Jan-97 17:58:43 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 28-Oct-96 16:27:32 GMTContent-length: 5178Content-type: text/html Direct Deposit Your Government Check Why leave the delivery of your government check to chance? Byfilling out a single form, you can avoid those time-consumingtrips to the bank and rest assured that your check won't be stolen,lost or delayed in the mail. If you receive a Social Securitycheck or other government payments on a regular basis, you'veprobably been contacted in recent months about having your checksdeposited directly into your bank account A trend of the future The U.S. Treasury Department this summer announced thatall Social Security recipients who apply for benefits after August1, 1996, will have their checks automatically deposited into theirbank accounts whenever possible. In addition, by 1999 all federalpayments, including salaries and other benefits such as thosepaid to veterans, will be issued electronically. Jim Hagedorn,the Treasury Department's director of public affairs for the financialmanagement service, reports that converting to electronic paymentscould save the government as much as $500 million over the nextfive years and eliminate about 100,000 check thefts and forgeriesa year. Kemper Funds can help As an alternative to your bank account, consider having your governmentchecks deposited directly into your Kemper Money Funds account. Kemper Money Funds offer the opportunity to earn higher yieldsand easy access to your money - as of September 5, 1996,Kemper Money Market Fund's current 7-day yield was 5.04% whilethe average bank money fund yield was 2.65%* - and many checkingaccounts don't pay interest. Ofcourse, unlike bank products, no money fund is insured or guaranteedby the U.S. government and there is no assurance that any fundcan maintain a $1.00 share value. Bank products offer fixed or variable rates and principal is fixed and may be insured. Once your government check is deposited into your Kemper MoneyFund, you can write an unlimited amount of checks (for $500 ormore) each month free, or use our EXPRESS-Transfer service totransfer as little as $100 into your bank savings or checkingaccount. You can also exchange a portion of the deposit to anotherKemper fund for long-term income or growth opportunities. Plus,you can make and verify account transactions 24-hours a day viaour automated phone service, KemperACCESS. Kemper's three money funds offer you these services and attractiveyields while maintaining a conservative investment philosophythat emphasizes quality and consistency, not risk-taking. To receive a Government Direct Deposit form, contact the governmentagency that issues your checks. Or, call Kemper Shareholder Servicesat 1-800-621-1048. Our representatives can provide the necessaryform (ask for Form 93) and answer your questions about KemperMoney Funds' performance and services. * Yield shown is the average annualized net investment incomeper share. Past performance is historical and is no guaranteeof future results. Yields will fluctuate. Bank interest rateshown is for the 100 leading banks and thrifts as of 9/5/96 accordingto Bank Rate Monitor. © Copyright Kemper Distributors, Inc. 1996 - Allrights reserved. 1022520